



















































Hansard: April 02, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 511 

 April 2, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of people with respect to young offenders. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition are from Abernethy, Balcarres, 

and Melville. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of the many citizens of 

Saskatchewan concerned about the social devastation caused by 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) gaming policy. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Bruno, 

Muenster, and Fulda, and from throughout the province. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions regarding big game damage to farmers 

throughout Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, shrubs 

and trees, which are being destroyed by the overpopulation 

of deer and other big game, including elimination of the 

$500 deductible; and to take control measures to prevent 

the overpopulation of deer and other big game from  

causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from the Coronach, some from Regina, and some from 

Kamsack areas of the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 

petitions to present and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And these are signed by people mostly from the area of Hanley, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

order increased efforts at enforcement and to pressure the 

federal government to amend the Young Offenders Act; 

and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

urge the government to commission an independent study 

to review the social impact of gambling; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the 

Saskatchewan big game damage compensation program to 

provide reasonable compensation. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following questions: 

 

What was the total funding from the Department of Health 

to each individual health district in Saskatchewan for the 

fiscal year 1995-1996? 

 

Again to the Minister of Health: 

 

What was the total funding from the Department of Health 

to each individual health district in Saskatchewan in 

1996-97? 

 

And once again to the Minster of Health: 

 

What will the total funding from the Department of Health 

to each individual health district be for the 1997-98 fiscal 

year; and what is the percentage funding increase provided 

to each individual Saskatchewan health district in ’97-98  



512  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

compared to total funding provided to districts in ’96-97, 

which included a $40 million emergency payment to the 

districts? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 

seated in your gallery, members of the Western Canadian 

Wheat Growers Association, western Canada’s largest 

voluntary farm group. 

 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — and I would ask that 

they stand when I call out their names — Sheldon Cooper, 

Saskatchewan vice-president, from West Bend; Barrie Malo, 

chairman of the board, from Wolseley; Len Rutledge, senior 

adviser, from Carievale; Keith Lewis, senior Saskatchewan 

director, from Wawota; Doug Thompson, Saskatchewan 

director, from Assiniboia; and Rick Swenson, whom I’m sure 

everyone in this Assembly knows, Saskatchewan director from 

Moose Jaw. I would ask that members welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming the Western 

Canadian Wheat Growers Association. We had an excellent 

meeting this morning and we discussed many issues that are of 

mutual interest. But I would also like to take the time to 

introduce Shelley Jones, because I think she may have been 

missed by the member opposite. So if Shelley would stand and 

we could welcome her to the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, we would also like to welcome the Western 

Canadian Wheat Growers directors here today. We also had a 

very interesting and fruitful discussion with them this morning 

and hope to see them again soon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and members of the Assembly, seated in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, a number of members from the fire-fighters from 

across Saskatchewan. In particular, I want to introduce my 

friend and member from Yorkton, Mr. Karl Austman. 

 

Karl is extensively involved in the community. He works with 

minor sports. Karl is also very active with the Saskatchewan 

burn unit. Just recently Karl has been elected to the district 

health board after there having been a by-election. 

 

So I want to extend my welcome to Karl and all of the other 

fire-fighters who are here today, and have the Assembly show 

their appreciation for being here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to on 

behalf of the official opposition extend a welcome as well to 

fire-fighters from our various communities throughout the 

province with whom we had the pleasure of meeting this 

morning as well. 

 

To these brave gentlemen who work very diligently and 

unselfishly, I’d ask that once again we welcome them here and 

look forward to meeting them again in the future. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 

third party, we certainly extend a special welcome to the 

Saskatchewan fire-fighters. I believe there’s some members also 

sitting in the east gallery and we want to recognize each and 

every one of them. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I think we all, if we caught the news, 

we were just reminded a little bit of some of the duties that 

fire-fighters perform — in that tragedy certainly outside of 

Regina. We just want to say thank you to each one of these 

individuals who give of their time, their efforts, and sometimes 

put their lives at risk for the lives of others. 

 

And a special welcome to each one gathered here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the others 

in welcoming the fire-fighters of course, but in particular I’d 

like to welcome Mr. Terry Ritchie, who’s from British 

Columbia. And he is an international vice-president of the 

International Association of Fire Fighters and serves the fire 

fighters, I believe, from Manitoba to British Columbia, and has 

been re-elected a few times to that post. So it’s good to see Mr. 

Ritchie joining us here today as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and all members in the House, a 

gentleman seated in your gallery, Mr. Leon Bezaire, an 

individual from Saskatoon who is part of the Liberal Party 

executive. Welcome, Leon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  On behalf of the member from Sask. Rivers 

and from Prince Albert Northcote, I’d like just to take a 

moment to recognize two of the fire-fighters who are here with 

us today, Cal Peneff and Larry Zadvorny, who’ve driven all the 

way from Prince Albert. 

 

And I want to, through you, Mr. Speaker, mention to the 

fire-fighters that our lounge really does appreciate the mugs that 

they give us every year. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well on behalf of  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

the Regina members, I’d also like to welcome the 

Saskatchewan fire-fighters association. 

 

I know the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley and myself 

had a chance to meet with Jim Schlechter, Leo Chapman, and 

Kevin Tetlow. And I see Mr. Huget is also in the gallery. We 

had a chance to talk with them and understand the issues that 

they’re faced with in a very high tension, very commendable 

job of being there in fire and in need, and we welcome them 

and thank them. 

 

I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

legislature, two fire-fighters from the great south-west. I can’t 

be outdone by all these other people. These are both proud 

members not only of the finest fire department in the 

south-west, but in all of Saskatchewan and probably Canada. 

 

So I’d like you to welcome Dick Yee and Trevor Braun. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Season of Miracles 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, as we heard last Thursday, we 

have just come through a season of miracles. The evidence is 

everywhere, and a little snow will not take away the wondrous 

nature of this year. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the good book tells us that confession is 

good for the soul at any time of the year. 

 

I want to report a miracle and a confession. The miracle 

involves the member from Cannington, the member from 

Cannington who wrote a column in the Kipling Citizen which 

says, among other things that, quote, “there is a renewed 

optimism in the province” and “our province is on the move 

again.” 

 

A miraculous transformation if there ever was one. The 

confession, Mr. Speaker, is the miracle is double-edged. The 

scales fell from the member’s eyes, true, but in doing so they 

fell on the Liberal leader, Dr. Melenchuk, and hit him on the 

head. I confess that we are in cahoots with the third party. The 

third party leader set the tone yesterday in his open admission 

that we, President Castro, the Pope, and ET are conspiring to 

thwart the Liberals. 

 

Not only that, the local rural media has now joined the PC/NDP 

conspiracy. 

 

I join the member from Cannington in confession and I feel 

much better for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 

hundreds of organizers and participants are staging a 

marvellous annual event in Prince Albert with the 23rd 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games. Over 3,000 competitors 

from across the province are in Prince Albert this week. They 

represent over 70 different Indian bands involved in a variety of 

events including competitions in hockey, broomball, curling, 

boxing, and traditional Indian games. In conjunction with the 

games, organizers are staging talent, craft, and trade shows, and 

teen dances. 

 

I would like to commend the city of Prince Albert, the 

organizers, volunteers, and all the participants who work so 

very hard to make this fantastic event possible. This week, no 

matter who crosses the finish line first or who scores the most 

points, people involved in aboriginal culture all across this 

province are winners because of the Saskatchewan Indian 

Winter Games. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Indian 

Winter Games in Prince Albert is indeed a marvellous event. 

There are approximately 2,000 youth involved, mostly of 

school age. When you add to that the parents, the family, the 

friends, the coaches that come, there are approximately 3,000 

people living in hotels and friends’ homes in Prince Albert this 

weekend. 

 

And for the first time, approximately 300 of them from 

Athabasca are participating in this event. As a matter of fact, the 

opening ceremonies featured the drummers from the Dene 

Nation. 

 

This was all made possible by the hard work and organization 

of the host, Prince Albert Grand Council; their Grand Chief, 

Alphonse Bird, and Vice-Chief Leonard Hardlotte; the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) with Chief Blaine 

Favel; and especially Vice-Chief Eugene Arcand, who has 

dedicated his life to aboriginal youth. 

 

And of course the generosity of our sponsors — national, 

provincial, and local. Among them our Crowns — SaskTel, 

SaskPower, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the 

lottery system. 

 

These games are a great thing for Saskatchewan youth. They 

learn teamwork; they learn about their communities; they learn 

about skill development; they learn about leadership; and it’s 

great for human development. 

 

I want to say to the athletes and the organizers — good luck to 

all of you, good sportsmanship. You are doing a great thing for 

your own personal growth, for your community, and your 

province, and we are proud of you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



514  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

BIRS Raptors Take Provincial Championship 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I delivered 

a member’s statement regarding the success of the BIRS 

Raptors, a local hockey club which had won a crucial play-off 

series and had moved on to the Saskatchewan Pee Wee C 

division provincial championships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to rise and congratulate 

the Raptors once again as they have just captured the provincial 

crown. After dropping game 1 to the northern champs from 

Avonlea-Rouleau by a score of 7 to 6, BIRS fought back in 

Invermay this past Thursday, taking game 2 by a count of 5 to 1 

and winning the two-game total series 11 goals to 8. 

 

I was one of nearly 500 people in attendance for this final 

match, and fans witnessed an excellent game which the Raptors 

won through strong goal-tending and disciplined defensive play 

from all players. 

 

The BIRS Raptors have achieved a once-in-a-lifetime goal — 

that is, to become members of a provincial championship team, 

a dream few ever attain. 

 

I would like to commend these young men and young woman 

as well as their coach, Julius Dziaduck, manager Louis 

Korchinski, and the team’s trainer, Sheldon Landstad. 

 

Congratulations on a job well done to be the 1996-97 Pee Wee 

C division provincial champions, the BIRS Raptors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yorkton Separate and Public Schools 

Join to Build New School 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Everyone in this Assembly is aware of the high quality of our 

education system. In fact we are well aware of the world-wide 

recognition it receives. And that is why I am happy to stand in 

my place today and yet acknowledge another major step in 

maintaining that system. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton Public School Division 

No. 93 and the Catholic Separate School Division No. 86, after 

four years of work, announced they plan a new joint-use school 

in our city. 

 

This new and innovative venture will provide students as well 

as the entire community with many benefits well into the future. 

Students from each division will share common space such as a 

resource centre, arts education centre, the recreational centre, 

while each division operates their classrooms autonomously. 

Through cooperation, the school divisions, in conjunction with 

the Department of Education, are providing students with the 

state-of-an-art facility that provides students with first-class 

space, but also will save taxpayers an estimated $1 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cooperation between these two school 

divisions will be a model to other school divisions; so that they  

can examine new alternatives and plan to provide the best 

possible education facilities for our youth. The long-range plan 

developed by the Yorkton public and Catholic school boards 

will serve for the betterment of our students. By working 

together through cooperation, students at our community will be 

the benefactors in many ways. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancer Month 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most of us in this 

Assembly have lost friends or family to cancer. Sadly, our 

experiences are not unique. 

 

In 1995, nearly 7,000 Saskatchewan people were newly 

diagnosed with this disease. One in three of us will be afflicted 

during our lifetime. Worst of all, the number of people affected 

is increasing at a rate of between two and a half and three per 

cent every year. These are only numbers of course, Mr. 

Speaker, and numbers can never properly describe the anguish 

suffered by the friends and family of cancer patients. 

 

Progress is being made, however, thanks to the hard work of the 

Canadian Cancer Society, our own Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation, and groups all across Canada and around the world. 

Public education about the value of early detection and research 

into new forms of treatment have resulted in the marginal 

increase in overall survival rates since 1971. But more needs to 

be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, April is Cancer Month, the month when the 

Canadian Cancer Society concentrates its fund-raising efforts. 

The Canadian Cancer Society sells daffodils every year as a 

sign of hope in the face of this terrible disease. The 

door-to-door campaign here in Regina runs from April 20 to 21. 

 

Our government has shown its support for cancer research with 

the recent purchase of a new simulator for the Saskatoon cancer 

clinic and by amendments to the cancer Act. I believe working 

together, there will one day be a time where nobody in 

Saskatchewan will ever again have to mourn the loss of a loved 

one to this terrible disease. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Funding for Agri-food Innovation Fund 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our agricultural 

biotechnology industry is first class. We are attempting to build 

and enhance this industry because it offers growth opportunities 

for our researchers, producers, processors, and marketers. 

Improving the quality of our produce is always an objective 

within the sector. So too is the breeding of better quality 

animals and developing our value added products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment to develop and enhance the 

agricultural biotechnology industry of Saskatchewan has been 

evident in the past. Yes, Mr. Speaker, our commitment to the ag  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

biotech industry has been evident in the past, and I am pleased 

to say it will be here in the future. 

 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, it was announced that an additional 

15 million in new funding would be provided for the Agri-food 

Innovation Fund. This is terrific news, not only for the 24 

projects that the money is targeted to, but our agro 

biotechnology industry as a whole and the leading role it has in 

this industry. 

 

This new funding will maintain our competitive advantage 

within the industry and propel us even further ahead. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Flood Disaster Relief 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, people across Canada are 

watching national news coverage on a nightly basis as fields in 

southern Saskatchewan turn into huge lakes, roads and bridges 

wash out, and many residents sand bag to save their homes. 

Others have found themselves living in temporary shelters — 

all because of severe flooding that has hit much of 

south-western Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to gain the necessary understanding of the extent 

of the emergency you do have to witness the devastation 

firsthand. You have to listen to the stories of the people in the 

Swift Current, Thunder Creek, Moose Jaw, and Wood River 

constituencies. The damage is widespread and when it’s all 

over, the clean-up and repairs will be a huge undertaking. 

 

I understand the minister in charge of Municipal Government 

will be touring some of the flood-ravaged areas this afternoon. 

Will the Premier make a commitment that this tour includes 

meetings with municipal government officials who have very 

serious concerns about the present disaster relief fund? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d be pleased to respond to the member on behalf of 

the Minister of Municipal Government, who at this time is 

touring the Moose Jaw area — an area that has been severely 

impacted by the excess of water that we have in this particular 

year. 

 

I want to say that the minister is well aware of the disaster 

assistance program regulations and the requirements that will 

need some changes because of the reassessment. I want to say 

that the member is well aware of this. Our intention is to ensure 

that this program remains viable so that we can help municipal 

governments who have been coping with some very difficult 

situations. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

commend all of the people in the area who have worked very, 

very closely with Municipal Government, Sask Water, and  

government people, and with municipal governments. They are 

to be commended for doing a very, very good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, many municipalities tell me 

that the current provincial disaster relief fund comes nowhere 

near meeting their financial needs as the threshold amount to 

qualify essentially becomes a deductible that is simply too high, 

and thereafter, the money will be too little and too late. The 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities is echoing 

these same concerns. 

 

With municipalities already staggering from the cuts announced 

in the provincial budget, will the Premier explain where these 

local governments should come up with the necessary funds to 

rebuild roads, bridges and other infrastructure that has been 

damaged or washed away by flood waters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I again would like to respond on behalf of the Minister 

of Municipal Government. But let me preface my remarks by 

saying, Mr. Speaker, that the cooperation that we have 

experienced from municipal governments throughout this 

province, from local governments, with respect to the damage 

that has been created — much of it not yet assessed because the 

water has yet to recede, so it’s difficult to determine the exact 

extent of the damage — I want to ensure the member that 

members on this side of the House, this government, will work 

with local governments to minimize the impact on their areas as 

we have done in past circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say though, the members opposite on a daily basis — 

and for this I think there can be no forgiveness — they’re 

asking for decreased taxation, they’re asking for increased 

expenditures, and it happens on an ongoing basis. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, why their leader in the 

Leader-Post the other day indicates his dismay and his 

confusion because, Mr. Speaker, his caucus is just as confused 

as he is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I was on the phone yesterday 

with some federal government officials to determine what the 

government opposite has requested in the way of assistance, 

and I was shocked to discover that they haven’t even yet heard 

from this government. 

 

Well that’s in sharp contrast to the cooperation that is apparent 

between the Manitoba government and the federal counterparts. 

I received a copy of a March 27 news release issued by 

Emergency Preparedness Canada in response to rising water 

levels on the Red River in Manitoba. And this release notes that 

the federal government is pulling out all the stops to be ready 

with support and resources if and when they are required by 

Manitoba emergency officials. 

 



516  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

Will the Premier explain what his government is doing to 

ensure that the same spirit of cooperation exists with Ottawa; 

and what specific steps is the Premier taking so that 

Saskatchewan and Ottawa work together in the best interests of 

the people and communities in this province that need 

assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I can ensure that 

member that we will in fact be working with all levels of 

government to minimize the impact of water management. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when he picks up the telephone 

to talk to his federal Liberal friends, he might want to ask them 

why their government is pulling a million and half dollars out of 

Hydrometric Management in this province. He might want to 

ask them why they’re trying to offload water management 

commitments that they made as early as 1975. 

 

And he might want to ask his federal friends why they’re 

cutting that money out of this province in a year when we’ve 

got this kind of damage happening through floods. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Universities 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Finance indicated to the media last Thursday that 

her government will be encouraging Saskatchewan’s two 

universities to reconsider tuition fee increases. The minister 

stated that these institutions are “going to see an increase in 

funding and students and the government expected perhaps a 

little more.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students and the universities expect more from 

the minister than statements that underline the hypocrisy of this 

government. Our universities have no new operating funding. 

They are at the same level of funding as was provided in 1995. 

The president of the University of Regina agrees, adding, 

“Inflation and higher physical plant expenses due to a new 

building on campus are some factors that made tuition fees 

necessary.” 

 

Will the minister in charge of Post-Secondary Education 

explain why this government is misleading the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, once again the 

Liberals have their facts quite confused. Last year the federal 

government took millions of dollars out of operating funding 

for post-secondary education. This government was able to 

replace most of the money but not all of it. So that in fact we 

had to pass on, in this year and in next year, $5 million of cuts 

— 10 million in total — of the federal Liberal cuts; so they 

were expecting $10 million less. 

 

When I announced in the budget that we were able to replace  

100 per cent of the federal funding, that meant that they have 

$10 million more than when they announced their tuition 

increases. 

 

We also said our primary concern is that as much of this benefit 

be passed on to students to ensure their accessibility to higher 

education. And I stand by that. We are committed to doing what 

we can to ensure that every person in the province, whether rich 

or poor, can have access to higher education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, let’s put aside the rhetoric and 

the finger pointing. Under the new plan, under your new plan, 

operating grants are either 163 million or 168 million, 

depending upon which document you read. The only effort this 

government made to address the concerns of our universities 

was to cancel previously announced funding cuts. 

 

So in effect the back-filling the minister speaks of is for her 

own cuts. The recent budget does nothing to address the added 

increase in costs that our universities face. Whether they’re the 

result of inflation, higher staff salaries, whether they’re the 

result of higher utility rates, those are all factors that determine 

costs. 

 

Will the minister explain why this government did not take into 

account these added costs to ensure a quality, affordable 

post-secondary education for all students in the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I simply cannot allow 

the members opposite to continue to play fast and loose with 

facts. This government has made no cuts to funding for 

post-secondary education. The federal government has reduced 

its funding to post-secondary education. We have replaced part 

of that funding in 1996. We’re able to replace a hundred per 

cent in 1997, which the universities say is good news. And what 

we said to the universities, acknowledging their independence, 

we said, please reconsider your tuition increases. 

 

But the final point I want to make about these members 

opposite is that this is getting to be irresponsible. They’re going 

to put more money into education. They’re going to cut taxes 

more. The list goes on. 

 

They have to put forward a credible alternative. We have put 

forward an alternative which reduces taxes, enhances spending 

in priority areas, and continues to reduce debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Court Case 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 

remember, in 1992 the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

opposition walked out of the legislature for three weeks to 

protest the NDP breaking GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) contracts with 60,000 Saskatchewan farmers. We 

believed it to be an illegal act at the time, and we certainly still  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

believe it is — and was — an illegal act. Now the question is 

finally before the courts and if the government loses, it could 

wind up owing farmers millions of dollars. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Finance: Madam Minister, 

have you made an estimate of how much your government 

could have to shell out if you lose this case, and what 

contingency plans have you made for coming up with the 

money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as the member well knows, this case is before the courts and for 

anyone to speak about this case might prejudice some part of 

that. So he knows full well that we cannot comment on this 

while it’s before the courts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, we think there’s a good 

chance you’re going to lose this case, and we’re certainly not 

the only ones. The president of the Canadian Bar Association 

says that your GRIP legislation is clearly contrary to the rule of 

law, which must take precedence over the power of politicians. 

He goes on to say, if the government acts contrary to the rule of 

law, then the legislation should be struck down in the courts. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to me that there’s a very good chance 

you could lose this case. And if you do, your illegal actions 

could result in the province being on the hook for millions, 

perhaps even hundreds of millions, of dollars. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you lose, what are you going to do? Are you 

going to raise taxes? Are you going to close more hospitals? Or 

what do you intend to . . . or how do you intend to pay for your 

illegal actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, again the member knows 

full well that I cannot comment on this while it’s before the 

courts. There will be, there will be ample time in estimates in 

Agriculture to hopefully, when this court case concludes, to 

answer any question that the member might have at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dual Marketing 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also to the Minister of Agriculture. This morning all three 

caucuses had an opportunity to meet with the Western Canadian 

Wheat Growers Association. And that’s one of those radical 

fringe groups the minister keeps referring to who favour dual 

marketing. 

 

Mr. Minister, the wheat growers represent thousands of prairie 

farmers who simply want a choice. It’s clear, it’s clear this issue 

is not simply going to go away the way you and Ralph Goodale 

want it to. This morning’s meeting and the 21,000 farmers who 

voted for open marketing was like an alarm clock telling you to  

wake up, get out of bed with Ralph Goodale, and support dual 

marketing. 

 

Did you hear the alarm, Mr. Minister, or are you still sleeping 

and refusing to give farmers a choice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Okay. I don’t know how many people 

are in that bed but with all the secret meetings that are going on 

maybe there’s more than we even know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just answer the question by saying that I . . . 

first of all, I’d like to apologize to the group for not being there 

this morning. I had to be in Saskatoon with Mr. Goodale at an 

announcement of the Agri-Food Innovation Fund. But our 

caucus met with them and we — I’ll just say this — we sit and 

listen to all people and all concerns, okay. Whether or not we 

agree with those concerns is another thing. 

 

I have stated on the record very many times — and I know 

members of the Western Canadian Wheat Growers and others 

do not agree with me. That’s their prerogative; that’s my 

prerogative — I believe that my position is the right position. I 

believe that the position I took was backed up by the fact that 

two out of three people agreed with our position. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the question is ended. If anybody has a reason 

to put forward positive aspects then we’ll listen to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Flood Disaster Relief 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, roads 

and highways in the south-west and across southern 

Saskatchewan were already in terrible shape this spring, but 

now with the spring flooding they’re an absolute disaster. Yet 

the government has no money set aside for its provincial 

disaster assistance program and reassessment has made the 

current disaster assessment formula almost useless. And therein, 

Mr. Speaker, is the problem. 

 

And for those colleagues who don’t understand it, SARM, 

representing the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, says that RMs (rural municipality) will have to 

come up with about $125,000 of their own money before they 

qualify for one dime of provincial assistance. Now it used to be 

25,000; so the reassessment is the problem and the RMs simply 

can’t afford that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the Minister of Finance — I suppose today — will you be 

changing the formula for provincial disaster funds and 

assistance programs, and will you be moving some of the 

money that you have to the provincial disaster assistance 

program immediately? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 

pleased to answer on behalf of the government with respect to 

the provincial disaster assistance program. 

 

The regulations quite clearly will have to be changed. It is our  



518  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

government’s intent to maintain the present relationship 

between damage and the available disaster assistance and in 

making so . . . in doing so, we will ensure that local 

governments don’t lose out on assistance just because the 

amount of a mill will raise much higher amounts following 

reassessment. 

 

So I would want to say to the member, I’ve understand and 

heard his concerns and I’m sure the Minister of Municipal 

Government will be addressing this through regulations in the 

very near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will be 

to the same minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one good thing about the roads in the 

south-west. They’re making it easier for the police to spot 

drunks on our roads. They’re the only ones that aren’t swerving. 

 

Madam Minister, or Mr. Minister, I find it kind of ironic that 

your government doesn’t bother to budget for a provincial 

disaster assistance program, but in yesterday’s OCs (order in 

council) we see that your government has set aside $300,000 for 

disaster relief, including flood relief, in foreign countries. Not 

in Saskatchewan — foreign countries. 

 

Why are disasters in foreign countries more important than 

disasters in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 

 

And immediately after question period, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 

Speaker, I will be moving an emergency motion calling for 

money to be set aside to rebuild washed-out roads in our 

province; and for your government to immediately change the 

funding formula to the RM program and to provide them with 

qualifications. 

 

Will you support this motion, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me first say that I 

don’t intend to comment on the driving habits of people in the 

province, but what I do want to respond to, Mr. Speaker, is the 

comments made by the member. 

 

We have in place what we believe to be a reasonable and an 

adequate disaster assistance program. I think it’s very important 

for the member to understand that to do an assessment in the 

particular areas, it will have to wait until some of the water 

recedes so we can determine what the amount of damage is. The 

municipal governments will be looking very closely at the 

damage in their areas and know the process with respect to 

talking to the Department of Municipal Government and the 

disaster relief program and how that functions. 

 

We have spent the past weeks, Mr. Speaker, working with local 

government, sharing information with respect to what they 

might expect, sharing information with respect to the programs,  

and it’s a process that we think will serve the municipal 

governments very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Bus Emergency Communication System 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

anyone who had to travel on our provincial highways in the past 

day is aware of the treacherous conditions. We can thank our 

lucky stars that schools are closed and, as a result, school buses 

are not travelling in these conditions. 

 

However, the present conditions reinforce the need for cellular 

phone service on school buses in rural Saskatchewan. The most 

recent statistics reveal that 53,000 children in this province 

travel some 2,000 bus routes in all kinds of hazardous weather 

and road conditions. 

 

Does the minister or her designate not agree that cell phones on 

school buses would provide a source of emergency 

communication and ease the concerns that parents so often 

express about their children who have to travel on our rural 

roads? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We will all remember the young person that came to the 

legislature during the last session talking about this very issue. I 

can report that SGI, the Department of Highways, and the 

Department of Education are working on this issue along with 

people in SaskTel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the problem is out there. And 

I guess what we’re trying to say is that SaskTel spends 

thousands and thousands of dollars every year on advertising, 

and what better way of advertising could you do than to protect 

our best natural resources in this province — our children. 

Aside from the safety aspect, advertising the fact that school 

buses are equipped with cell phones, compliments of SaskTel, 

would also help to generate a positive image for the Crown 

corporation. 

 

Given the facts, will the minister or her designate agree that this 

is a serious problem and may save a life or lives of our children 

in the future if we help to provide this cell service for school 

buses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member raises 

some interesting issues, and as I reported earlier, the 

Department of Education, Department of Highways, SaskTel, 

and the Department of Education are working on this issue. We 

will . . . As you know, there are many, many school buses in 

this province that do have cell phones on buses. 

 

The other thing I should indicate is that for many decades in  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

this province the Department of Education has worked in 

partnership with local school divisions and sometimes these 

types of issues are determined at the local level. So obviously 

we’re all working together to see whether or not we can come 

forward with a solution in order to ensure that our young people 

are indeed protected while on school buses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cudworth Hospital Closure 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Health. St. Michael’s Hospital 

in Cudworth is slated for closer on June 30 of this year. Citizens 

of Cudworth — many of whom are seniors — are devastated. 

And they are devastated because a community planning 

committee, requested by the district board, had presented a 

well-thought-out, financially responsible plan for an integrated 

facility that would include two to four acute care beds, 

long-term care beds, etc. The Central Plains Board initially 

agreed that this proposal would offer more services for less 

money — a better proposal than the board could come up with. 

 

But shortly after, with pressure from district management and 

Saskatchewan Health officials, the board voted against this 

plan. Instead the community now has to accept a health centre 

combined with nursing home beds, a move that will 

unnecessarily cost the district and taxpayers of the province 

hundreds of thousands of dollars. 

 

My question is, how can the minister justify this action when a 

better, more cost-effective alternative was put forward by the 

people of Cudworth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, what the member is clearly 

doing is taking sides in the community with respect to an issue 

that the local health board has dealt with. The member disagrees 

with the decision that the board made. The board made its 

decision because it believes that conversion of the centre, the 

hospital, and integration with the nursing home is the best way 

to go. The member disagrees with that decision; however the 

board has taken a decision. 

 

But I want to remind the member in the House that this is very 

much like last year when the members opposite got up and 

talked about the closure of the Wilkie hospital, Mr. Speaker, 

and what we find this year is that more services will be 

provided out of the Wilkie health centre than have ever been 

provided in the past. And I want to assure the House and the 

member and the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, that when 

the health centre is converted and combined with the nursing 

home, there will be palliative care, there will be respite care, 

and there will be a very wide range of services to the people of 

Cudworth and area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, exactly  

what the minister is stating has been told those people. However 

we have other areas of the province to look at, such as Spalding, 

Eatonia, etc., etc., to know that their hopes may be very soon 

dampened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the integrated facility proposal for Cudworth 

would not only meet the needs of the people, including acute 

care, it would also have come with a 1 million . . . close to a $1 

million contribution from the people of that community. 

Reliable calculations indicate the province could have saved 

over $2 million in operating costs over the next 10 years had the 

planning committee’s proposal been approved. When asked to 

explain the decision, the board chairman simply stated that the 

proposed acute care beds were the problem. 

 

I think we all know who this was a problem for, Mr. Speaker. 

This government and this minister have decided that the people 

of Cudworth, like so many in smaller communities, are not 

worthy of acute care services. Can the minister explain to this 

House why it isn’t worth allowing the citizens of Cudworth two 

acute care beds in an integrated facility if it will save the 

taxpayers $2 million in operating costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, one of the difficulties I have 

with the member’s line of questioning is that the member 

clearly does not believe in local decision making by the health 

board, by the elected health board, Mr. Speaker. And I have to 

say that we have to make a choice: either we believe in elected 

health boards that make decisions and have the right to make 

decisions or we believe in going away from the 30 elected 

health boards to what we had before, which was 450 boards 

each with their own administration. 

 

Now the leader of the member’s party says that he wants to do 

away with the local, elected boards; he wants to go back to the 

450 boards. He wants to hand-pick the members of those 

boards, Mr. Speaker. Now clearly what this member wants to 

do is to dictate what the local board should do and she wants me 

to dictate what the local board should do. That’s not the model, 

Mr. Speaker. The model is local democracy in health and that’s 

what we’re going to stick with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

this afternoon pursuant to rule 46 on a matter of urgent and 

pressing necessity and ask leave of this Assembly to discuss the 

matter of municipalities, especially rural municipalities, that are 

in an extremely vulnerable position this day. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member for Cypress Hills 

wishes to introduce a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 

according to rule 46. And I’ll ask the hon. member to briefly 

describe to the Assembly why he feels it is a matter of urgent 

and pressing necessity and to advise the Assembly of the 

motion he wishes to introduce. 

 



520  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Immediate Financial Assistance for Municipalities 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because of flooding 

our roads are in desperate need of repair. Many are to the point 

where they are impassable. Mr. Speaker, municipalities need 

immediately financial assistance from the province in order to 

undertake the task of fixing roads that are being damaged by 

flooding, weather, and the like. 

 

Because of changes in assessment, municipalities have to put up 

$120,000 or more before they can receive any further financial 

assistance from the provincial government. This number used to 

be an average of about $25,000 per municipality, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s a pretty far cry from 120 to 125. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province must immediately take steps to set up 

a disaster assistance for rural roads. And we can only do so 

much to combat the floods and the weather, Mr. Speaker, but 

we can ensure that disaster . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The hon. member is, I 

believe, is making arguments for the motion he wishes to 

introduce and varying from advising the House as to its 

urgency. I’ll ask him to simply advise the House of the motion 

he wishes to introduce. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  I ask leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to 

discuss immediately the appropriate steps that may be taken to 

address this crisis through the following motion, seconded by 

my colleague from Cannington: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the desperate need to repair 

flood-damaged roads in Saskatchewan, primarily in the 

south-west; and demand that the government immediately 

take steps to provide emergency road assistance to 

municipalities through the provincial disaster assistance 

program; and further urge the government to immediately 

change the funding formula requiring municipalities to 

provide the equivalent of three mills, which is five times 

the amount previously required, due to reassessment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. All hon. members will come to 

order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to  

move second reading of The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993 

introduced several fundamental democratic changes to the 

difficult process of striking the constituency boundaries of the 

province in a manner that was demonstrably fair. These 

initiatives taken in 1993 included reducing the number of 

constituencies from 66 to 58, fixing the acceptable variation 

from the constituency quotient at plus or minus 5 per cent, 

removal of all references to a predetermined number of rural or 

urban constituencies, and establishing an independent 

Constituency Boundaries Commission appointed in consultation 

with the opposition parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of these changes was very clear — to 

provide a process for establishing constituency boundaries 

which all parties and all the people of Saskatchewan could be 

confident was a fair process. Through the work of the Malone 

Commission, in our view, this objective was achieved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this amending Bill is to make the 

simple but important change from requiring a Constituency 

Boundary Commission every five years to requiring a 

commission to be struck every 10 years, following the 1991 

Statistics Canada census. 

 

This amendment would link the establishment of a commission 

to the major decennial census conducted on the 10-year cycle 

from 1991, rather than proceeding on the interim five-year 

census as well. We are advised that the cost of conducting an 

overall redistribution of boundaries this year would be in the 

range of $200,000. 

 

Saskatchewan is the only province which would require 

boundaries to be changed every five years. The majority of 

provincial, territorial, and the federal jurisdictions proceed on a 

10-year cycle or following a fixed number of elections having 

been held. It is therefore incumbent upon this Assembly to ask 

the question of whether this cost is justified and essential to our 

overall goal of a demonstrably fair distribution system. 

 

Saskatchewan has undergone no less than three provincial and 

federal boundary redistributions in the past eight years. These 

shifting boundaries have been confusing for the electorate and 

for those candidates seeking to represent their constituents to 

the best of their ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also note that since The Representation 

Act, 1994 we have not been advised of any dramatic shift in our 

population between the established constituencies. In other 

words, the fundamental concept of fairness in the Bill will not 

be unduly compromised by adopting a 10-year rather than a 

five-year redistribution cycle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our consultations with the House leaders of the 

opposition parties, we have agreed that a 10-year cycle for 

redistribution would be the preferred approach. We concluded 

that it upholds the fundamental principle of fairness without 

incurring undue cost and confusion for Saskatchewan voters. It 

is on this basis that I bring this Bill before the House. 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill also makes one minor correction to the 

original 1993 legislation to ensure that the constituency 

quotient, which is based on the total population of the southern 

half of the province, is compared to the entire population of 

each constituency within plus or minus 5 per cent rather than 

the voter population of each constituency, which is in the 

legislation as it presently stands. This was an unintentional error 

in the original Act and one which needs to be amended to allow 

for the logical operation of this provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those brief words I move second reading of 

An Act to amend The Constituency Boundaries Act, 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to address Bill No. 11, The Constituency 

Boundaries Act. 

 

Any alteration to our electoral process is of great concern to the 

official opposition, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Act will be 

carefully scrutinized. 

 

The process of redrawing boundaries has been the subject of 

much heated debate in this House in past years. The changing 

population patterns of Saskatchewan have prompted this 

government to implement significant boundary modifications in 

recent years. And we have seen what direct impact these 

boundary changes have had on the distribution of members in 

this House. 

 

It is extremely important to the Liberal caucus that the 

alteration of electoral boundaries accurately but fairly 

represents the population trends in Saskatchewan. The 

procedure set out in The Constituency Boundaries Act provide 

the very basis for the heart of the democratic process in 

Saskatchewan. It is absolutely imperative that the integrity of 

this democratic process be cultivated and preserved to the best 

of our ability. 

 

(1430) 

 

As democratically elected members of this House, we are all 

very proud to say that we were chosen by the people of our 

constituencies to represent their interests and concerns in this 

House. Unfortunately, voter apathy and growing public 

cynicism about Saskatchewan politics could be detrimental to 

the electoral process. 

 

This apathy and cynicism breeds on Saskatchewan ground 

littered with broken election promises, Mr. Speaker. They fully 

realize the Premier won’t live up to his 1991 election promise to 

eliminate child poverty in Saskatchewan by the year 2000. 

 

The NDP government has also demonstrated little honour in its 

dealings with the farmers of Saskatchewan by unilaterally 

cancelling GRIP contracts. Saskatchewan people will not soon 

forget that this government broke its election promise to return 

a measly 10 per cent of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues 

to local communities, or that since coming to power the NDP 

government has cut overall K to 12 education operational  

funding by $26 million. 

 

The cut in education funding comes despite 1991 promises 

made by the Premier that, and I’ll quote, Mr. Speaker: 

“Increased education is a priority for the NDP. We simply have 

to find more money.” 

 

The list of broken promises by this government goes on and on, 

causing people to doubt that this government will be 

accountable to them. But we must ensure that the integrity of 

the electoral process is not similarly affected. Saskatchewan 

people must believe that their vote can make a difference. 

 

Is it coincidence that the ’95 election, the first election to take 

place after this government’s boundary restructuring, also 

provided one of the poorest voter turnouts in Saskatchewan 

history? People do want their concerns actually represented, and 

the redrawing of boundaries does directly impact on their 

perception of the electoral process. Unfortunately some people 

do believe that redrawing the boundaries has been nothing but a 

tool used by past governments in order to retain their power. 

 

It is our job as elected officials in Saskatchewan to ensure that 

we do all that we can to restore the public’s confidence in the 

democratic system. And I am hopeful that part of that goal can 

be accomplished by some of the amendments proposed in this 

Bill. 

 

In order to destroy voter apathy and to encourage as many 

eligible voters as possible to exercise their democratic right, we 

must make the electoral process as straightforward and as fair as 

possible. 

 

Extending the time period between boundary restructuring from 

5 years to 10 years will hopefully eliminate many confusing 

changes that voters face nearly every provincial election. 

 

Saskatchewan people should have every opportunity possible to 

be familiar with the constituency to which they belong in order 

to feel more comfortable with that electoral process. 

 

I also hope that amending The Constituency Boundaries Act to 

provide boundary restructuring after a more extensive federal 

census will provide more accurate information for the 

Boundaries Commission to work with. Acquiring the most 

recent and extensive census information available should only 

enhance the integrity of the commission’s decision. But this 

new information must be applied with complete and utter 

fairness. 

 

The remaining amendments contained within Bill 11, with 

references to the population formula used by the commission, 

have caused us just a little bit of concern. Because the impact of 

this legislation on Saskatchewan’s democratic process cannot 

be underestimated, we will require a little further time to 

analyse the potential impacts of these amendments. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, at this time I move that we 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 11. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



522  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Cancer Foundation Amendment 

Act, 1997. 

 

The purpose of the amendment is to streamline the process for 

paying physicians who serve cancer patients. Under the current 

system, the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation receives funding 

to pay for physician services. When a physician who’s not on 

the foundation staff treats a cancer patient, the physician bills 

the Department of Health. The department then invoices the 

foundation to pay the physician’s fee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment before the House will streamline 

the process and make it more efficient. It will allow the 

department to pay the physicians directly in a normal 

fee-for-service arrangement without invoicing the cancer 

foundation. It’s a fairly technical amendment actually, Mr. 

Speaker. The foundation will no longer have to act as an 

administrative middle person, if you will, for these billings. 

 

I think it’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that this change is 

being made in response to a request from the cancer foundation 

itself. As a result of the amendment, funding for services of 

private physicians will appear differently on the books. These 

funds will no longer be part of the cancer foundation’s budget 

but provincial funding for cancer services will continue to be 

identified separately in the budget documents. I want to stress 

that there will be no change in the services provided by the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation as a result of this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like also to take the opportunity to say that the 

government, in this term and the last term of this government, 

has made a priority of supporting the work of the cancer 

foundation. In fact this government has increased funding to the 

foundation by more than 9 per cent or $2.3 million since ’93-94. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since its establishment in 1979 the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Foundation has provided caring and compassionate 

services to people across the province. Today it serves residents 

from its cancer clinics in Regina and Saskatoon. It also offers 

province-wide breast cancer screening services to women 

between 50 and 70 years of age. 

 

The high standard of service provided by the cancer foundation 

was recently recognized by the Canadian Council on Health 

Services Accreditation. That is a national organization, and it 

awarded our cancer foundation with a three-year accreditation, 

which is a testament to the quality of services it provides to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The government looks forward to continued collaboration with 

the cancer foundation in developing new programs and 

technologies to provide quality cancer prevention and treatment 

services to the people of our province. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of  

The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

Minister of Health for his brief comments in relation to Bill No. 

7. Mr. Speaker, this appears to be a very straightforward piece 

of legislation and I don’t see a lot of reason to hold it up in 

second reading any longer than absolutely necessary. 

 

We have met with a number of stakeholders to discuss the 

implications of the changes as proposed by the government. 

Most have told us this Bill will simply clear up some of the 

administrative headache based by the cancer foundation in 

terms of how it reimburses physicians for services provided to 

those unfortunate enough to be afflicted with cancer, and the 

Minister of Health has very eloquently described that in his 

address. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anything we can do to make the health care 

system in this province work a little more smoothly and still 

provide important services to people who need them most, we 

will support. 

 

I don’t have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it seems over the last few 

years the administrative burden and structure in our health care 

system has increased greatly. This has not led to better service 

however — far from it. 

 

Many of the services Saskatchewan people depend on have 

been drastically cut. We have seen each health district in the 

province set up huge bureaucracies at the same time they’d been 

forced to cut services due to this government’s lack of 

commitment to maintaining quality health care in many parts of 

this province. 

 

So obviously, when we’re told that some of the health care 

system’s administrative structure is actually being streamlined 

by the government opposite, it comes as a bit of a surprise. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, whenever we’re dealing with a Bill in 

this House that affects any aspect of the health care system we 

do want to take a very close examination of it. The last few 

years, I believe, have given the people of Saskatchewan every 

reason to be concerned whenever the government begins 

tinkering with the health care system again. 

 

So I think it is incumbent on us on this side of the House to 

scrutinize this and any other Bill affecting our health care 

system very, very closely. That being said, however, I think we 

can effectively ask many of the questions that we do have 

regarding Bill 7 in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

be able to rise today to address The Cancer Foundation Act. 

 

Basically, this piece of legislation enables the Department of 

Health to pay physicians for cancer-related billings without 

invoicing the cancer foundation. Hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that 

means it’ll be a reduction in paperwork. However, we would 

like to have a little more details regarding these payments made  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

pursuant to The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

We support the cancer foundation, Mr. Speaker; in fact my 

mother still uses their services. We would like to be able to talk 

to the various stakeholders that are involved with the cancer 

foundation and the physicians that deal with the cancer 

foundation. So we feel that a few more days of debate on this 

issue would not be an imposition on this particular piece of Bill, 

since the physicians are being paid, the services are still being 

provided by the cancer foundation, at least, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as Saskatchewan Health provides for these days. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move an adjournment of 

debate on this issue. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Department of Health 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Department of Health Amendment 

Act, 1997. This amendment has a few purposes, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, it strengthens protection of our Saskatchewan health 

cards; and secondly, it allows the Department of Health to take 

on some of the provisions in The Saskatchewan Hospitalization 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well all know, our universal medicare system 

that was pioneered in 1962 is a source of pride to most 

members in the House. It reflects our historic values of 

cooperation, community, and compassion. And it’s nothing less 

than a statement of who we are. It guarantees that access to high 

quality health services is based on need, not on ability to pay. 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we certainly do have high 

quality health services in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that we would all agree that if you ask somebody to say 

where in the world they had a better, more caring, and 

compassionate health system than in the province of 

Saskatchewan, people would have a very difficult time naming 

such a place, Mr. Speaker. And of course, I’ve challenged the 

opposition to come up with such a place and they really 

haven’t. 

 

So I wanted to make that comment, Mr. Speaker, because I 

think the values of caring and compassion that were pioneered 

in this province for health care are values that are very much 

alive today. But they’re values we want to continue to build on 

as we renew our health system, strengthen it for the future, and 

make sure that we sustain it for the next generation. 

 

And with our government’s recent budget, Mr. Speaker, the 

future of those services has been secured. We’ve increased 

funding to the health system to ensure people across the 

province have access to compassionate, caring health services 

now and in the future. And as the House knows, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve replaced every penny that has been cut back out of the 

health care system by the federal government in Ottawa. 

 

Our Saskatchewan health cards are an important symbol of 

those things, Mr. Speaker. They represent our right as 

Saskatchewan residents to receive the services we need to 

ensure our good health. Mr. Speaker, this legislation will clarify 

the role that our health cards play in identifying residents as 

beneficiaries of our health system. And this Bill will also 

strengthen the measures in The Department of Health Act that 

protect our health cards from fraud and misuse. 

 

Saskatchewan people want to feel secure that their health cards 

and everything they stand for are protected from abuse. This 

amendment will increase the fine for fraudulent use of a health 

card to $5,000. Currently the maximum fine is $500. This will 

serve as a stronger deterrent to those who might consider using 

someone else’s card or allow others to use their card. 

 

Because of course, Mr. Speaker, with the kind of health system 

we have in Canada, and particularly in Saskatchewan, there are 

people from other countries like the United States, that if they 

could fraudulently use a card and were so minded, could 

perhaps avoid personal bankruptcy. Because that’s the kind of 

sad system that you have when you have a two-tier, private 

system. We need to avoid that, but we also need to avoid 

fraudulent use of our cards in our system. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that fraudulent use of health cards is 

not currently a major concern in our province. But it’s 

important that we be proactive and preventive, and say that we 

won’t put up with fraudulent use of health cards. 

 

(1445) 

 

I want to note that the $5,000 fine brings us into line with 

legislation in other provinces, and is identical to legislation 

recently introduced in Ontario. 

 

The legislation will also address another issue, ensuring 

coverage for health services provided to our residents outside of 

Saskatchewan. We have reciprocal agreements with other 

provinces for hospital services. That is contained in The 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. The amendments before the 

House today will transfer those provisions to The Department 

of Health Act. Once that’s done, The Hospitalization Act, 

which is now obsolete, can be repealed. 

 

This aspect of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is really just a 

housekeeping measure that will not change the way services are 

provided or paid for. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendments in this 

Bill help protect an important aspect of our universal health 

system. They clarify the function of our Saskatchewan health 

cards and provide a stronger deterrent to future misuse of those 

cards. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to speak on this motion. Bill No. 15 makes some 

long-overdue reforms to The Public Health Act which I think 

are positive. 

 



524  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

After having reviewed the Bill, I agree with several of the 

objectives as set out in it. But as is so often the case with this 

government, I have some reservations about the way the 

government wants to proceed with these reforms. 

 

Firstly, I note that the Bill creates a much clearer legislative 

authority for the Minister of Health to provide payment to 

health service providers in the other provinces and territories. I 

know that there have been several cases presented in this very 

House in recent years, of people who have had to go outside of 

the province to receive specialized medical attention. 

 

Well I’m extremely pleased to see that this Act will finally give 

the minister clear authority to ensure that the province pays for 

those health services. I hope this government will also soon 

address the reasons why many Saskatchewan residents are 

forced to seek specialized treatment out of the province. 

 

This government is fully aware that there is a great demand for 

medical specialists in Saskatchewan. Yet the NDP’s so-called 

wellness plan is not sitting well with medical specialists who 

are considering Saskatchewan as the place to relocate. 

 

So while I support the amendments proposed in this Act that 

will allow the government to legally live up to its responsibility 

to pay for specialized health services not offered in 

Saskatchewan, I implore the minister to address the 

inadequacies of Saskatchewan’s health care system that make 

this legislation so necessary. I also hope that the minister will 

ensure that Saskatchewan is open to reciprocal agreements of 

this nature with the other provinces and territories. 

 

The amendments within Bill 15 that refer to extending the 

definition of beneficiary and to include the issuing of health 

cards to beneficiaries are also long overdue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m also pleased to see that anyone caught illegally using their 

health cards can be fined. Saskatchewan’s health system must 

not be the target of abuse. 

 

On the topic of health cards, I do have some concerns about the 

future of Saskatchewan’s health cards and how the information 

contained in the cards will be used. I would like to know what 

security provisions the minister foresees including in legislation 

that will make patient confidentiality a priority. 

 

Within the evolving technological world that we live in, there 

are more and more security dangers every day. I hope that this 

government will take the necessary steps to ensure that 

legislation relating to Saskatchewan’s health card information 

system keeps up with the high-tech dangers that will inevitably 

target that information. The issue of patient confidentiality must 

not be lost in the pursuit of efficiency and cost-saving measures 

in the health care field. 

 

Another concern I have relating to Bill 15 is the clause once 

again providing the minister with the power to make changes to 

the health Act through the regulations. Time and time again the 

minister and his colleagues hide behind the cloak of regulations 

in order to undermine the real power of this Legislative 

Assembly. 

Ideally this Legislative Assembly is to provide public debate 

and scrutiny of proposed government policies, but the minister 

and his government continually take the power of the people 

out this House and take it behind closed doors. As a result, the 

Saskatchewan people are forced to cope with this government’s 

mistakes just as we saw in the babysitting wage fiasco. 

 

Those major changes were made behind closed doors by way of 

regulation changes and then the Department of Labour did not 

even have the foresight to properly inform the public of the 

changes to the labour laws. And who pays for this government’s 

mistakes? The Saskatchewan people. 

 

However I do support the overall intent of this Bill, which is to 

provide more adequate medical coverage for Saskatchewan 

residents. And I hope that the minister will be able to address 

our concerns further in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the outset, 

Mr. Speaker, I see this legislation contains some good things, 

such as the Minister of Health being empowered to pay for 

provisions of health services outside of Saskatchewan on behalf 

of beneficiaries. But we would like more information, Mr. 

Speaker, on how and what kinds of treatments are involved in 

these kind of payments. 

 

This is very important, Mr. Speaker, for my constituents, 

because a good many of them travel down to Minot in North 

Dakota for services; they travel to Brandon, Manitoba for 

services. So it’s extremely important, Mr. Speaker, to know 

what kind of services we’re talking about and how those 

payments are going to be made. Are people who pay those 

services up front going to be reimbursed, or is it a matter of 

billing between the two jurisdictions? Those are very important 

considerations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s also very important to find out what’s going to happen 

when people from outside of Saskatchewan come into 

Saskatchewan and utilize our services. What happens in my 

particular constituency if people from across the border, in 

Manitoba, come to Redvers for health care services. 

Saskatchewan Health bills Manitoba Health for those services, 

but my health care district, the Moose Mountain District, 

doesn’t receive any credit for having performed those services. 

So they’re only budgeted on the number of people in the 

district, not on the amount of service they actually provide, 

because the people from Manitoba don’t count in that sense. 

 

So we need to talk, Mr. Speaker, to the stakeholders, to see 

whether they feel this particular piece of legislation serves all of 

those needs. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this time 

that debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

to the Assembly for second reading, the Bill titled An Act to 

amend The Tourism Authority Act. 

 

In the autumn of 1994 we transferred responsibility for 

marketing and development of tourism to the Tourism 

Authority, which is a unique partnership between the industry 

and the provincial government. This major milestone was 

targeted in our Partnership for Renewal economic strategy, 

which included the expansion of tourism marketing in the 

development through new partnerships as one of our 31 

initiatives for economic renewal in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This partnership, Mr. Speaker, between the government and the 

tourism industry was the first of its kind in Canada and was the 

result of recommendations from the tourism task force. The task 

force focused on new approaches to financing tourism 

marketing and development efforts and on appropriate functions 

for both industry and government. 

 

The Tourism Authority Act, which established the Tourism 

Authority as a corporation, was the result of the task force’s 

recommendation based on industry input through the 

consultation process. This enabling legislation responded to the 

recommendations that the Tourism Authority’s responsibility 

include tourism funding programs other than capital funding, 

tourism marketing, visitor information services, education and 

training, support of tourism and public awareness, tourism 

research and policy, and finally, tourism destination area 

planning and development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the two years since the establishment of the 

corporation known as the Tourism Authority, commonly 

referred to as Saskatchewan Tourism Authority, we have seen 

impressive growth and development in the Saskatchewan 

tourism sector. And in recent weeks, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a 

number of announcements related to tourism. And as recently 

as today at lunch we announced another major event in 

Saskatchewan tourism industry, the establishment of the 

aboriginal waterways initiative, a partnership between the 

Canadian Tourism Commission, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tourism industry generates around $1 billion a 

year in the tourist expenditure and provides more than 40,000 

full-time jobs and part-time jobs for Saskatchewan people — 

many, many exciting projects. Even in your area, Mr. Speaker, 

with the new spa in Moose Jaw, many of our young people are 

able to look at tourism as a way to earn their living in exciting 

and non-capital-intensive way for young people who want to 

work in that particular industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in April of 1996 the Government of Saskatchewan 

transferred the mandate for tourism capital development to the 

Tourism Authority, and in May of ’96 the industry-driven 

tourism partnership was strengthened by merger of the Tourism 

Industry Association of Saskatchewan, known as TISASK, the 

Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council, and the 

Saskatchewan Tourism Authority. 

 

This merger followed consultation meetings with members of  

the industry of Saskatchewan and almost a thousand tourism 

industry organizations, business, and individuals, who gave 

their overwhelming approval for the new, integrated system. 

Through this merger, TISASK and the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Education Council became part of the Tourism Authority 

framework under the operating name, Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan’s tourism sector will benefit from having a 

strengthened organization with a broader mandate and financial 

base. The industry’s profile will be strengthened and the 

members will have a single organization to represent their 

interests and support their activities and focus their resources. 

The credibility, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan’s tourism 

industry will be enhanced and it will be a stronger competitor in 

the Canadian, North American, and international tourism 

marketing areas. Mr. Speaker, the board of directors of the 

Tourism Authority are asking the government to amend The 

Tourism Authority Act in response to this merger. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I might, I think it would be appropriate at 

this moment to thank and recognize all of the individuals who 

historically worked in the Department of Economic 

Development and Tourism, transferred to the new Authority 

and now to Saskatchewan Tourism, for the wonderful job that 

they have done for the people of Saskatchewan and providing 

the focus that we need to provide jobs and to provide tourism 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The amendment of the legislation will allow Tourism 

Saskatchewan to charge a membership fee, as is customary with 

industry associations. And it will give the broad discretion to 

waive fees for certain members because of their already high 

level of financial support. 

 

Decisions concerning membership fees were developed in wide 

consultation with industry stakeholders, who approved both the 

structure and the fees to be charged. The amendment will also 

add capital funding to the organization’s mandate, a reflection 

of the government’s transfer of this responsibility for tourism 

capital development to the Tourism Authority. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we propose to amend the legislation to 

accommodate administrative charges — specifically, 

reimbursement of expenses in accordance with the Tourism 

Authority standards and reallocation of board seats formerly 

designated to TISASK. Mr. Speaker, these changes have been 

requested by the board of directors of the Tourism Authority on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan tourism industry. 

 

It’s my pleasure to present The Tourism Authority Amendment 

Act, 1997 for second reading and trust members will give it 

speedy consideration and passage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

speak on this Bill because of my interest in the tourism industry 

in Saskatchewan. 

 



526  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

The government has been quite vocal, since coming to power, 

on its emphasis on building a vital tourism industry in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, as a small-business person I know the 

importance of tourism in our economy. And the people of 

Saskatchewan do everything in their power to make 

Saskatchewan an inviting destination for visitors and not simply 

a pass-through point, or even worse, a place to avoid altogether. 

 

Saskatchewan has many points of interest for visitors to enjoy. 

In the south-west we have the beautiful Cypress Hills; in the 

south there’s the Big Muddy; and further east there’s the 

Qu’Appelle Valley. There are places of major historical 

significance such as the Batoche National Historic Site. 

 

We also had the good work of the Kinsmen who are working 

very hard to keep the Big Valley Jamboree, hopefully for many 

years to come. And of course there’s the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders who thankfully will play another season. 

 

And let’s not forget the building we’re on now, or the land it 

sits on, and of course our provincial and national parks 

throughout the province. On that issue, Mr. Speaker, I note that 

the government did appear to recognize the importance of the 

provincial parks in the most recent budget and I sincerely hope 

they now realize that maintaining our provincial parks is not 

simply a cost to the province. It’s truly an investment because 

our provincial parks are our biggest tourist attraction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sprinkled within all these major, well-known 

attractions are the many interesting events and things to see and 

do in nearly every community in this province. Saskatchewan is 

rich in natural beauty and cultural importance. We may not 

have the Rocky Mountains or the CN (Canadian National) 

Tower or the Niagara Falls, but we have our own unique tourist 

attractions that people should be encouraged to visit. And we 

have our people. 

 

The more people we can convince to visit this province, the 

better we all are. And the government acknowledges that 

constantly, at least in words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the measures that are being taken through this 

piece of legislation clarify the role, the make-up, and the powers 

of the Tourism Authority. 

 

This Bill appears to change the membership of the Authority. 

The Bill will now allow more organizations in Saskatchewan to 

become members. Under this legislation the onus will no longer 

be on the Tourism Authority to decide who can and who cannot 

be members. If an organization meets the criteria set out in the 

Bill’s regulations, that organization will automatically be 

welcomed. The Bill will, however, give the Tourism Authority 

the power to levy membership fees for its members. And it 

appears the legislation will allow the amount of those fees to 

vary for various types of members. 

 

We hope when making these decisions, the Tourism Authority 

will remember that many of our organizations or tourism 

operators who may want to join are on a very tight budget. I 

would hope the move to make it easier to join as a member will  

not be undone through onerous membership fees that will be 

unaffordable to smaller operations. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, it does appear that this legislation will give 

the Tourism Authority the legal authorization to do what is 

already being done in fact — namely, handle capital funding for 

tourism projects. The government has used the Authority for 

this purpose for about a year already, so this simply brings the 

legislation into line with what’s really happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other changes to this 

legislation as well and we’ll want to study them a little further. 

At this time we are not overly concerned about most of the 

aspects contained in this Bill, but I think a little more secure 

scrutiny is warranted before voting on Bill No. 8. We do want 

to take a little more time in talking with the affected parties in 

Saskatchewan and gathering some legal opinions. 

 

However before adjourning debate, I do want to spend a few 

moments discussing the tourism industry, both as it relates to 

the Authority and in more general terms, because this is an 

aspect of our economy that we must always remember. There 

have been some very positive moves in the past few years. Mr. 

Speaker, the government has moved to involve more industry 

stakeholders in setting strategies, in trying to capitalize on the 

potential for tourism in our province. Mr. Speaker, the 

Authority has not been in place long enough for anyone to pass 

judgement on its relative success or its failure. We’ll have to 

wait awhile to see if this unique partnership is working in 

Saskatchewan’s best interest. 

 

However, the concept that lies beneath the Saskatchewan 

Tourism Authority is, I believe, a very good one. This is an area 

where we desperately need the input of all those sectors of the 

economy that are affected by tourism and know tourism. 

 

Whenever a government thinks it alone has all the answers in 

any area of the economy, we’re usually in desperate trouble. 

And in so many other areas that does appear to be the case with 

government. But this is one of the few instances where they 

have at least appeared to be inclusive in a very important aspect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very important to have an Authority that 

includes effective representation from areas such as the hotel 

and motel industry, the outfitters from first nations and from 

Metis communities, not to mention representatives from various 

regions and organizations such as the arts groups, heritage 

foundations, and multicultural groups. 

 

Obviously all of these groups are affected to a tremendous 

extent by the strength or weakness in the tourism industry in the 

province and it’s only positive that their viewpoints are listened 

to by government officials. Because, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that does need a lot of help when it comes to 

building on our tourism strength and overcoming our 

weaknesses, which are, in some ways, considerable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a strong and successful Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority is very important and we encourage the continued 

development of that organization. It appears this Bill does alter  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

the structure of the Tourism Authority. We are in the process of 

reviewing the proposed legislative changes with various 

affected parties. 

 

But I think we also have to take this opportunity to point out to 

the members opposite that the work in building tourism in 

Saskatchewan can’t stop at the Tourism Authority’s front door. 

No amount of tinkering with the mandate of the Authority will 

solve some of the main problems in this province, problems 

only the government opposite can deal with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly one of the main hindrances in attracting 

people to our province is the status of our highways. Travel 

outside of Saskatchewan east, west, or south and you’re greeted 

with smooth, safe roads. But driving back into Saskatchewan 

you don’t have to see any signs to let you know when you’ve 

entered the province, because most people only have to go a 

few feet within the boundaries of Saskatchewan when they are 

greeted with their first pothole. It only takes a few minutes for 

those who live in Saskatchewan to see the sad shape of our 

highways in comparison to other provinces, who have 

continued to make the maintenance of highways a high priority 

in government spending. 

 

But to a certain extent, we who live here have gotten used to the 

decrepit state of our roads. But can you imagine the reaction of 

those who are visiting from outside of our province, especially 

those who may be brand-new to our province or those who 

haven’t been here for a decade or so. Can you imagine what 

their first impression of our province really is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think a clear example of how devastating the 

situation can be on our tourism potential can be shown by a 

phone call that we got last fall — actually last July — a time 

when our province should be teeming with tourists. 

 

A lady by the name of Linda Danielson called our caucus office 

to complain about the highways. Ms. Danielson is from British 

Columbia and she came back to Saskatchewan after a lengthy 

absence to visit some family here. Unfortunately her visit to 

Saskatchewan was ruined when the truck she was driving was 

extensively damaged near Drake on Highway No. 20. It was 

another victim of the ever deeper and ever more plentiful 

potholes in our highways. And this tourist phoned our office 

very, very angry, to express her concerns. She was angry 

because her whole vacation was ruined and because her vehicle 

ended up in a shop for a whole week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian Tourism Commission, 

our country is experiencing something of a tourism boom. 

However, if Saskatchewan is to get its share of the potential 

from this boom, we have to do everything in our power to make 

this a place where people will want to come to. 

 

Nearly every road that leads to one of our major attractions is in 

a state of disrepair. I hope the case isn’t irreparable, but if the 

government doesn’t commit to reversing the situation, it soon 

will be. 

 

I think Ms. Danielson’s exact words pretty well sum up the 

frustration of so many of the visitors to our province. She said,  

and I quote: 

 

I would not have believed the state of our highways if I did 

not see it for myself. I cannot believe that the government 

would allow these highways to deteriorate to a point where 

people are driving on the wrong side of the road (just) to 

dodge potholes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these words I believe capture the anger and 

frustration many visitors and would-be visitors have when 

discussing Saskatchewan. We have to have a government truly 

committed to all aspects of tourism. That doesn’t simply mean 

increased promotion of our province, though it is extremely 

important. It also means getting a good first impression, and 

that’s something we are failing miserably at, and most of that is 

the continued destruction of our provincial highways. 

 

The problem was not fixed in the budget, and if the government 

sticks to its 10-year plan the highways will only deteriorate 

more. We need a true commitment to our highway system. 

Unfortunately that’s not been the case for this government or 

the previous PC administration, which began our highways on 

the road to ruin, a policy this government opposite has clearly 

taken up as its own. 

 

The point I’m making, Mr. Speaker, is that the government can 

do all the fixing and fiddling it wants with the Tourism 

Authority. However there are some very real problems in our 

province, problems that are a serious blow to attracting visitors. 

And until the government addresses them in a meaningful way, 

that will remain the reality. 

 

We’ll have more to say on this later on, Mr. Speaker, but right 

now I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 

her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I hereby move 

resolution no. 1: 

 

That a sum not exceeding $675.429 million be granted to 

Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1998. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, before we begin the discussion and some of the 

detailed information on the interim supply, I would like, if you 

wouldn’t mind, to introduce the officials that you have with you 

today. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you for that opportunity. 

Sitting next to me is Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant 

deputy minister for taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 

Sitting behind Kirk is Larry Spannier, assistant deputy minister,  



528  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

Treasury Board branch; and sitting next to Larry is Jim 

Marshall, the executive director for the economic and fiscal 

policy branch. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Minister, and 

welcome to your officials as well. 

 

I have to start by saying that I’ve been lobbied by members of 

the Assembly this afternoon that we’re all in agreement, I think, 

that we would move this interim supply through very, very 

quickly if you could assure us that there would be sufficient 

funds provided to the Legislative Assembly to heat this 

Chamber. It seems that on April 1 we must have stopped paying 

our power bills or our heat bills around here, and it’s quite 

chilly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you very much. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Want to borrow my sweater? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  No, we’ll warm it up. 

 

Minister, the amount that you’re requesting in this interim 

supply, I would like you to explain if you would, how the 

number was arrived at in its total. Was it a percentage of the 

overall estimated budgetary expenses for the year? Was it 

estimated in relationship to certain department needs? Or how 

was it done? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, with respect to the temperature, I had sent a note to 

the Speaker saying it was cold on this side of the House; I 

didn’t realize it was cold on your side of the House too. 

 

What I’ll do is I’ll send to the member and to the third party and 

to the independent member — to their desks anyway — an 

outline of the different spending being requested here. So if I 

could get a page to take these across. 

 

And what you’ll see there is that there’s a certain amount of 

spending that the government does that is statutory — that is, it 

does not have to be voted because it’s according to statutes that 

exist. So you subtract out the statutory. And then beyond that, 

every department has just had two-twelfths of its spending 

being voted here. 

 

So it’s two-twelfths of government spending, taking out the 

statutory spending. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. In doing some 

research on this, I noted in March of 1993 in this legislature you 

indicated that in providing a detailed explanation of the interim 

supply at that time, you said the following, and I quote: 

 

In fact in the 33 years since 1960 there’s only been three 

occasions when the first interim supply Bill was for an 

amount other than a straight one-twelfth of the budgeted 

amount. 

 

Minister, I see in the documents that you’ve just provided, that  

excluding the statutory amounts that are authorized by law, the 

amount that is requested in this interim supply Bill is 

two-twelfths. Would you mind explaining the difference 

between your comments in ’93 and this request? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes, I’d be pleased to answer that question. 

 

The issue is one of timing. Because if we went for one-twelfth 

today, whatever this pass, we would have to be back in a matter 

of days to go for another twelfth to be sure that we’re ready for 

the next month. 

 

And I think the point here is that interim supply is just a means 

to ensure that health boards, universities, all the groups out 

there that rely on government spending, are being paid in the 

interim between when the budget is presented to the legislature 

and the budget is passed. 

 

Because of course the budget authorizes all the spending, but 

the fiscal year begins April 1. So as of April 1 these people will 

be expecting to receive cheques in the near future that we can’t 

guarantee that we can give to them. So it is in that sense an 

interim measure. 

 

And this year, because of the date of the budget and the date of 

the first interim supply, it really is more appropriate to do two 

together to ensure that these people will know that their money 

is coming. And then after that we can revert back to the original 

practice if that’s necessary. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I know some of my colleagues 

will be asking more detailed questions in terms of specific 

departments, but as a general rule, if you’ve allocated a straight 

mathematical two-twelfths for the amount to be authorized, 

could you see any circumstances where that would create 

difficulties? And I’m thinking, are there any circumstances 

whereby a department or a certain entity or third party entity 

may require more money than just the two-twelfths up front; 

that they have special needs that may or may not be addressed. 

Or are you satisfied that a straight, across the board 

two-twelfths amount will satisfy all contingencies? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes, it is our belief that they will be able to manage 

with the two-twelfths. And of course, it’s just giving them the 

choice to do that. That doesn’t mean that they will be spending 

this necessarily. There may be some situations in which the 

spending isn’t required. But it’s a way to allow them to reassure 

their third parties that just because the budget isn’t passed, 

they’re not going to suffer. 

 

So we believe, from everything we know, that the departments 

will be able to manage with the two-twelfths they’ve been 

allocated. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, in 

looking at page 16, I see that under the equalization payments 

there is an actual increase from the 1996-97 forecast figures 

compared to the ’97-98 estimated figures. Could the minister 

explain this difference? And does it mean that the province will  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

actually be seeing an increase in the equalization payments 

rather than a decrease? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I would remind the member opposite that this is not 

the Department of Finance’s estimates. The estimates of the 

Department of Finance will be here under a different process; so 

that we don’t get into too many detailed questions. 

 

But to answer the member’s question. What she needs to 

compare is apples and apples. She’s comparing apples and 

oranges there. You need to look at the estimate for ’96-97 — 

the estimate was about 315 million — and you compare that to 

the estimate of this year, which is 129 million. So in fact there’s 

a dramatic drop in apples to apples. 

 

The drop reflects the fact that our economy is doing very well. 

What the actual payment will be could vary dramatically 

because you get re-estimates throughout the year, and these 

numbers vary very dramatically depending on how your 

economy is doing relative to the rest of the province’s economy. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you. Minister, to put it in context, I 

guess the concern was, or the issue was in relationship to the 

two-twelfths. Because if your estimated income is changing, 

does that have an impact on how you would allocate your 

two-twelfth expenses? Do you take into account the net of 

income or is it strictly an expenditure-side allocation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, revenues don’t flow evenly over the year anyway and 

there’s no revenue change estimated here. That is, this is an 

expense measure; you’re just taking all the expenses in the 

budget, and except for the statutory, you’re carving off 

two-twelfths. And there has been no change since the budget in 

the revenue side. The estimate, you know, the estimate remains 

the way it is. 

 

What I was saying to the member opposite is you don’t know 

next year at this time what in fact equalization will come in at. 

If you look at it historically over the last couple of years, it 

swings dramatically. So when you’re talking about numbers 

you have to compare estimate to estimate and then actual to 

actual, but not estimates to actuals. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

are all of the departments given their cheques for their 

two-twelfths as soon as this interim supply Bill has been 

passed? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the departments are not given cheques — it’s 

permissive. They’re given the authority to spend up to that 

amount if it is required to spend up to that amount. But they 

have to prove that it’s necessary to spend up to that amount. 

 

So it’s permissive, and the whole process is in place where they 

have to show why that money is spent and why it’s covered in 

the budget. And they won’t be able to spend anything that’s 

obviously not covered in the budget. 

Ms. Draude:  So if that’s the case then . . . Like last year the 

Indian and Metis Affairs didn’t receive any funding for two or 

three months — does that mean that they didn’t need any until 

that time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I don’t really know the specific example she’s using. 

But if in fact money wasn’t spent by a particular organization, 

it’s because they didn’t have any legitimate budgetary reason to 

be spending that money. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, are there resource revenues, 

gaming, and other revenues going to meet the requirements of 

the interim supply Bill? Presently oil prices are lower than they 

were last year — they were around $21 a barrel, U.S. — and 

there were no windfall revenues from the Crown corporations 

expected, nor are there any funds available through sell-off 

assets similar to the Cameco shares. Is there enough money in 

the government coffers at present to cover the two-twelfths of 

the annual spending? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, it’s difficult to know how to answer that because it’s 

. . . the money that is . . . the revenue is the same as it always 

has been in the budget. If the budget were passed right now, we 

would be spending money, and some departments would be 

spending more than two-twelfths perhaps, some would be 

spending less. 

 

So the member talks about the estimates for the price of oil. If 

you look in the budget, we have assumed in the budget that the 

price of oil this year was going to be less than it was last year. 

And we assumed in the budget that we will be getting less 

revenue from oil than last year. 

 

Again though, what the member has to compare is estimate to 

estimate not actual to actual. Each and every year we’re very 

cautious in what we assume we’re going to get from resources 

like oil because we want to be pleasantly surprised, not 

unpleasantly surprised. So the actuals have tended to be a lot 

higher. 

 

But certainly the revenue is there to ensure that these 

two-twelfths can be permitted to be spent if required. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, you said that a department 

would have to prove that it actually needed the two-twelfths. 

What happens if one department shows that they actually need 

half of their budget this month — is that available to them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. First of all, it would be highly unusual for a 

department to be spending half of its budget in the first two 

months of the year. I mean there’d have to be something very 

unusual happening. 

 

Nothing unusual is happening. Department of Finance have 

canvassed all the departments and all the departments expect no 

such unexpected events to occur. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So, Madam Minister, for something like the  



530  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

flooding that could be a problem, is that going to be covered 

then? Is there sufficient funding for that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again what I would say to the 

member opposite is, all that’s occurring here is whatever has 

been budgeted for in the budget, two-twelfths of that is being 

spent. So if something is already in the budget, there’ll be some 

money for it. If something isn’t in the budget, this will be . . . 

You’re not changing the budget here; you’re just confirming the 

spending, the allocation that already exists in the budget. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

following up on that last question, is there somewhere in the 

budget that there are monies for emergency measures; in 

particular, for the flooding that we’re now seeing occurring in 

southern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I would remind the member about the process that 

we’re engaged in here. All we’re doing is we’re providing 

two-twelfths for interim supply. That is a detailed estimates 

question. As soon as we get through this process, we will get 

into the estimates of the various departments and you can go 

through that sort of question. 

 

As you can understand, there’s many departments here and if I 

was going to provide you with the detailed information for 

every department, I mean this desk would be full of 

information. And that’s why this process is one in which, again, 

we’re doing something narrow here — ensuring that third 

parties, who will require their money because we’re into the 

new year, have money available to them. 

 

That sort of detailed question of course we welcome, but the 

process for that is when we get into estimates. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for the history 

lesson. I think I understand the process to some extent here. 

And I guess the point I’m trying to make is that we are in a 

crisis situation in the province. We’ve got flooding in the 

southern part of Saskatchewan, and indeed in other parts of 

Saskatchewan as well. What we’re trying to find out is, indeed 

is there money in this interim measure here for those people out 

there, the municipalities, that are going to need them? And if so, 

where will we find it? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I think I do have to repeat my answer because he 

keeps asking the same question. What I said to the member 

opposite is this is a very narrow interim measure here in which 

we’re taking two-twelfths of everything that’s in the budget. 

We’re allowing that money to be spent, and we’re doing it only 

for one reason — to ensure that third parties like hospital 

boards, health boards, universities have enough money to 

continue to operate. 

 

If the member opposite does think there’s a serious situation, 

then what he can do — he has a recourse — he can pass interim 

supply right now. We will bring on the appropriate departments  

and you can get into the detailed questions that you want to ask. 

And we would welcome that, that issue. 

 

So you know, it’s up to the member opposite. If he wants that 

sort of detailed information, then he should say that he doesn’t 

want to spend any further time on this, and we’ll bring forth the 

department’s estimates and you can ask that sort of question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Madam Minister, we continue to hear from 

your side of the House that open and accountable government. 

And I think it’s a simple enough question. I guess maybe I’ll try 

and rephrase it so that maybe you will be willing to answer it. Is 

there enough in the two-twelfths of interim payment to cover 

the costs of emergency measures for the flooding in the 

southern part of the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I really think the member opposite needs to show a 

higher level of understanding of the process. That is a very 

specific question. There is a specific department that we will be 

prepared to bring on to answer that question. 

 

This is a general process in which we’re taking two-twelfths of 

the government spending; we’re approving it so that we can 

ensure that third parties that depend on this revenue will have it 

available to them. 

 

And as I say, the member opposite, this government is entirely 

open and accountable. What the members opposite have to 

come to understand though is the process, and the process for 

that accountability. And you have it within your power to pass 

this interim supply, move into the more detailed questions, and 

get the answers that you require. We more than welcome that 

moving along with the process to give you the answers that you 

require. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Can the minister perhaps tell us then what 

figure is two-twelfths of the Emergency Measures budget that 

you’re allocating today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the members 

opposite, as you’ll see from the sheet that I passed out, all that 

we’re approving today is two-twelfths of every department’s 

budget except statutory. As I mentioned to your colleague, the 

statutory spending is taken out. 

 

In order to get that detailed answer, the member would have to 

have the department that’s involved. Here they will go through 

the detail of the estimates and they will be more than happy to 

answer your detailed question. But that’s . . . it’s necessary to 

move on to that process to get the detailed answers that you 

require. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well surely, Madam Minister, that with the 

number of staff that you have with you, and surely this has been 

a topic in cabinet for a number of days, that your Finance 

people have been working on it, and it seems to me it would be 

very simple for you to answer the question — if indeed there is 

money there for Emergency Measures, in particular the flooding 

in southern Saskatchewan, as part of this interim supply. And I 

think to me, if you’re going to be open and 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

accountable, let’s start right here and give us an answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, one has to be a little disturbed at recent events when it 

becomes clear that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan doesn’t 

understand the process. I mean when I picked up my newspaper 

today and read that the Leader of the Liberal Party is alleging 

that the Minister of Finance leaked tax information . . . I mean 

totally serious allegation. No evidence to back it up. Outside the 

legislature there would be places in which such a person would 

be open to be sued. 

 

So what my point is to the Liberal Party — and I’m trying to 

make it gently — is there has to be a respect for the process and 

understanding of the process. I do not have before me the 

details of every department’s spending. It’s ridiculous to believe 

that one person would have all of that detail here. And this isn’t 

the process by which you go through that detail. 

 

There is a process. We’re more than willing to move to it to 

give you the sort of detailed answers that you want. And you 

know it’s up to the opposition how quickly they want those 

answers, whether they want to move on to that process. 

 

But there has to be a better understanding of some of these 

processes, because unfortunately we’re getting this province 

into some difficulty by some of the statements that are being 

made. And I just hope that that understanding grows quickly. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Madam Minister, a minute ago you 

talked about the narrow focus that this forum provides. And all 

of sudden you stray off into the wilderness, talking about all 

sorts of things, talking about a person that’s not even in the 

legislature. And you want to talk about politics and you don’t 

want to talk about being open and accountable. And I’m sure 

that your staff members that are with you here don’t want to get 

into that discussion either. 

 

The focus is very simple. We’re asking a simple question about 

funding, and I’m not sure why you won’t answer it. If you’re 

worried about the people in the province getting led astray, it 

seems that your answers are leading them astray. They’re 

saying, well she won’t answer. What’s she got to hide? Why 

won’t she answer the simple question? 

 

So I’ll ask you once more. What is a two and a half . . . or 

two-twelfths of the interim supply motion today as it relates to 

emergency funding for the province, in particular, flooding? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’ll make my point again. What the Liberals are 

concerning me about is their lack of understanding of the 

system. And to some extent what I fear the most is lack of . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I would caution the minister that 

we are on a discussion of interim supply and not a political 

discussion here, and I would like to see it brought back to a 

very narrow format that we have set out. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I’m trying to 

say to the member opposite is that the system has a place for  

that sort of question. My concern is the lack of understanding of 

the system and the lack of respect for the system. I do not have 

the detailed answer for your question, and there is a process by 

which that question will be answered. 

 

And I say to the member again, if you want the answer to that 

question, we would be more than willing to move quickly to the 

departments, which they will give you the detailed answers. 

And that’s the place to get it. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I take from that 

answer that the minister is not willing to answer and tell the 

people of the province what kind of funding there is. And 

evidently maybe the problem is, is they haven’t talked about 

flooding in rural Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan and 

so there is no money. They don’t really care about it. 

 

The people that are listening here today, from the southern part 

of the province, would be a little bit disturbed at hearing that — 

that you don’t have a plan in place for flooding. And so I guess 

from that, they know what to expect from their Finance 

minister, as they did in the lack of consideration in the last 

provincial budget for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’ll take it that you won’t answer that question because you 

don’t have the answer, Madam Minister; that there is no 

funding. So maybe we’ll move on to something else if we can, 

and that will be into Health, Madam Minister. Could you tell us 

then, or is it too specific if I ask you how the two-twelfths will 

be allocated within the Health department, including the health 

districts. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the department will provide two-twelfths of their 

budget, be allowed to spend two-twelfths of their budget if they 

require the spending of two-twelfths of their budget, the same 

as with other departments. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Madam Minister, then if, just rough 

figuring, if it’s . . . for the total Health estimates, if two-twelfths 

of that is about $272 million, where will that go? Will that 

completely be up to the discretion of the health districts as it 

relates to capital projects and those type of things? And are 

there any . . . I doubt whether there are any capital projects 

going on. But what portion of that money will they have? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. One of the reasons you have a budget is that the 

budget tells the people where the money is going to be spent. So 

the money will have to be spent according to what’s in the 

budget. And so it will allow the Department of Health to spend 

up to two-twelfths of its budget, according to what the 

allocation of the money is within the budget. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

if I could just ask a couple of questions related to the provincial 

picture on grants for capital projects. There have been 

allocations for the post-secondary institutions, the universities 

primarily, for capital. There are grants allocated for school 

divisions in terms of capital. These are basically a fiscal year, 

the calendar year for both school divisions and universities. 



532  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

Will capital continue or is a two-twelfths allocation . . . will that 

meet the goals of both post-secondary and K to 12 boards in 

terms of being able to proceed with capital? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. This is the sort of thing that the Department of 

Finance would have checked with the departments, to ensure 

that the two-twelfths will allow the departments to continue 

with their capital projects without any hindrance but according 

to the way they’re set out in the budget. So that has been 

checked, and obviously they’re able to manage it within the 

allocation that they’re getting, or the permissive allocation that 

is there for them. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 

expect, Madam Minister, that the two-twelfths will be sufficient 

to carry us to the time that this session will end in terms of 

passing of the budget, or will you expect that, especially in the 

area of capital, when we start to award major projects . . . We 

just heard of the announcement of a school being constructed in 

Yorkton where there will be letting of a contract. Will those 

kinds of things be necessary in terms of an additional interim 

supply? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, from what we know right now this will take us 

through the period that we’re requesting interim supply for right 

now. In terms of the length of the session, it’s difficult to know 

how long the session will go. The members opposite may have 

a better idea of that than I do. And so then we’ll have to 

reassess it. 

 

But I think what we’ve been told by our departments and by our 

third parties is this will be enough to get us through the first two 

units, and then after that we’ll have to assess the possible length 

of the session and ask those sorts of questions about projects 

and then come back again to the House with a new proposal. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. A specific question, I guess, 

around supply of money to the third parties — basically school 

boards. Have boards of education received their proportionate 

allocation of the foundation grant for the months of January, 

February, March? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, you want to ask that question when the department’s 

here because the answer is detailed. But they would have been 

getting money, obviously, for those first three months. As the 

member opposite probably knows because of his experience 

with the school system, they run on a different calendar. 

 

Our budgets run April 1 to April 1. Our year end is March 31. 

Of course the school boards run on a yearly calendar — January 

1 to December 31. And provision is made so that their funding 

obviously doesn’t stop just because our budget is on a different 

time frame. 

 

But exactly how it works, you’ll have to ask the Department of 

Education when they’re here. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. From past 

experience, I do know that probably boards of education have 

not received any allocations up to this point. In fact they 

probably may not receive their first allocation until maybe the 

month of May. My concern of course here, is that we have 

school boards — as you’ve indicated — operate on a different 

calendar year. Their expenditures are basically over a 10-month 

period, excluding July and August. 

 

So if we look at for instance the month of April that we’re in 

right now, January, February, March, April — that’s four 

months, basically four-tenths of the operation of a school board. 

You can probably say 40 per cent of their costs. You have asked 

for two-twelfths in terms of interim supply. Will there be a 

problem for boards of education to operate because they will 

have incurred already possibly 40 per cent of their costs by the 

end of April? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to answer the 

member’s question, again what I would do is I would wait until 

the Department of Education is here to get into the detailed 

explanation. But what I would say is this: every year the same 

situation occurs. That is, every year the budget is in February or 

March and it’s not passed till much later. And even though, 

even if the budget were passed the day that it’s presented in the 

House, you still would have a time lag because the schools’ 

year starts January 1. So obviously historically this has been 

taken into account in the way the money is processed for the 

educational part of the funding. So as I say, I would wait till 

they’re here to get a detailed answer. 

 

But the main point that I would make is that the Department of 

Finance has checked with all the departments. All the 

departments, including Education, say there should be no 

problem with their third parties with this particular process that 

we would be approving today. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The point that I 

would like to raise as well, which is historical in nature I guess, 

is the fact that as boards of education — which are third party 

recipients of funds from the government — as they wait for 

their funds, they incur probably interest costs because many of 

them are working on borrowed money. The sooner payments 

are made to boards of education, whether we’re talking about 

the month of April or May, the better off the people of 

Saskatchewan will be. 

 

So while you’ve indicated that this is a specific thing for the 

Department of Education, my concern is that indeed that we 

address the concerns of boards of education who’ve raised those 

concerns for many, many years, I think — I’m sure with your 

department as well as the Minister of Education — in saying 

that they incur additional charges in terms of interest rates on 

borrowed money while they are waiting for their so-called grant 

money. 

 

My concern is that this process does not further download extra 

costs to boards of education while they wait for grant money. 

 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite again will want to raise this issue with the Department 

of Education, because on the one hand he’s raising a policy 

issue in terms of how the department funds third parties. But 

what I would say to the member about this process is that this is 

exactly the same as it has been done in the province probably as 

far back as we have records; that this process differs in no way 

from what has occurred in the past. 

 

So school boards are not going to be in any sense jeopardized, 

or their position is not going to be in any sense worsened 

because of this process. This is what they would expect us to be 

doing right now at this time. 

 

The only concern they would have is that we allow the funding 

to proceed as quickly as possible. Some groups will, as they get 

further into April, become nervous because they will have bills 

coming in that have to be paid. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

I’ve been listening with some interest to the comments being 

made about your need to tap the taxpayers’ fund of money in 

order to pay the province’s bills ahead of time. It seems strange 

that after five years of being here we once again find ourselves 

into a situation where you’re asking for money ahead of time. 

 

When in fact I recall in 1990 and ’91 the Premier of today’s 

government campaigned strongly on the approach that we 

would never ever have special warrants or the need for interim 

supply; we were going to do things better. 

 

Now as you have proven of course, the ineptness of your 

government over the past five years, you’re not only unable to 

run this province and its finances but you’re also unable to keep 

your first and number one election promise of five years ago, 

which was that you could do things that other people couldn’t 

do. 

 

You’ve proven to the people of this province that you are an 

economic disaster and therefore we must remain vigilant as to 

how you ask for money and what you plan to spend it on. And 

so we defend our position here today by the fact that you have 

not kept your promises in the past. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister very straightforwardly: in 

those months that goes through the year, are there any months 

that you spend less than other months, or do you spend the same 

amount of money — of the provincial taxpayers’ dollars — 

equally every month? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, you do have to have a sense of humour to be in this 

legislature. No doubt about it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with your understanding here, I’m going to have 

to respond to this allegation about the special warrants. I don’t 

know. I keep hoping those people will learn not go back to the 

past, but we’re back. 

 

What the present Premier committed to was to not do what was 

the case under the Conservative administration in this province.  

They used . . . First of all, these aren’t special warrants, I would 

say to the member opposite. 

 

Secondly, what happened there was that in 1991 the province of 

Saskatchewan didn’t have a budget. That is the government of 

the day — the Conservative government — brought a budget 

into the House. It was such a fiasco the House leader quit in the 

middle of the session; that the government prorogued the House 

without ever passing a budget. 

 

Passing strange that Saskatchewan would be one of the few 

provinces in the history of Canada to actually go through 

virtually a whole calendar year without ever having a budget 

passed by the legislature of the province. 

 

And the only way they could spend money was through special 

warrants. Absolutely inappropriate, absolutely unacceptable, 

absolutely different from the use of, the legitimate legal use of, 

interim supply and special warrants. 

 

Special warrants are permissible when, as this year, there is 

unexpected expenses and the expenses have to be passed by 

special warrant — when a budget is already in place and a 

budget has been passed by the legislature. Quite a different 

story than what happened under the Tories — no budget in 

place; no approval of the legislature; prorogued the House 

because you can’t get your budget through; and used special 

warrants stamped that that’s the only kind of spending that 

you’re allowed. So if the member wants to go back into that 

debate, we can. 

 

Now to answer his question. As in any organization, spending 

can’t be regularized on a monthly basis. There are some 

departments in which obviously spending is going to occur 

more at one time of the year than another time of the year. And 

all this measure really does is . . . again I say it’s not saying to 

departments, go out and spend two-twelfths. It’s permissive. It’s 

saying to them, if for some reason or other you require 

two-twelfths — and the main concern will be third parties that 

are depending on this money — we’re giving you permission to 

do that. But it doesn’t mean that they will necessarily have to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, I find it passingly strange that you would consider that 

you need to have a sense of humour to be in this Assembly. I 

can assure you that for the taxpayers of this province, this 

whole process and your need for money to be spent without 

justifying it, without just standing in this Assembly and 

explaining your actions, the only joke in this House for those 

taxpayers is this government and the way that you have handled 

the fiscal management of the monies that you take in. 

 

Spending 5.2 billions of dollars in the past year, looking at 5.4 

billions of dollars to be spent in the future; all when you had a 

Premier who said that you could do better with four and a half 

billion and that was enough, that you’d never need any more. 

And now you expect us to trust you to spend two-twelfths of the 

entire budget without any discussion or debate. 

 

And you stand in this House with the nerve to demand from the  



534  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

members of the opposition that they quickly wrap up this debate 

so that you can get on with life. Well, Madam Minister, that is 

the joke, because we are not leaving. And when you ask the 

members opposite how long it’s going to take this Assembly 

dismissed for the summer, I can tell you right now we may not 

have summer in Saskatchewan if those are the kind of answers 

we get from you. We demand more, and we expect more, and 

we’re going to get more or we’ll be here for ever. 

 

Madam Minister, the province of Saskatchewan is awash in 

floods and you have just admitted to me that there is no possible 

way that you can predict how much the expenditures for any 

month might be. That in fact third party interests may in fact 

cloud the issue to the point where you never know exactly how 

much money you’ll have to spend. So now we need to take a 

look at what third parties might be interested in the first 

two-twelfths of your budget to be spent. 

 

And we talked to you, Madam Minister, about a situation we all 

encountered this morning coming to work. As we slipped and 

slid down the roads of Saskatchewan, I found myself making a 

350-kilometre trip, and when I got to Moose Jaw I had covered 

two-thirds of that on ice and snow, half of which was slick as 

could be. There was trucks in the ditches, cars turned around 

backwards. And where was the Department of Highways, 

Madam Minister? Not to be seen. Not until I got to Moose Jaw, 

then I found Department of Highways trucks. The only depot in 

Saskatchewan that was working. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, we want to know how much of this 

budget has been allocated to emergency highways, the needs, in 

this period of time when we’re into floods and disaster in this 

province. How much of this money are you going to allocate? 

Do you have enough funds available and put into your interim 

supply? Have you got that available for the Minister of 

Highways? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we quite enjoy the legislature so we’re no rush to 

leave and quite interested in debating. We would like to spend a 

lot of time here talking about things like our budget and other 

measures that are before this . . . 

 

What I would say to the member opposite is, the Department of 

Highways obviously has enough money to deal with the 

situations that they require, otherwise they would be here 

asking for some special consideration. But they say that they 

can deal with the situation quite appropriately, and the member 

needs to be reassured so that he can calm down. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, typical example of how fast this government can 

flip-flop in every direction and on every issue. A few minutes 

ago you thought it was a joke that we’re here; now of course 

you’re right ready to go to work. Well that’s good to see, 

because now we’ve got you back on track of the reality of the 

world, let’s talk about the real problems. 

 

Now you say the Minister of Highways doesn’t need any 

money; he’s got lots. Well let me assure you that the people in 

SARM don’t have enough. They told us loud and clear through  

the news media around this province this morning, that they are 

desperate for funding to help them with the flood damage in this 

province. The SARM and the rural municipalities have found a 

glitch in your system, and we stood in this Assembly and asked 

you and your colleagues if you’re going to correct that glitch 

because there’s a need for money. 

 

Now the minister of water department says that he is committed 

that the cabinet of this province will sit down and straighten out 

the problem in some cabinet meeting some place through some 

regulations. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, how much money is that disaster fund 

going to cost? Have you got anything laid aside in this interim 

supply for the next month? Because that’s when they need the 

money, is in the month of April, not in the month of July. They 

need that money in the next two months. How much money 

have you put aside for a contingency plan for disasters for the 

roads and the municipal problems in this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. What the member opposite will know is he can go 

through the budget and he can look through the estimates and 

find out what is being allocated for a year, and he can say 

two-twelfths of that is being permitted to be spent. 

 

The member opposite knows that if he wants to get into this 

detailed questioning, what he needs to do is to allow the 

department to come forward and provide him with his answer. 

And we would be more than willing to have the departments 

here to provide that answer for him. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, have you ever heard of the term, grievance before 

supply, in the democratic system? First of all, you have to listen 

to us ask you questions about why you’re spending the 

taxpayers’ money and then you have the right to spend it — and 

not before. 

 

And the point that we’re going to make right now is that you do 

not have in the budget an allowance of one-twelfth of the 

money necessary, as you have explained in your answer. It’s as 

phoney as a $3 bill because you do not have a disaster fund in 

this province. There is no money in that fund; there is no fund 

available to be found. 

 

So where’s the money going to come from? Are you going to 

snatch it out of thin air? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I 

think with that last comment the member’s reflecting more on 

the practices of the 1980s when he talks about snatching money 

out of thin air. 

 

What I would say to the member opposite is what is occurring 

here is simple. There are people out there who require funding. 

The budget has not been passed by the legislature. And the 

members say they want to debate the budget more before they 

pass it. Fair enough. We’re quite willing to allow the debate to 

occur as long as possible. We’re quite proud of this budget. I 

think you kind of liked it too in that you voted for it, as I recall. 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

So what is happening is the legislature says that we don’t want 

to pass this budget right today. We want to keep talking about 

it. Fine, we’ll talk about it. We’re quite willing to talk about it. 

We enjoy talking about it. 

 

The problem is though, there are third parties out there that 

require funding and what we’re trying to do is to ensure that 

they get the funding. 

 

The member will get the answers to his detailed questions when 

we have the people here to provide the details. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I’m afraid it’s not 

going to work that way. You see we’re here now and you want 

the money now. And before you get it, you’re going to answer 

our questions. That’s our responsibility in the democratic 

system — is to demand that you explain to us how you’re going 

to pay the bills, how you’re going to use the money. 

 

You haven’t provided any kind of logical explanation for how 

you’re going to fund the very simple thing like a disaster fund 

this spring for rural municipalities, a system that has been 

ongoing for many, many years in this province; a system where 

if you spend more than 3 mills — and this is a policy that’s in 

effect — if you spend more than 3 mills of your total 

assessment, you now qualify for disaster fund relief help from 

the provincial government. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now we find the provincial government doesn’t have any 

budgeted money for that process. And that being the case then, 

we have to know what’s going to happen in terms of getting 

that money out. 

 

Then we have the mix of the assessment problem, the 

assessment problem that now creates the situation where all the 

province’s properties are being reassessed higher, and as a 

result, municipalities — because of a glitch in this system that 

hasn’t been corrected — will now have to put up $125,000 

where they used to put up, on average, about 25,000 before they 

are qualified for this relief. 

 

So, Madam Minister, it appears to me that you don’t have your 

figures together today. It appears to me that you haven’t done 

your research. It just appears to me that maybe you’d better go 

home tonight and get some people to work on this, and we’ll all 

come back tomorrow and start with a fresh start after you’ve 

gotten some idea what’s going on in the world and how to 

handle your department. 

 

So with that, Mr. Chairman, I move that this committee do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Chair:  The motion to adjourn is out of order in 

committee, is not in order, and is not well taken. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, it is highly amusing to get lectures on finances from 

the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

What I would say to the member opposite is the members 

opposite have got lots of information about the budget — 

budget document, the Supplementary Estimates, the detailed 

Estimates. There’s lots of information, and we’re quite 

interested in debating this in even further detail. That’s why 

what we would like to do is, soon as the members want to get 

into the detail, we’ll move to that process. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Chair:  I recognize the minister and would ask him to 

introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman, and I want to say how much it pleases me to be the 

first estimates to be dealt with in this session. It’s a privilege 

and probably signifies the importance the government puts on 

jobs and job creation, the fact that this department is up. 

 

I want to introduce our deputy minister of Economic 

Development, Clare Kirkland, who is seated directly to my 

right. Janis Rathwell, ADM (assistant deputy minister) of 

administration, is to my right and behind. And David McQuinn, 

the executive director of policy, is seated directly behind me. 

Those are the staff who are with us at the present time and if 

anyone else is joining, we’ll introduce them at that point. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Good afternoon, Minister, and officials, and 

welcome to this first of many sessions, I’m sure, on detailed 

scrutiny and estimates of the Department of Economic and 

Co-operative Development, I note. 

 

Mr. Minister, indeed I think we’re, as well, very pleased that 

your department is the first one coming forward, because 

undoubtedly we are going to want to ask why when compared 

to our neighbour in Manitoba that we only were able to create a 

thousand jobs last year when they were able to create so many. 

So I think that we will want to indeed not only note what you 

plan to do but also look at the very limited successes that 

you’ve had so far. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that, although I know the risk involved, I 

want to give you an opportunity to give an overview of your 

department, where you see it going — kind of an advertisement, 

if you like, for where you’re going. And I know the risk that I 

entail in doing that. 

 

However, I know that it’s fair to start this process; that the 

minister should be given an opportunity to give an overview 

and a direction and what do you see for your department in a 

general sense. So I invite you to provide us with that right now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well as you know, the Department 

of Economic and Co-operative Development in our province 

includes a number of different areas — includes the whole  



536  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

science technology, trade and international trade and 

interprovincial trade. Tourism is included. The area of 

co-operative development, the whole . . . What used to be a full 

department at one time in the 1960s and ‘70s is now included in 

the Department of Economic Development, and of course 

economic development policy as well. 

 

So it’s a broad-ranging area of topics that we deal with. But 

most of all we try to set the tone and tenor for economic 

development in the province in terms of the regulatory side, in 

terms of setting the standard and creating an atmosphere for 

business development. 

 

And if you look at a number of areas in Saskatchewan where 

we’re doing very well, trade of course is growing by leaps and 

bounds. And I was just checking the number this morning on 

trade — Saskatchewan exports have increased by almost 60 per 

cent since 1991. It’s a huge increase. 

 

And when you go through the numbers — and I’ll send this 

across because it’s quite fascinating to look at — the export of 

wheat is up very little in terms of dollars since 1991, but it’s 

very much the non-traditional areas where the companies that 

are involved in manufacturing machinery . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . One of the members heckles that it’s the 

demise of the Crow benefit, and it’s interesting that that would 

be the position of the Liberal Party because I kind of thought 

they were in a different mode. But the increase in export of air 

seeders, for example, has little to do with the Crow rate or 

freight rates. In fact the freight rate on exporting farm 

machinery has increased significantly from ’91 to ’95 or ’96. 

 

The reason that those exports have gone up and the number of 

jobs for example, in Flexi-coil or Morris and Bourgault, have 

increased is because we have a manufacturing section in our 

province that’s second to none in the world. And this is where 

the new jobs are being created — in machinery manufacturing, 

particularly short line and air seeders; the whole 

ag-biotechnology; the film industry; and value-added. And that 

really is where the economy of Saskatchewan is headed. 

 

That’s to say nothing of the whole resource sector, tourism, as 

well as a number of other smaller pieces to the economy; the 

forest industry which is very large and growing. 

 

But if you look at Saskatchewan it’s a very, very exciting place 

to do business. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I agree that your 

department has a great number of aspects. The way that I would 

propose to deal with estimates over the course of this session is 

to start in the general and then move more specifically into the 

various aspects that you outlined in terms of the responsibilities 

of your department. 

 

In a general sense, Minister, it strikes me as one of the major 

changes that has occurred this year, which we’re looking at in 

specific, is the renaming of your department and the change in 

direction in terms of no longer being called strictly the 

Economic Development department, but in essence the 

Economic and Co-operative Development department. 

I would like to ask you how you see that change of emphasis on 

your department affecting not only that specific area of 

Co-operative Development but also the general thrust and 

emphasis of your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The change of name for the 

Department of Economic Development to the Department of 

Economic and Co-operative Development, of course, is done in 

large part to set the tone for Saskatchewan going into the next 

century, that the role of co-ops is going to be as important and, 

we believe, more important as we go into the next century than 

even it has been in the past or is at present. 

 

And therefore the name change is done for two reasons. First of 

all, to emphasize in a very important psychological way and 

practical way the role of co-ops in the province of 

Saskatchewan going out into the future. 

 

And secondly, if you look at the line on co-ops, the amount of 

money that we’re putting into Co-operative Development is 

increasing by, I think, a little over a quarter of a million dollars 

this year, and that will be money that will be there permanently. 

 

So in a very practical way it will mean that we’ll have more 

staff people to work on such things as new-gen co-ops. And the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena will know that in many of 

her areas of the province, or in the Humboldt area, for example, 

a number of the new hog production facilities are going to be of 

a co-operative nature. 

 

And so there are many, many new co-operative structures that 

are being looked at, especially in rural Saskatchewan, to create 

jobs and to help build the economy — therefore the change of 

name. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I appreciate what you’re saying 

and I’m tempted to get into the whole area of co-operatives, but 

I assure you that we will definitely have more detailed 

questions in that specific area. 

 

I would like to know how you see the emphasis that you’ve 

indicated that you’re placing on co-operatives, existing 

co-operatives, and new-gen co-ops, how does that sort of square 

with the emphasis that people are concerned about in terms of 

small individual and private businesses? 

 

It seems to be recognized across this province and across 

Canada and the world indeed, that the real engine of growth is 

small business. It seems that we have been quite unsuccessful 

last year in creating jobs. How is your new emphasis on 

cooperatives, which in this province have certainly not been 

small business, how does that square with the recognition of the 

importance of small business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  If the member is making the point 

that . . . I was having a difficult time hearing, but I understand 

that what you’re saying is that small business is the backbone 

and the keystone of economic development. And I think that’s 

true in Saskatchewan as it is right across Canada and North 

America. 

 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

If you look at the . . . where vast majority of new jobs are being 

created, and I don’t have those stats right with me, but I recall, 

and go by memory, that over half of the new jobs being created 

are being created by companies with fewer than 10 employees. 

And that in fact many of the large companies, whether it’s the 

big railway companies or the big computer companies, what 

you’re hearing is they’re still downsizing — being more 

productive but still downsizing. 

 

And so while we like to have more head offices move to our 

province, like Crown Life or like some of the other companies 

who are building call centres in our province, the fact of the 

matter is that the vast majority of new jobs being created, of the 

jobs that we keep track of, the majority are being created by 

small and medium sized companies. 

 

I say again that’s not to take away from the IPSCOs or the 

larger companies, because they play a very vital role and 

provide high level, good paying jobs. 

 

(1615) 

 

But one of the numbers that sticks in my mind is that in 1991 or 

1990 or 1988, I forget which of those years, that production of 

steel from the pipe mill in Regina was about 350,000 tonnes 

and they had 900 employees to manufacture and process that 

pipe. Last year it was over a million tonnes of pipe with the 

same number of employees. So you can see how the efficiencies 

in some of these big companies just means that they can 

produce way, way more. 

 

The other area of course is in agriculture. We have 7,000 fewer 

people working in agriculture today than we did in 1991 even 

though we had record production last year, in 1996. And that 

record production was done with 7,000 fewer people — to show 

the efficiency and the way that agriculture is changing. And 

we’ll go through the numbers of Manitoba versus 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But one of the big areas where we have a major difference in 

job loss is on agriculture. And the main reason is that because 

our agriculture is a much bigger sector and as it contracts in 

terms of the number of jobs and the efficiency of Saskatchewan 

farmers, the other sectors of our economy have to grow that 

must faster to keep up. 

 

But we’ll get into the comparison of Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan. There’s a number of areas where our job 

creation is much better than Manitoba’s — trade for example. 

Our number has grown much greater and faster between 1991 

and 1996. Manufacturing, we’ve grown faster. But on the 

agricultural side they’ve stayed about level on the number of 

people working in agriculture while we’ve gone down 7,000. 

And that reflects the larger machinery, larger farms, and the 

need for fewer and fewer people to grow more and more grain. 

 

So we can talk about the difference in those two provinces, and 

we will as the discussion goes on. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I guess my concern . . . And I’m 

pleased to hear you articulate the importance of small business  

in terms of the overall scheme of things in this province, 

recognizing that larger businesses in Saskatchewan are not 

necessarily large businesses on the international side and they 

too employ a very important part. 

 

My question was related more towards, is your department 

shifting emphasis from the small-business sector to 

cooperatives, which are hardly small business in Saskatchewan 

— at least the traditional cooperatives are not small business. 

The new gen cooperatives are more limited in size and more 

project specific perhaps. 

 

Does this indicate a shift in emphasis of your department that is 

going to take some emphasis away from small business and 

placing your hope into the cooperative sector instead? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, as I mentioned earlier, there is 

new emphasis on co-ops and also new money. So it’s not 

money shifting out of the small-business sector or the 

small-business programs to co-ops. It’s additional money that, 

as a result of getting the deficit under control and balancing the 

budget and having a bit of surplus, some small part of that 

surplus finds its way into the cooperative sector. 

 

But let me say when it comes to large co-ops or large 

businesses, our department doesn’t have a big role to play, for 

example, in allowing IPSCO for example to find its way into 

the international markets. IPSCO is very well established, and 

they compete well with any other steel plant in the world when 

it comes to pipe. They don’t really need a lot of help other than 

regulatory and setting the right tone to do business in 

Saskatchewan. We deal with them all the time, but they would 

likely do very well whether the Department of Economic 

Development was there or not. 

 

The same is true of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. They’re 

very, very large; they’re very proficient. Where our department 

really is doing, I think, a great job is dealing with small 

business and small co-ops, and our emphasis will continue to be 

on medium and small business and medium and small co-ops. 

 

And one shouldn’t dismiss quickly the growth in small co-ops 

in Saskatchewan. And I say again, particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan, there are many communities that are looking at 

the potential of establishing small co-ops in order to meet their 

economic development needs of their community. 

 

So the view that we have had historically in the New 

Democratic Party and government is that Saskatchewan has 

three main engines of growth and that they . . . the province 

works best when they’re all working at top speed. Those are the 

public sector, that $7 billion entity that includes all of our 

Crown corporations. They employ thousands and thousands of 

people and have done a great job historically of creating 

employment and creating an economy. There’s the small, 

medium, and large business sector, which is very fundamentally 

important to our province; and of course there’s the cooperative 

sector — all of which are fundamentally important. 

 

I think when we get in trouble is when we — as you suggest we 

shouldn’t do, and I agree with you on this — is overemphasize  



538  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

one area over the other. And I think of one of the failings of the 

previous administration during the 1980s was the overemphasis 

on one sector very much to the detriment of other sectors of our 

economy. And I think key to economic development, the way it 

is structured in this province . . . And this is historic. 

 

So when you try to make any of these quick changes, which I 

think we were trying to do in the 1980s, to say that business 

was everything and get rid of the Crowns and forget about 

co-ops, I think some of the lack of economic growth that we 

saw in the 1980s was that radical shift that was attempted, much 

to the chagrin of much of Saskatchewan because it went against 

the history of this province. 

 

And I think politicians who make those kind of drastic changes 

that move away from supporting co-ops, Crown corporations, 

or business do it at their own peril. And my view is, is you try 

to keep all of them working at top-notch, keep the systems 

working, and you’ll have a very strong economy. And this has 

proven to be the case both in the 1970s when we were in 

government, and now in the 1990s. 

 

Now of course some would say, well that’s just good luck. But 

isn’t it interesting that when we had seven years of Liberal 

government in the 1960s the economy was pretty darn tough 

and people remember those seven lean, mean years of the 

Thatcher administration. And they remember the nine years of 

Grant Devine and how terrible that period of time was. 

 

Now some people can say that that was just good luck, but I 

think there’s a little bit more than luck when you have an 

economy that’s working as ours is today. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, we were lectured by the Finance 

minister about staying on topic, so I’ll resist the urge to talk 

about all the development that happened in this province during 

the Thatcher Liberal years. And a great deal of it was started in 

that time by a very innovative and creative — fiscally 

responsible, I may add as well — government. 

 

Minister, I wonder if, from your information, one of the great 

concerns that people have generally is, is I guess what could be 

loosely called urbanization. And I’m wondering if in your 

economic outlooks or your forecasts of job creation or activity, 

do you see any trends occurring in terms of the jobs and 

economic activity being centralized in hot spots? Saskatoon has 

a very dynamic economy happening right now. 

 

How do you see the shifts or trends, or do you see any 

long-term trends in terms of urban versus rural? And I don’t 

mean that in an adversarial sense; I mean it by way of 

comparison. And where do you see your department 

functioning in terms of looking at areas that maybe are not as 

active as others are to try to enhance the opportunities in those 

areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well it’s interesting to look at those 

areas historically in the province, that have done well 

economically, and what the role of government has been in 

helping set standards and make things happen in communities. 

 

And I think in general when you look at communities that have 

survived and flourished and those that went the other way . . . 

And many of them have disappeared — and this is not a 

political statement — under whoever’s been in government. 

This is true in Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, or 

Montana for that matter. Some have flourished and some have, 

under the same kind of administration both federally and 

provincially, haven’t made it. Well what’s the reason or what’s 

the rationale? 

 

When you do analyses of that, it usually is a core group of 

people in the communities that survive that had a vision for 

what they wanted their local community to look like. During the 

1950s with the centralization of communities at that time, it was 

those mothers and fathers of the community that got together 

and said, we’re going to put sewer and water in. And some 

communities said no, that’s a pretty radical idea; we’re not 

spending all that money and raising taxes to do that. 

 

But as time went on, those that went forward quickly with some 

of those new, progressive ideas, they survived and they grew, 

and the others . . . Because as retiring farmers moved to town, 

they wanted to move where they had those systems of sewer 

and water, and those communities went well. 

 

If I look around the province today, one of the main issues 

driving the growth of some communities is where you have 

good economic development strategies at the local level. We 

have the same policy for all of the province, and the federal 

government has the same policy for all the province. Yet some 

communities are doing very, very well and some aren’t. 

 

But what will fundamentally affect that change is the 

transportation system. And with the announcement that the 

railway companies are abandoning, I think another 1,600 

kilometres of rail line in western Canada, about half of it in 

Saskatchewan, you see communities like Davidson for example 

now with two main terminals, one on one side of town and one 

on the other. They are now strategically located to be a 

community that survives based on being a collection centre for 

grain. The announcement of the Pool now to build an inland 

terminal at Gull Lake, and the Southwest Terminal has built a 

terminal just east of Gull Lake. Many of these patterns, I think 

will be based on transportation. 

 

But one thing I can say, since 1991, that has been very, very 

encouraging, is that many communities that saw vacancy rates 

of 20 or 30 per cent in the 1980s are now full to capacity, where 

you can’t get a house and you can’t get a trailer and can’t find a 

place to live. If anyone would have told me that that would have 

turned around in five years . . . I know we all dreamed of that 

turning around in five years, but many, many people would 

never have believed that most of our small communities are 

now full and having to build housing. And a big part of the 

reason that we had a 40 per cent increase in housing starts last 

year had to do with housing starts in rural Saskatchewan. And 

this is the first time in 15 or 16 years where this kind of housing 

numbers have been achieved in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’m very optimistic that where we have regional economic 

development authorities, where they’re doing work in  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

partnership with the local community and the federal 

government’s programs in economic development, you’re 

actually seeing some very fantastic economic development 

come into place. 

 

And I’m not going to go through and list the communities, but a 

number of people from your caucus represent those towns and 

villages that are doing very, very well. Look at Bourgault in St. 

Brieux, for example. And somebody will say, well it’s because 

hospitals will cause a problem. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It’s a Liberal area. It’s all Liberals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I don’t think it’s all Liberals. I 

mean Maple Creek is doing very well and that’s a Conservative 

area. Weyburn’s doing very well; Estevan’s doing very well; 

Swift Current . . . In fact it’s a much longer list when I list out 

the communities that are doing very well than those that aren’t. 

And I think that’s a credit to all of the people who have been 

involved in economic development — opposition, government 

— but most of all the companies and people who are taking the 

risk by plugging their dollars and taking the risk in those 

communities. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. My question related to 

how does your department interface with those people. And I 

certainly do recognize that many people in our area are doing 

very well, and Bourgault would argue probably in spite of your 

government, not because of it. 

 

Minister, the other area that’s a great deal of concern is the 

demographic shifts, or how your department is going to deal 

with issues of high unemployment for young people. We see 

that while the general unemployment rate is one level, when 

you actually look at the demographics, that young, particularly 

uneducated people, are even more at a disadvantage. 

 

How do you see the shifting trends for these young people? 

Instead of necessarily entering the workplace right away but 

also potentially going into small businesses or things of that 

nature, how do you see your department? You know, what areas 

of your department do you see addressing this demographic 

issue as well as the urban/rural one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think it’s important to realize 

that for the longest time in many Canadian schools and in the 

education system, small business was not looked at as an 

alternative when life skills and counselling was taking place, or 

at least not emphasized to the extent that it could or I believe 

should have been. To that end the Department of Education and 

the Department of Economic Development are working very, 

very closely on entrepreneurial skills teaching, using mentors 

from the community to come into the school to work with 

students, to talk about opportunities that there are on the 

small-business side. 

 

(1630) 

 

Because as the member opposite — having been a small 

business and still consider myself to be involved in small 

business in a number of ways — there really are few career  

choices that I believe are as satisfying as having a small 

business. I mean it’s a tough life; you work very, very long 

hours. But like farming, there’s something satisfying about 

being the person that makes the decision and tries to put 

together strategies of survival, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

Because I just think and believe that in rural Canada, being an 

entrepreneur and making a success of it is tough, and you know 

that and I know that. 

 

But I did want to go back to your opening comment about jobs 

in Manitoba and Saskatchewan. I just had my staff do up the 

quick numbers on number of jobs in non-agriculture, and I want 

to give you these because they’re interesting. But in the 

non-agricultural side there’s been a 5 per cent growth in jobs in 

Manitoba, or 21,000 job increase. In Saskatchewan in the 

non-agricultural side there’s also been a growth of 5 per cent or 

19,000 jobs. 

 

And so when you look at . . . Leave agriculture out of it, 

because there’s a very, very large difference in the size of 

agriculture in Saskatchewan and Manitoba, but in the 

non-agricultural side the jobs have grown at exactly the same 

percentage rate in Manitoba and Saskatchewan since 1991. 

 

On the agricultural side in Manitoba, the jobs have contracted 

or there’s 5 per cent fewer jobs on the agricultural side, and in 

Saskatchewan it’s closer to 20 per cent. And so we have to 

realize that on the entrepreneurial, small-business side we’ve 

had every bit as an aggressive growth rate in Saskatchewan as 

we have in Manitoba. And you should get these numbers, look 

at them, and be proud of the fact that we’ve been able to do that 

while at the same time balancing the budget and going forward 

towards the next century. 

 

But for us to say to ourselves and to preach the idea that 

somehow our entrepreneurs over the last few years have done 

less than the entrepreneurs in Manitoba, I think does a great 

disservice to the folks who are creating jobs. 

 

And I just urge you to get those, look at them, study them so 

that we know exactly what we’re saying. I mean, if having 

looked at them you want to keep then giving out wrong 

information, that’s fair enough. Then one can wonder why 

you’re doing it. But the fact of the matter is, in the 

non-agricultural sector, the growth rate in employment is 

exactly the same in Manitoba and in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we can say that that’s not good enough. And I agree that 

we can do better and that Manitoba can do better. But to say 

that somehow our entrepreneurs aren’t as quick off the mark 

and aren’t doing as good a job as Manitoba, it’s not accurate. 

 

And the member from Kelvington-Wadena wants to make a 

point. And I would urge her to get to her feet and make a 

counterpoint if you think the entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan are 

less effective and not creating jobs at the same rate. Get the 

numbers from StatsCanada, because your folks in your area and 

those in my area of rural Saskatchewan are doing every bit as 

well creating jobs as our good friends in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I would be pleased to engage in  



540  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

the debate on the job issue and it certainly is a point that we’ve 

been making all along, that small business in this province is 

functioning quite well in spite of your government, not because 

of it particularly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And the area that isn’t doing well is the 

whole agricultural area. And you can say it’s because farmers 

are hauling larger implements over more acres. That’s not 

necessarily true because the agricultural jobs also include the 

area of livestock, and all the rest of that, which only now you’re 

beginning to address. 

 

But again I turn back to the focus of what we’re dealing with 

here, and the question I asked you had nothing to do with jobs 

in Manitoba or the ability of Saskatchewan small business to 

create jobs, which we’ve said all along is the real engine for 

growth. 

 

The question that I had specifically, and I’d like to remind you 

what it was, is what is your department . . . how is your 

department dealing with the issue of the high unemployment of 

young people and the fact that young people initiatives . . . what 

initiatives are you taking to assist young people not only to get 

jobs, but also to create small businesses or initial businesses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’ll get you the actual numbers in 

the percentage of unemployment in young people in 

Saskatchewan and verse that against other parts of Canada, but 

there again it has been improving. Again not good enough and 

we’d like to do better and we’d like to have more kids staying 

in the province to work. But here again, I wanted to take you 

back so that . . . and I’ll send you the graph of the out-migration 

because here again, it’s very interesting. 

 

In 1998, we were losing a net 7,000 people a year out of the 

province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What 

did I say? In 1988, sorry, and thank you for correcting me. But 

in 1988 were losing net 7,000 people, which meant 7,000 more 

families or people, working people, were moving out than 

coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

That was at the worst point on the graph — and it’s all neatly 

graphed out, I’ll give it to you — but that’s where we hit the 

peak. And then gradually every year it started improving until 

last year, in 1996, we actually broke even and had I believe a 

few more people moving into Saskatchewan than moving out, 

and that is very important . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

you laugh, but the point is we were losing 7,000 a year in 1988 

and this is the first time in 14 years that we had net in-migration 

into the province. And I think that’s significant. 

 

And the reason we had more people moving in than moving out 

is because we have a shortage of workers. Now what areas do 

we have shortage of workers in for young people? In 

information technology. If you go to ISM (Information Systems 

Management Corporation) today they have established 

Information 2000 — ISM 2000 — in Regina. They are going to 

need 200 people doing the computers, of revamping computers 

for the year 2000. They’ve hired a hundred, and they can’t find  

another person in the province to hire and they’re now looking 

worldwide to find people to go into information technology. 

 

So if you’re saying, where is there an opening for young 

Saskatchewan people? Information technology. In ag biotech, if 

you were to try to hire somebody for the centre in Saskatoon 

who has training in ag biotech to meet the needs, we’re having 

to bring in people from other parts of Canada. Welders. We 

have a shortage of pipeline welders and welders for farm 

machinery manufacturing to the point where anybody who has 

training and wants to weld can get a job welding. 

 

Those are three areas that we have shortage of workers. So 

counsellors and people who are interested in advising their 

young people where there will be openings in the future, 

information technology, computers. All of the projections are in 

Canada that we won’t be able to fill that need and we’ll have to 

import people from other parts of the world. Not only in 

Saskatchewan is there a shortage but there’s a shortage across 

Canada. 

 

The whole biotechnology, there will continue to be a shortage, 

and in the area of welding and machinery fabricating or metal 

fabricating there’s a shortage there as well. So these are some 

ideas that I would suggest we need more young people. 

 

The other small statistic that you’ll want to keep in your mind 

when you’re talking about how great it is in Saskatchewan, is 

that last year was the first year that we had more people moving 

from British Columbia to Saskatchewan than moving from 

Saskatchewan to British Columbia ever in the history of the 

province. So when you’re thinking of good, solid, positive 

things to say about this wonderful province, that’s a good one to 

keep in your speeches as well. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I know that there are 

more people moving back than there have been in the past and 

it may have a lot of other reasons for that. 

 

The question that I think you’ve still missed . . . And I 

appreciate the three areas of jobs that you indicate are 

opportunities for young people. The other general question that 

I had in terms of the young people demographics is, what is 

your department doing, if anything, that potentially allows 

young people to not just necessarily work for the ISMs — and I 

recognize that that’s very important — but what is your 

department doing specifically that in general would create 

opportunities for young people to set up their own small 

businesses that would create their own job and operate in that 

fashion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member asks what we’re doing 

to assist young entrepreneurs to get into business. I say again, 

through a coordinated effort between the Department of 

Education and the Department of Economic Development, I 

think the fundamental thing is opening up in the education 

system the option, and allowing young people at a very early 

age to be involved in the education system, to the advantages 

and opportunities that exist in small business. I think that’s 

fundamental. 

 



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

And I don’t know how it was in your school but I remember 

when I graduated many years ago and you had all the graduates 

get up and say what they were going to do, all of them said how 

they planned to work for somebody else. They were going to be 

teachers. They were going to work within the health care 

system. They were going to be nurses. All of them were, except 

for the farmers. They were going to find ways to work for 

someone else. 

 

What you find today is many young people, when they graduate 

from high school, clearly state as a goal and objective that 

they’re going to set up a small computer company, that they’re 

going to set up a welding shop, that they’re going to go into 

business on their own. And this is a fundamental change. 

 

And part of what we’ve done in the last five or six years is 

made that a viable option. And one of the reasons that we’re 

getting more and more young people to stay in our province is 

because that opportunity is now there for them. 

 

One of the main areas is in tourism where, especially in 

northern Saskatchewan but not limited to northern 

Saskatchewan, in fact in places like Nipawin and Meadow 

Lake, you see a large number of entrepreneurs, many of them 

young people, finding their way into business. And the lowering 

the sales tax, for example, by 2 per cent will go a long way to 

helping small entrepreneurs get into and stay in business. 

 

We have the small business loans program which helps a great 

number, and the statistics are pretty amazing on how many 

people have used that program to start small home-based 

programs. 

 

The immigrant investor fund of course, which is presently, I 

would argue, under attack by the federal government . . . And 

you may want to get into that a little bit and make a few phone 

calls to see if we can’t stop the decimation of that program 

which has helped a number of small companies establish in 

western Canada. And you’ll know that there is now a pan 

western approach to taking the federal government on on that 

issue, because if their plans to change immigrant investor 

program go ahead, it will virtually mean the end of that 

program. And over the past 11 years over half a billion dollars 

has come into Saskatchewan and created 7,000 jobs. 

 

This will virtually end if your counterparts in Ottawa go 

forward with the changes that are being recommended at the 

present time. And I’d really urge you to make some 

representation to Mr. Goodale and to the Prime Minister to see 

whether or not, in this 30-day period of review that we’re 

presently in, we can’t in a common, coordinated way make an 

approach to the federal government that would make sure those 

changes don’t take place. Because regardless of who’s in 

government, this is going to slow down economic development 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I want to carry on in 

the general sense today and I would like . . . You mentioned 

some of the things about tourism, specifically in the North. 

 

I want to turn the attention to another group, demographic 

group if you like, and I’m thinking particularly of our aboriginal 

people. I want to know what your department is doing in terms 

of creating opportunities for our aboriginal people, where I 

think by everybody’s estimates are the very highest levels of 

unemployment across the province. And I want to know how 

you see your department interfacing with the aboriginal people 

to not only have them have jobs but potentially business . . . 

economic future in that regard as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the whole area of first nations 

people and job opportunities is a very important one. First of 

all, one of the things that I’m proud of is the fact that we have 

moved quickly since coming to government to deal with some 

of the outstanding treaty issues that were over 100 years old. 

 

And if you remember back to the history of how the treaties 

started, when we came, our forefathers and parents, 

grandparents came to this country, we made a deal with the 

Indian people that if they gave up their land so we could use it, 

all of their land so that we could use it and build our homes and 

build our farms and build our ranches and build our towns, that 

we would give them 640 acres per family or about 126 acres per 

person. 

 

Now there aren’t many people in this world that would wait 

over a hundred years to get that bill paid. And one of the things 

that I’m proud of this government is that we’ve taken that issue 

on, whether politically popular or not, and started to meet some 

of those requirements of the treaties. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I know there are many people who say, well what the heck 

are you guys doing giving all this land away to first nations 

people. The fact of the matter is, if you look at who’s getting 

land and who’s taking land, I think if we were to go to the 

Indian people today and say, look we want to redo this whole 

deal, I think they would be very interested in working out a deal 

where we would all move out, they’d have all their land back, 

and we might have even a little bit harder bargain to bargain 

than what we do now in giving up 126 acres per person. 

 

And so I think one of the fundamental things that we have done 

to help young first nations people and first nations people in 

general is getting some of those treaty obligations settled. And 

that’s fundamentally important. 

 

Other areas of course where we have made, I think, large 

progress is in the surface leases in northern Saskatchewan. In 

meeting with COGEMA the other day where they’re doing 

expansions to their mines and new processing mill, they’re 

saying that they now employ over 60 per cent Northerners on 

their sites in northern Saskatchewan. This is a big, huge change 

from what it was 15 or 20 years old ago where first nations 

people didn’t have much chance to work in the mines in 

northern Saskatchewan. So that’s been a huge improvement. 

 

The other area of course is tourism. And today again we 

announced another first nations project jointly with the 

Canadian Tourism Council or Tourism Commission with  



542  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

Tourism Saskatchewan and the FSIN to allow for the 

development of waterways in Saskatchewan in a joint fashion 

which will give opportunities for development to first nations 

people. 

 

Of course I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the operation of 

casinos in the province of Saskatchewan — both the casino in 

Regina and the four Indian or first nations-operated casinos. 

They are very, very proud of what they’ve been able to do in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And actually this agreement that was signed between the 

Government of Saskatchewan and first nations people is held up 

as an example of the way to do casino operations right across 

Canada. And there are many people coming to study this model 

from other parts of the world as a way of including first nations 

people in not only the jobs area but also in the administration 

and being on the board of directors. 

 

Now there are many other ways. Of course in government, our 

numbers of first nations people continue to grow as a 

percentage of our total number of people working in 

government. We have, I think about 10 per cent of our 

population is aboriginal and first nations. We’re not at that 10 

per cent in government yet but we’re moving in the right 

direction. That’s important that we work towards and some day 

achieve that. 

 

And finally, the area that I want to mention is in some of the 

JobStart and training programs — that first nations people are 

picking up many of those training spots and we encourage more 

of them to become involved. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, and I know as well 

that my colleague will be undoubtedly talking more in specific 

about these aboriginal programs. 

 

I want to continue on in the overview sense that I indicated that 

I would start with. And I would like to turn my attention now to 

the demographics of the women of the province and how your 

department sees your department interacting with women 

entrepreneurs and where there are opportunities for women in 

the province. 

 

Quite often we see the ladies are in part time and in a situation 

where they have to take multiple jobs in order to provide 

income for their families. And I wonder if you would comment 

on where you see your department interfacing with women in 

the province to create real opportunities for them both by being 

employed in businesses and also to create their own 

independent entrepreneurial businesses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The role of women in our economy 

of course has been very fundamental. And obviously the 

members of your caucus who are female and members of our 

caucus who are female are good examples of women who have 

in their own right made their way in, in some cases in the 

private sector and some cases in government and in some cases, 

as with the Minister of Finance, as a professional educator at a 

university. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that on the entrepreneurial side 

during the 1980s, in that tough time when the farms were not 

performing well, the people who came to the front and did a lot 

of the economic development of the small businesses in rural 

Saskatchewan were in fact women. And while the male farmer 

who was out there struggling along with their spouse to keep 

the farm going, a lot of the small cottage industries that were 

established to keep the farm going were actually headed up by 

women. And the statistics within the department show that the 

male counterparts aren’t quite as competitive when it comes to 

success as their female counterparts in small business. 

 

But I have to say that there’s still a long way to go, because 

when you look at the average income of male and female in the 

same description of jobs, there still is a huge gap. And that’s 

true right across the piece. And I was reading the other day 

about managerial positions, what has happened in the last 10 

years in Canada. While the number of females in managerial 

positions has increased by 2 or 3 per cent, it’s still very, very 

small when compared to where it should be at 50 or 51 per cent. 

 

So while there’s progress being made, I think that there are still 

huge opportunities for us to improve our position here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. But really it’s much bigger than 

Saskatchewan. It really is as a country we’re still not where we 

should be when it comes to opportunity and positioning of our 

daughters and females in our society. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I would like to turn to 

another aspect of your overall vision of economic development 

in the province. And I would like you to comment on how you 

see the relationship or interrelationship between economic 

development and things like infrastructure requirements. 

 

It strikes me as that you might have an industry that is very 

gung-ho about creating economic development. And I’ll even 

use the Bourgault example in St. Brieux, where it’s very 

important for them to make sure that number one, that there’s 

adequate schools, there’s adequate facilities in terms of local 

government, there’s adequate roads for which they can export 

their products on. 

 

And so it’s very important to economic development across the 

province that it’s not looked at in isolation. That indeed there is 

the whole package and the broader vision that includes the 

required necessities for the employer and the employees by way 

of infrastructure. 

 

And I would like to ask you to comment on how you see the 

role of your department interfacing with other aspects of 

government — Highways, Education, Municipal Government, 

all those other areas — to ensure that all the requirements are 

there so economic activity can indeed occur. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well you raise a very good point. 

And one of the reasons that the Premier established the 

Committee on Economic Development, which includes 

ministers from a number of different areas of government that 

talk about the economy as a holistic piece, is for that very 

reason that decisions that are made in transportation, or 

decisions that are made in many areas of government, affect the  



April 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

very fabric of economic development in a community. 

 

And so to try to do that in a sensitive way where you, with the 

limited dollars we have, build the right roads in the right places, 

try to structure an education system and health care system 

that’s meaningful to the people in the community who pay for 

it, these are never easy but still, and at the end of the day, you 

have to do your best to make sure that those kinds of structures 

meet the needs of the community. 

 

The approach that we have taken is one of partnership. And 

whether it’s education, or whether it’s roads, with the 

establishment of transportation committees in various areas of 

the province, or whether it’s our health boards, we’re moving 

much more towards including the communities as to where the 

limited dollars will be spent. 

 

And I think the Saskatchewan people in general have picked 

this up with a fervour and very much want to be involved in the 

planning of their communities and the spending of the tax 

dollars that they receive. And the idea that somehow we should 

sit in Regina and decide, for example, which roads are the 

priority in the area or which hospitals are the priority of the 

area, or the schools for that matter, somehow can’t work. 

 

Is the system perfect? Obviously it’s not. And there’s a huge 

debate in the Englefeld area about schools, and the whole issue 

of which schools should be open and which shouldn’t be. And I 

wish them the best in keeping the best system that they can in 

their area. But at the end of the day, much of that decision 

making will be made by local people. 

 

But I want to say that this is not a new discussion. I remember 

back in 1955 and 1956, as one of the first political discussions I 

remember in our household, was when the Pilot school, which 

was a mile from our house, was being closed by the then 

Tommy Douglas government, as it was said in our house. And I 

remember the angst that when I started school I was the first 

one of nine children that couldn’t go to that school — that 

one-room school with eight grades, one mile from our house — 

and walk to school and walk home every night. 

 

And this was going to be the end of the world. They just could 

not figure out how this kind of change could be possible and 

how you could have an education system that would reflect the 

needs of the family who lived in that area, and the school bus 

would have to come and pick you up and take you 10 miles to 

school, and we’d have to ride on the bus for 30 minutes. 

 

And lo and behold, if you think back to what would have 

happened if we had won that argument and had continued to 

have a one-room schoolhouse with eight grades, we wouldn’t 

look very smart today, would we? 

 

And so these changes, as they come and they flow, are best met 

by this partnership of communities that will work together to try 

to fine-tune a system so that we’re not taking a snapshot of 

what we need today, or worse yet taking a snapshot of what was 

needed in the 1970s, or worse yet what was needed in the 

1950s. But what’s the snapshot or our vision of what will be 

there in the year 2010? And what is the system that we’re about  

to design, to create the picture of what our communities will 

look like going out into the future. And that has to be done in a 

sensitive way, including as much as we can the needs and 

aspirations of local people. 

 

And so I say to the member opposite that this is a big task 

facing all of us to try to put the picture together as it should be 

for the future. Because the idea that was there in the 1980s that 

whatever the political pressures were, that you would go to New 

York and borrow money at high interest rates to meet some 

political needs to build more bricks and mortar, it isn’t on, and 

nor is it morally right for politicians, for political purposes, to 

put future generations at risk because what I need for my 

political future. 

 

And so I say this has to be handled sensitively. We’re not going 

to be right all the time. But I’d prefer a partnership where the 

local communities are very, very much involved. And I think 

we’ll work our way through this issue. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Minister, it’s very gratifying to see that 

you’re saying that local communities should have more input on 

the decisions that affect them and the whole infrastructure as 

well. But the reality is, in many instances you have to take your 

own responsibility. 

 

Part of the reason why schools are being closed in local 

communities have nothing to do with the decision of a local 

community wishing that that school close. It is an issue resolved 

around financing and the fact that your government has moved 

from funding 60 per cent of education to only funding 40 per 

cent — and so local school boards are unable to do it. 

 

And you can say it’s their own local decision. It’s quite easy 

sometimes, or it’s quite easy to blame local people for making a 

certain decision when you’re sticking a gun to their head and 

saying, now make the decision autonomously. That’s what 

you’ve done and that’s where I’m asking you, Minister, what 

about this whole infrastructure commitment with a bit of a 

vision for the future? 

 

How will someone in Englefeld or in Annaheim be able to 

attract the kind of workers that they’re going to need, educated 

for their expanding businesses that you’re taking so much credit 

for? How are they able to attract those workers into their 

community when because of other responsible decisions that 

they’re making, by the Humboldt School Division, for example, 

of having to close schools because of the fiscal realities that 

you’ve imposed on them. And you sit here and tell us that, oh 

you respect the local decision-making process. The local people 

have no choice but to deal with the fiscal reality you’ve 

imposed on them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And so, Mr. Minister, I mean it’s a hollow 

kind of a commitment to say, oh it’s so great that local people 

are making the decision, and that the reality is is that the 

one-room school is over. Of course it’s over. But we’ll talk 

about some more of these issues another day. I think we have  



544  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1997 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just want to respond to the 

member opposite and then my colleague from Prince Albert 

will move the committee rise and report progress. 

 

But I just want to say to the member opposite that, in terms of 

the percentage of money that goes to roads . . . and I know that 

there is a great wish that 100 per cent of the taxes that are 

collected on fuel tax would go to roads — and I wish that as 

well — or that the amount that goes to education was more. 

 

But I want to tell you this, that in 1982 when I sat around the 

cabinet table at our last meeting and planned the budget in 

1982, the E&H (education and health) tax that was raised could 

all go to education and health. There was no interest on the 

debt. No interest on the debt. The fact of the matter is today it’s 

$800 million and we have to use that money to pay interest. 

 

And I know why the members are shouting time, because they 

don’t want to hear about this. But I say to the member opposite, 

what rings hollow is at a time when this province is struggling 

to make its way, the federal government would use that 

opportunity to cut education and health. And so I think that 

rings hollow to . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. It now being 5 o’clock, the committee 

will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 511 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 511 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 512 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 512 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 512 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 513 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Season of Miracles 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 

 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 513 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 

 BIRS Raptors Take Provincial Championship 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 

 Yorkton Separate and Public Schools Join to Build New School 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 

 Cancer Month 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 

 New Funding for Agri-food Innovation Fund 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Flood Disaster Relief 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 515 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 515 

 Funding for Universities 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 516 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 516 

 Gross Revenue Insurance Program Court Case 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 516 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 517 

 Dual Marketing 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 517 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 517 

 Flood Disaster Relief 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 517 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 517 

 School Bus Emergency Communication System 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 518 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 518 

 Cudworth Hospital Closure 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 519 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 519 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Immediate Financial Assistance for Municipalities 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 520 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 520 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 521 

 Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 522 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 522 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 522 

 Bill No. 15 — The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 524 

 Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 524 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 525 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Interim Supply 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 527 

  Gantefoer ........................................................................................................................................................................... 527, 529 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 528 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 530 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 531 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 533 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Economic and Co-operative Development Vote 45 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 535 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 535 

 

 


