



















































Hansard: May 13, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1591 

 May 13, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I present petitions today from people in 

the Kamsack and the Stornoway area. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to join 

my hon. colleague on behalf of citizens of Dubuc, Melville, 

Grayson, and Ituna: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of people who are concerned 

about child prostitution: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

This petition is signed by people from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

to present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people from 

the city that the Premier resides in, and that being Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’d like to present a petition to create regional 

telephone exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities that the petitioners are from is the town of 

Odessa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road, including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, and Pinehouse, and an 

access road to Garson Lake. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever will pray. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition signed by citizens of the city of Saskatoon: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places and to stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I too have a petition from the many conscientious 

people throughout the province — and particularly this petition 

is from Saskatoon — who are gravely concerned about child 

prostitution in the province. And the prayer reads, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

  



1592  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

The petitioners are from Saskatoon and I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 

read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to urge 

the government to stop contributing to rising farm input 

costs; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime 

in Saskatchewan; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to reform provincial legislation to help children who are 

being exploited for sexual purposes; and finally 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the rebuilding of Highway No. 155. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

to draw to your attention and that of the members, a 

distinguished group of visitors who are seated in the west 

gallery. This is a group of about 40 students from the grades 4 

and 5 classes at St. Augustine School. They’re accompanied 

here today by their teachers, Mr. Doug Devernichuk and Edith 

Seiferling, and also by Mrs. Sharon Lang. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this particular group especially, 

because I had the opportunity to meet with them last week at 

their school. And I look forward to meeting with them because 

they ask very many excellent questions. And the members of 

the opposition may want to make note of that and they may 

want to attend this meeting that I’ve scheduled with them. 

 

But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, it’s really a privilege to be able 

to meet with this group. I look forward to meeting with them. 

 

I ask all the members to join me into wishing them a very warm 

welcome here today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today we 

have some very special and very important guests that are 

visiting us in the Assembly. And I want to, to you and through 

you, introduce these guests. 

 

We have a number of students from my home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. We have 23 students in your east gallery. And 

they’re accompanied by a number of people from my home 

community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

The teachers that have put a lot of effort into bringing the kids 

here — and that effort’s most sincerely appreciated — are 

Karen Schommer, Mark Zinger, Sharon Hoffman, and Bruce 

Downtown Brown. 

 

And the chaperons we also have here attending the visit and the 

trip are Irene Gardiner, Heather Pinay, Shirley Laliberte, and 

Janice Bouvier. And I’ll be meeting with these students 

momentarily, right after 2 o’clock, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’d like to ask the members to join with me in welcoming this 

very special group of people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too am 

very pleased to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

House, a very special group of students on behalf of my 

colleague, the Deputy Premier, the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — and behind the bar here 

is Khira — are 32 grade 4 students from St. Francis School. 

They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Laurie Ruhr, and a 

chaperon, Miss Sherri Allen. 

 

I know that they have had a tour of this wonderful building and 

will spend some time here with us, and I look forward to 

meeting with them later on and I know they will also have some 

very interesting comments and questions. 

 

Please join me in extending a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you and to the House, one of my constituents, Bob 

Axtell, who’s in the back row of the Speaker's gallery; along 

with three of his friends — Jennifer Anderson, Carla Crossley, 

and Mark Oamek. All four of them are students at university in 

Pocatello, Idaho. Three of them are studying microbiology and 

one of them . . . Jennifer’s studying to be a physician’s 

assistant. 

 

It’s the first time in Saskatchewan for the Idaho citizens, and so 

let’s all give them a big welcome here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Federal Leaders’ Debate 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So last 

night it was the big debate. And it was an interesting debate 

with views from both the left and the right and the right and  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

really far right. 

 

And I have to say I was impressed to see the leaders even got 

gussied up to share with us their vision for Canada over the next 

four years. 

 

I note that the Prime Minister even donned his best pair of 

pyjamas for the event. Which was good, because it enabled him 

to keep sleepwalking right through this campaign without being 

bothered by any of the minor problems people might want to 

talk to him about. You know, problems like unemployment, or 

cuts his government’s making to health care, or even that pesky 

GST (goods and services tax) promise that just won’t quite go 

away. 

 

Well I also noted that Mr. Preston Manning put on his best 

brown shirt for the event and took particular interest in 

hectoring and lecturing and chiding his opponents. Now far be 

it from me to say that hectoring and lecturing and chiding are 

bad things. Except I would note that he was doing so in a vain 

effort to goose-step around his ultra right-wing agenda that 

makes Jean Charest and the Tories look downright 

compassionate — which conveniently, is exactly what Jean 

Charest was attempting to look like. 

 

I’d have to say he did his best to look repentant and 

un-Mulroney-like. He even showed just enough sincerity to 

make me think he maybe even believed it. Fortunately however, 

Alexa was there. And Alexa was there to speak out for ordinary 

Canadians and remind the Prime Minister that there are real 

issues real Canadians want debated. 

 

I’m confident Alexa, and more New Democrats, will be joined 

in the House of Commons after this election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Buena Vista School Drama Production 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 

are a lot of adult theatrical companies who shy away from 

Shakespeare because, as Huckleberry Finn said, “The words are 

interesting but tough.” It’s hard to do a good job on 

Shakespeare so most don’t try. 

 

Because this is so, it is all the more remarkable that the students 

of Buena Vista School in my constituency put on a production 

last week of Romeo and Juliet, and by all reports did an 

excellent job. 

 

For those of us who have seen one of the recent movies of 

Romeo and Juliet, or remember studying it in school, we know 

that it is not only remarkable but appropriate that a group of 

grade 5 to grade 8 students performed the play. After all, the 

characters of Romeo and Juliet are not only star-crossed lovers, 

they are very young — a fact which makes the play all the 

sadder and more powerful. 

 

The 70 or so students involved in the production were under the 

able direction of their teacher, Ken Marlin, and Mr. Marlin is to 

be commended for having the idea to mount this play and the  

persistence to carry it through. As well the Buena Vista 

Community Association, parents, and the Gateway Players 

assisted in to build sets, make costumes, and prepare the 

desserts and coffee which were served before the curtain was 

raised each evening. 

 

I’m proud to have these students, their teachers and parents, in 

my constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. I think that they’ve 

established an exceptional standard and I congratulate them all. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Science Fair Winners from St. Dominic School 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

recognize Angela Possburg and Tracy Burton of Humboldt. The 

grade 8 students at St. Dominic School were chosen to attend 

the Canada-wide Science Fair this week, May 11 to 18, in 

Regina. 

 

Now the girls teamed up for the science fair project in their 

study of how music influences sows in the farrowing room. The 

project, called “Musical Hogs”, won them the first place award 

of $1,000 from Saskatchewan Education at the Carlton Trail 

Regional Science Fair in Kelvington. Their study showed that 

sows and piglets that listen to vocal music over a two-week 

period proved to be more relaxed, gained weight more quickly, 

and were less susceptible to disease. 

 

Not to be outdone, Richard Winters and Mark Possburg won 

honours at the science fair. They will take their “Tireriffic 

Cattle Guard” to the Saskatchewan Science Centre in Regina in 

October. It’s their reward for winning the Saskatchewan 

Showcase Award and first for Junior Engineering. 

 

Now their project recycled old tires into a cattle guard in which 

strips of rubber are bolted together in grids which are placed 

atop 6 inches of gravel as a cattle barrier. The idea got attention 

from prospective buyers, but they resisted, turned down 

lucrative offers, and are patenting the idea themselves. Their 

teacher is Peter Pavelich, who has had students qualify for the 

National Science Fair for the third straight year. 

 

Congratulations, St. Dominic students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the week of May 11 to 17 has been designated as 

Child Care Week, a week during which we publicly recognize 

those workers who provide care for our children — in the 

home, in day care centres, in schools, or in any other setting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am in agreement with those who say that 

proclaiming is one thing, doing is another. I believe that Child 

Care Week would ring hollow if it were not for some 

substantial evidence that our deeds match our words. 

 

  



1594  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

This is why I am proud to be associated with Saskatchewan’s 

action plan for children — a plan that began modestly in 1993; 

that began after consultations with groups, organizations, and 

individuals from across the province. A plan that involves 

co-operative efforts of seven government departments and 

hundreds of organizations across the province. 

 

I am proud that funding for this year will more than double, 

bringing the total for programs and services to nearly $25 

million. This additional commitment will allow for expanded 

child care programs and services; for expansion of teen-infant 

centres; for enhancement of wages for child care workers; for 

renovation of child care facilities; and for a host of other 

important initiatives. 

 

The action plan for children, in short, gives voice to Child Care 

Week. We honour those who provide the care and, Mr. Speaker, 

we also support them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Working Women’s Share in the Economy 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 1995 the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government stated categorically 

that women don’t share equally in the economy. On that point I 

agree with them. The Women’s Secretariat has now collected 

the facts to prove that women don’t share equally in the 

provincial economy. To address these inequities, the NDP 

promised to set up a task force to examine family-friendly 

work. They promised to make it easier for women to balance 

work and their family responsibilities. Obviously they have 

failed to do this. 

 

Thirty per cent of the women in this province work part time. 

This compares to an overall number of 7 per cent. The main 

reason women say they work part time is because they can’t 

find full-time work. We have hundreds of women in this 

province working at minimum-wage call centres. These are the 

types of jobs this government is creating. 

 

Women are also saying that they have to take care of their 

families first so they work part time. If the NDP had fulfilled 

their promise to help create family-friendly workplaces, the 

women would not be faced to have to . . . to choose between 

work and family. 

 

And when we look at the record of the NDP government, we 

find it astounding that they claim to stand up for people in need, 

for fairness and equity. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, 60 per cent of the temporary and part-time 

employees the government bureaucracy has are women; 82 per 

cent of government clerical works are filled by women. I 

believe this demonstrates that the government is not willing to 

commit to women who work for them, let alone to the women 

in the rest of the province. 

 

On behalf of the women in this province, we ask, please give 

this very important issue . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dr. Ali Rajput Selected for World Health Organization’s 

International Committee on Parkinson’s Disease 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the United 

Nations’ World Health Organization decided to make a special 

effort recently to combat Parkinson’s disease on a worldwide 

basis, they looked at Saskatchewan and they selected — as part 

of a committee of 12 individuals worldwide to address the 

scourge of Parkinson’s disease — an individual from 

Saskatoon, Dr. Ali Rajput, who is professor and head of 

neurology at the University of Saskatchewan, an expert on 

Parkinson’s disease worldwide And so the envelope from the 

World Health Organization arrived at his home last Tuesday, a 

week ago today. 

 

Dr. Rajput will be the only Canadian on this prestigious 

international group of medical researchers, and he will attend 

his first meeting of this consultation in Geneva, Switzerland 

later this month. Dr. Rajput is known for the international scale 

of his research, for his international reputation, for the 

international scale of scholarship that comes to Saskatoon 

because of his presence at the University of Saskatchewan, and 

also for the international funding that comes to Saskatoon 

because of him. 

 

As the 1993 Order of Merit citation for Dr. Rajput read, he is “a 

world-class medical scholar and teacher, truly committed to the 

search for knowledge, a man of compassion and generosity.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teachers Enrich Students’ Education 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 

few minutes just to acknowledge a very special group of people 

that have done a tremendous amount of work for our 

community through the school system. And that, of course, are 

the teachers that have made an extra effort to bring students all 

the way to our capital city and to view the Assembly. 

 

While a trip to this Assembly for most students may only mean 

a trip that will last a couple of hours, students from my 

constituency are looking at a trip that will last eight hours one 

way. Planning a trip from the schools takes personal sacrifice 

on the part of the teachers, and I want to take this opportunity 

again to pay tribute to those teachers in all the schools of 

Athabasca constituency. 

 

I do so not only to call the members’ attention to these teachers’ 

great efforts in bringing students to visit the Assembly, but for 

all their good work during the school year — much of it done 

on their own time. 

 

These teachers organize fund-raisers for our schools and take 

part in many other extra-curricular activities that benefit 

students and the entire community, not because it’s part of their 

job description, but because they truly care about enriching the  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

education of their students. 

 

Other teachers throughout the North, and especially teachers 

from Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division, which include Mr. 

Ahenakew, Ms. Favel, Mrs. Zinger, Mr. McJannet, Ms. Bast, all 

do their part to enrich Ile-a-la-Crosse and the school spirit. 

 

Schools in my constituency thrive on this type of activity on the 

part of the teacher the same way many small schools in 

southern Saskatchewan communities do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to remember the 

contribution of the teachers such as those in my constituency, 

for whom teaching isn’t simply a job, but a true calling. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Producer Marketing Boards 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the leader of the federal 

New Democratic Party has made no secret of the fact that she is 

basing her campaign on this provincial NDP government. But 

let’s look closely at what this NDP government is doing when it 

comes to single-desk marketing boards in Saskatchewan. 

 

Bill 67, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, which is presently 

before the House will give this government the power to wipe 

out every single provincial farm marketing board without even 

giving producers a vote — without even a democratic vote. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture explain why he wants the 

authority to dissolve marketing boards which manage poultry 

producers, pork producers, and a long list of others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I’ll answer that, thank you to the member 

of the third party, but I’ll be happy to answer this question. 

 

And you’ll be able to, Mr. Member, get to ask all these 

questions in Committee of the Whole if you just move it into 

Committee of the Whole; you can find out exactly what it’s all 

about. But I can start now. 

 

This legislation, that every other province in Canada has, and 

what Saskatchewan had prior to 1990 when it was inadvertently 

removed by an amendment to the Act, this will facilitate 

requests from groups that have marketing boards that decide 

that they no longer want that board, and if they don’t want to 

have a vote with their members when we can do it for them, or 

in the case of an economic decision by government, that is also 

possible. 

 

But the fact of the matter is — the fact of the matter is 

marketing boards for the most part are looking internally. 

They’re deciding if their current system — a system that was 

put in place many years ago, a system that has served them well 

— if that is still the system they need to go into the future. I 

think they’re being proactive by looking at themselves and I  

commend them for doing so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well here we go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There’s the two faces of this argument that the government 

would present. This NDP government portrays itself as the 

defenders of farmers. In fact it recently ran ads at taxpayers’ 

expense defending the Canadian Wheat Board. It even criticized 

the federal government for holding a vote on whether wheat 

boards should continue to be the single best marketer of barley. 

 

Well look at what you’re doing, Mr. Minister. Under your 

legislation you have the power to wipe out marketing boards. 

And farmers are provided no vote, no say whatsoever. How can 

you possibly look a producer in the eye when you’re taking 

away their democratic right to determine the future of their 

marketing boards? 

 

Mr. Minister, the Liberal opposition will be proposing an 

amendment that requires a democratic vote of producers before 

a marketing board can be eliminated. Will you support this 

amendment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  If this amendment is like most of the 

other amendments the Liberal Party has put forward it really 

isn’t worth looking at, but I will certainly look at it. But this 

legislation does not stop — does not stop — the Agri-Food 

Council from conducting votes. It doesn’t take the vote away at 

all. They can still have a vote if they so wished. 

 

This legislation, like I said, is the same in every other province 

of Canada. We had it in Saskatchewan prior to 1990. I know 

they want to do a little grandstanding on it. I’d ask the member, 

what’s your position? Do you agree that the other provinces are 

. . . Are you saying all the other provinces are wrong? That they 

should not have that? 

 

But I ask this member . . . I’ll tell this member this, is we in 

Saskatchewan have done more for agriculture than Ralph 

Goodale and the federal Liberal government have done in the 

four years they’ve had it; $320 million out of farmers’ pockets 

with the Crow; $250 million in reduced crop sector programing; 

80 to 100 to $150 million in lost grain sales because the federal 

Liberals and Ralph Goodale don’t have the fortitude to take . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government does 

not appear to understand the impact that its decision is already 

having on hog operations in this province. Saskatchewan Pork 

International has issued lay-off notices to more than 100 

employees in its Moose Jaw plant. These have been described 

as precautionary lay-offs by Jim Morris, the head of SPI, who 

says this legislation has created a great deal of uncertainty in  

  



1596  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

the hog market. 

 

Until such time as this government comes clean on its 

intentions, the Moose Jaw plant will remain closed, and its 

employees will be out of work. Mr. Minister, what is the 

intention of your legislation? And if it’s not to override the 

wishes of producers, make a commitment in this House today 

that you will support our amendment that gives farmers a 

democratic vote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That member knows full well this 

legislation has absolutely nothing to do with the Moose Jaw 

plant — nothing. Your credibility and integrity sank to the 

bottom of the floor in this cabinet. And you can try, I’ll tell you, 

Mr. Liberal, you can try . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Chair is 

having trouble hearing the minister respond and I’m sure that 

other members are wanting to hear the response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, that member and that 

Liberal caucus can try all they want to disrupt the increase and 

production of hogs that’s planned for this province. They can 

try all they want, but I’ll tell you they will not be successful. 

 

They will not be successful because we got hundreds and 

hundreds of producers from small units to large units who 

understand this hog industry is going to be growing. And you 

can play your little negative politics all you want, but I’ll tell 

you, in the dairy industry they went to western Canadian 

pooling, a good step forward, a move off the old. 

 

The SPI is looking internally to decide if they should continue 

single desk; these people are being proactive. I don’t care who 

says, who says, or what ties you make. This hog industry is 

going to grow in Saskatchewan. It’s going to be grown by all 

levels of producers from small to large, and we on this side of 

the House are going to be there to assist them, to make sure we 

are major players in this industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a simple 

question for this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if it 

answers honestly it could give the NDP a chance to restore 

public confidence — something it has done little of during this 

legislative session. 

 

On March 10 the Chief Electoral Officer indicated the Kuziak 

report, which was launched to look into election fund-raising 

practices, would be released very shortly. Well it’s conspicuous 

by its absence. It is now two months later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and the people of Saskatchewan are still waiting. In essence, the 

Chief Electoral Officer is an employee of Executive Council 

and the report should be submitted to the Premier’s office. Is 

the report completed; and if so, why has it not been made 

public? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The report has 

not yet been received by the government. We do not know 

whether it has been completed or not. We take it it has not, 

because if it had been completed it would be in our hands. 

 

The member will know perfectly well from the long debate we 

had about this last year, that the Chief Electoral Officer is a 

position of some independence and we respect that 

independence. We don’t treat this person as though he were an 

employee of Executive Council or any other part of 

government. We try and respect his independence in every way 

possible. 

 

We have not asked him directly when he intends to file his 

report, but he will know from following the debates in this 

House that there is some wish all the way around that this report 

be delivered to our hands and be made public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need a little better 

answer than that from the government. We understand that the 

report has been completed. The Chief Electoral Officer 

launched the investigation long time ago. He launched it after it 

was revealed that the Progressive Conservatives had access to a 

two and a half million dollar trust fund. Shortly after, we found 

out Tommy Douglas House had contributed hundreds of 

thousands of dollars worth of secret donations to the NDP. 

 

This issue was raised a year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

people have a right to know the results of this investigation 

regardless of whether or not it has in fact been totally 

completed. We understand it has been. This is a provincial 

matter. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to know what’s in 

that report. Will this government be accountable to the people 

of this province and table this document by Friday, May 16? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I can’t imagine, I can’t 

imagine where that date comes from. I can’t make any such 

undertaking. 

 

The fact of the matter is that we haven’t got the report; it hasn’t 

been filed with the government. We have no indication that it is 

ready, that it has been completed. 

 

The member says it has. He knows more than we do then. He 

knows more than we do where that report is and perhaps he’d 

tell us if it’s ready and when it will be delivered to us, because 

we simply don’t know. 

 

Now that member is a reasonable person most times, Mr. 

Speaker, but there’s something about this issue that drives him 

right over the end. And all of a sudden we see him engaging in 

rhetorical outbursts that have no relation to the facts at all. 

That’s the truth of the matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

Main Farm Access Road Program 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan farmers have 

spring seeding under way. The amount of traffic is drastically 

increasing on Saskatchewan rural road systems right now, and 

the wear and tear is showing. 

 

Unfortunately many RMs (rural municipality) are struggling to 

find money for road maintenance and rebuilding projects 

because of the massive funding cuts by this NDP government. 

Adding to the headaches for rural administrators and councils 

are the minister’s cancellation of the main farm access road 

program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now that the minister can see what 

devastating effects her cuts are having on rural and urban 

municipalities, is she giving any consideration to reinstating the 

main farm access road program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the intent of not funding 

the main farm access road program is so as not to add to the 

53,000 kilometres of rural roads that we have. It is felt that at 

this point in time that the construction . . . adding to the network 

shouldn’t be necessary. The maintenance and re-gravelling 

assistance remains intact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, what those roads, the 

main farm access system was doing is not building new roads 

where there was no roads before; it was rebuilding roads that 

have been wore out, that have been there for years. If you don’t 

understand that, I’m afraid we’re in big trouble in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that by cancelling the 

farm access road program without any warning, many RMs 

have unfinished projects. This creates problems for people 

living in the area and for contractors who are left in the lurch 

while RMs scramble to find money to finish farm access 

projects. 

 

Madam Minister, will you explain why you are forcing nearly 

all rural governments to put road construction on hold and are 

you waiting until you have driven everyone out of rural 

Saskatchewan and we have no need for roads out there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, in addition to the money 

that remains in the revenue-sharing pool for rural 

municipalities, there is also $20 million in the Crow benefit. 

There is infrastructure money. And there is . . . the futures are 

being paid out — probably this week — to the tune of $16 

million. There is not a shortage of money for tending to the 

rural road system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the SaskPower minister. Well we now know what the 

Guyana power company is worth — sort of. It is worth 

somewheres between 90 million U.S. (United States) and a 

negative 15 million U.S. So it’s like Bre-X stock a couple of 

weeks ago — could be worth something, and then again, it 

could be worthless. 

 

And we all saw how that turned out. The paper certificates are 

now worth more than the company is. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you want to gamble and live up to your 

nickname of Lucky, go to a casino, but take your own money. 

Taxpayers don’t want you dropping $31 million of their money 

in a crap shoot in South America. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you quit playing Monopoly with taxpayers’ 

money in South America? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

fact that the member’s researchers spend a lot of time perusing 

the newspapers. What they haven’t done though, is accurately 

report it in the papers. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite that we have indeed 

signed a letter of intent to Guyanese officials; that there has 

been no agreement reached; that there has been no money spent 

on the purchase of GEC (Guyana Electricity Corporation); that 

before any decision with respect to that would be made, I’ve 

indicated the process in this legislature ad nauseam. 

 

But I’m going to do it just one more time, Mr. Speaker, just one 

more time. Before any agreement is reached, it will have to be 

perused by the SaskPower Commercial board and by the 

SaskPower board of directors. And I just want to say to the 

members opposite that that process has not taken place. So I can 

report to him that no agreement has been reached. 

 

And I can also report to him that there will be, if an agreement 

is made, an agreement made based on sound business practices 

that would return a very positive investment for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, aside from the fact that 

this is a very . . . is a tremendously risky deal, I guess the bigger 

question is why; why is it the business of SaskPower to be 

spending millions of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollar buying 

power companies in foreign countries? If SaskPower has $31 

million to spare, why don’t they spend it in Saskatchewan? 

Better yet, why don’t they give it back to the consumers in the 

form of a rate decrease — a real rate decrease. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is SaskPower doing this? Why are you 

blowing our money on a dilapidated, foreign power company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 

member that we are not putting the Power Corporation in a  

  



1598  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

position where it will be doing undue risk. I want to say that the 

members of that political party did more to destroy the Crown 

corporations both in Regina and in Ottawa, along with their 

cousins the Liberals in Regina and in Ottawa, than any single 

thing any government in this country could do with respect to a 

Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these Crowns are facing a deregulated 

environment and they will do what is sound business, and that’s 

position these corporations so that they can compete. We’re not 

about to stand by and see the assets of this province diminish 

because we did nothing. And I want to say that these 

corporations will, as they have in the past, look at business 

opportunities both inside and outside of this province. 

 

Those members forget to mention the fact that SaskTel netted 

for the people of this province, to reduce debt, $114 million on 

a cable deal in Leicester. I say they’ve got selective amnesia. 

They’re playing politics with . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Health Care Bill of Rights 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 

afternoon are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan people have lost faith in your health system and 

the health care problems in this province. Your polling shows 

that 62 per cent of people expect health services to deteriorate 

even further over the next 10 years. 

 

Mr. Minister, the biggest problem we hear from Saskatchewan 

people is the uncertainty about health care services. They don’t 

know if they’re going to lose their hospital or their nursing 

home. They don’t know if emergency services are going to be 

available to them. They don’t know what the bottom line is — 

what your health care services and what kind of health care 

services they can expect in the future. 

 

Mr. Minister, the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus is 

proposing that a health care bill of rights and responsibilities be 

established through consultation with health care providers, 

communities, and Saskatchewan people. Will you support this 

process and support the Saskatchewan health care bill of rights 

and responsibilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, this party, this government, 

and this province brought in a health care bill of rights in 1962 

when we pioneered the medicare system for this country . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  . . . over the opposition of that party, the 

Conservatives, and that party, the Liberals. 

 

That’s our commitment. That’s our bill of rights for health care, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to keep the public medicare 

system that we pioneered — no thanks to the Conservatives, no 

thanks to the Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you know 

what was most frightening about last night’s leaders’ debate? 

When Jean Chrétien defended his health care record by quoting 

the Premier of Saskatchewan. If Jean Chrétien is basing his 

health care policy on Saskatchewan’s NDP’s attacks on the 

health care system, we’re all in a lot of trouble in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, last summer I toured a number of communities 

that lost health care services. They just wanted to know what 

the bottom line was — what was the basic level of health care 

services we can have the right to expect so we can start doing 

some long-term planning instead of crisis management. That’s 

what they wanted to know. Our health care bill of rights and 

responsibilities would set up a process of establishing those 

standards and guaranteeing them in law. 

 

And we wonder, Mr. Minister, what is wrong with that. Why 

don’t you provide Saskatchewan people with a guarantee of 

health care services in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, coming from the 

Conservative Party, this is empty words and hollow rhetoric. 

What we have done in this province, Mr. Speaker, is to back-fill 

every penny of federal cuts to the health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Cuts which started under the Conservatives 

when they were in power under Brian Mulroney and continued 

under the Liberals. And I want to say to this House that Alexa 

McDonough and the New Democrats are talking about keeping 

the public medicare system. 

 

The policy of the Conservatives is two-tier, pay-as-you-go 

medicine. That’s the policy of the Liberals and that’s the policy 

of the Reform Party. There is one party that stands for the 

public medicare system, Mr. Speaker. It is the New Democratic 

Party that founded the public medicare system in this province 

— no thanks to the Conservatives, no thanks to the Liberals, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if you’re 

doing such a great job in health care, then why do 62 per cent of 

the people expect health care services to continue to deteriorate 

over the next few years? 

 

Mr. Minister, your government recently undertook a public 

review of the Crown corporations. While that is important, the 

future of health care services is far more important in this 

province. Yet you don’t want to even give Saskatchewan people 

a right to a say in the future of the delivery of health care 

services. 

 

Mr. Minister, most people in Saskatchewan expect health care 

services to deteriorate because there is no clear game plan.  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

They have no guarantee of what health care services they can 

expect and no outline of who is responsible for providing those 

services. Mr. Minister, shouldn’t people expect their 

government to show some leadership and provide that 

blueprint? Mr. Minister, will you do so today by supporting our 

bill on health care rights and responsibilities for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I’ve already told the member, Mr. 

Speaker, the bill of rights in health care in this province came 

about in 1962 when medicare was introduced. 

 

But I want to say to the member, that if the member thinks back 

to the provincial budget, delivered on March 20 by the Minister 

of Finance, which the member supported — the member 

supported, Mr. Speaker — one of the things about that budget is 

that it puts into health care in Saskatchewan $56.2 million new 

money, and $53 million additional money to back-fill the 

Liberal cuts to health care. That’s more than $100 million new 

money to health care in Saskatchewan this year, Mr. Speaker. 

And that money is going to guarantee stability and security in 

the health care system. And it’s going to help secure medicare 

for future generations. 

 

We don’t just have empty words and hollow rhetoric, Mr. 

Speaker. Unlike the Conservatives and the Liberals, this 

government puts its money where its mouth is, which is in 

public medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When this 

government began axing hospital beds, it promised the people 

of this province better home care services. But evidently this is 

not happening, and Colleen Covey-Kennedy’s battle to get an 

in-home nurse for her daughter Natalie is a prime example of an 

epidemic facing our health care system. 

 

After a year and a half fight the health board finally approved a 

nurse for Natalie. However, Mr. Speaker, it came too late as 

Natalie died of brain cancer four days later. The 

Covey-Kennedys represent hundreds of people slipping through 

the cracks as neither hospitals nor the home care system are 

meeting their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Natalie spent her final days concerned about the 

financial toll her illness was taking on her family — the very 

last thing that she should have been worried about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we hear the sanctimonious Health minister. 

They’re so busy slapping themselves on the back and praising 

their health care. Mr. Speaker, where is their compassion, and 

what are you doing about all these people, Mr. Minister, that are 

falling through the cracks in your wellness model? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the 

House that Saskatchewan is recognized as a leader in the 

provision of palliative care. Much more money has been 

directed toward palliative care in the last number of years. 

 

And I want to say to the member that in the Saskatoon Health 

District the palliative care unit provides 24-hour palliative care 

support. People do not always want to be in institutions. 

Sometimes they need palliative care in their home. And 

palliative home care has increased, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon 

by 67 per cent in 1995-96 over the previous year. 

 

It’s always a sad situation and a tragic situation when somebody 

needs palliative care, especially a young person. But I want to 

say that we’re doing a lot more in the area of palliative care 

than we have in the past, Mr. Speaker. There may be some 

improvements that can be made, and if there are improvements 

that are needed, this government wants to work on those 

improvements in cooperation with the people in Saskatoon and 

elsewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask leave of the Assembly to make a motion which 

would change the hours of sitting for the day. I will read the 

motion so that the members can hear what the intent is. The 

motion would read: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly will recess at 6 

p.m. and reconvene at 8:30 p.m. on May 13, 1997. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I therefore move, seconded by the member 

from Melfort-Tisdale: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly will recess at 6 

p.m. and reconvene at 8:30 p.m. on May 13, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, due to an oversight, by leave, we 

would like to move back to item no. 3, Bill No 227, 

introduction of Bills. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 227  The Saskatchewan Health Bill of Rights 

and Responsibilities Act 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of the 

legislature. Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 227,  

  



1600  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

The Health Care Bill of Rights and Responsibilities Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 303  The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 303  The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Chair, I move that Bill No. 303, The TD 

Trust Company Act, 1997 be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in discussions we’ve reached 

agreement with the opposition party and the third party for the 

agenda for the remainder of the day. And I would ask for leave 

of the House that we now go directly to private members’ 

public Bills to deal with Bills 209 and 234. And furthermore, 

that when we vote off those Bills, that we would proceed to 

government business for the remainder of the day. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1430) 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 209 — The Measures to Combat 

Child Prostitution Act 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity 

to speak about Bill 209 at the second reading stage in this 

House. At the close of my remarks I will be making a motion in 

relation to my Bill. Mr. Speaker, I will preface my remarks by 

citing the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 

Child. 

 

The Rights of the Child states that: 

 

Every child has the inherent right to life, and States shall  

ensure to maximum, child survival and development. 

 

States shall ensure that each child enjoys full rights without 

discrimination or distinctions of any kind. 

 

States shall protect children from physical or mental harm 

and neglect, including sexual abuse and exploitation. 

 

The child is entitled to the highest attainable standard of 

health. 

 

Children shall have time to rest and play. 

 

States shall protect children from the illegal use of drugs 

and involvement in drug production and trafficking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am speaking today about a problem. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order, the hon. member from 

Humboldt has the floor and I would ask the private 

conversations to please move behind the bar or outside the 

Chamber. I’m having trouble hearing the hon. member in her 

debate and I would ask that the House refrain from private . . . 

too loud private conversations. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am speaking today about a problem, or 

more accurately a crisis, the importance of which cannot be 

overstated and where action instead of empty rhetoric is long 

overdue. I am talking about child sexual abuse and exploitation. 

I am talking about child prostitution. 

 

As a conscientious woman, mother, human being, and legislator 

— and yes, we legislators are human — I care about the healthy 

emotional, psychological, and physical development of our 

children. I believe in the worth and dignity of every human 

being and I treasure beyond measure the lives of our children. 

My social responsibility is to work toward the betterment of all 

lives in order to better society. But most of all it is to work for 

and protect the most vulnerable members of our society, those 

children who are defenceless against the predatory and criminal 

behaviour of ruthless and exploiting adults. 

 

In a country like Canada, which according to the United 

Nations is the best country in the world for quality of life and 

Saskatchewan the best province, child prostitution is a blight 

and a blemish not to be tolerated. Not only must it not be 

tolerated, Mr. Speaker, it must be eradicated. It is fine and 

dandy to place first on the United Nations’ development 

program’s human development index. Unfortunately there is a 

marked disparity between the rhetoric about prosperity and the 

reality that many Saskatchewan families face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in December 1996 there were 39,000 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan cases involving 79,000 

recipients, which is about 8 per cent of the population. Over 

43,000 Saskatchewan children under 18 live in poverty, this in a 

province where the government boasts of its economic 

management and job creation prowess. The situation is further 

compounded by the difficulty families and communities  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

experience in attempting to voice their concerns about the 

well-being of children. 

 

A case in point was the recent rash of car thefts and near-fatal 

encounters with police in Regina. And what was the Minister of 

Justice’s response? His response, hard as it is to believe, was 

that car theft was not a serious problem. He quickly changed his 

tune however when everyone else — police, parents, youth, 

judges — disagreed with the minister and thought it a problem 

worthy of some attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it took a rash of car thefts to really focus the 

public’s and politicians’ attention, albeit only for a short period, 

on a problem of endemic proportions. Similarly, child 

prostitution in Regina only receives significant public attention 

with the recent release of the City of Regina Crime Prevention 

Commission report on child prostitution and the attendant 

media reporting. 

 

The report is illuminating and disturbing, and echoes the 

findings and conclusions in other jurisdictions. The 

commissioners identify child prostitution as a priority because 

of the children’s vulnerability as well as the long-term 

consequences to our children and our community if child 

prostitution is not stopped. 

 

How do you eliminate child prostitution? And make no mistake 

about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anything less than total 

elimination is unacceptable. 

 

My Bill, which I will have more to say about a little later, is a 

concrete step in excising this cancerous community sore. It does 

so by targeting the perpetrators of child prostitution — the 

pedophiles and the rapists. I fully recognize that my Bill or any 

criminal and any punitive legislation only deals with the 

symptoms of a much broader and deep-rooted community 

problem. 

 

Such legislation however, as has been recognized and acted 

upon in Alberta and Manitoba, is an essential step with potential 

dramatic short-term results, while the policies and programs and 

support structure and services necessary for treating the 

underlying causes of child prostitution are developed and 

improved and implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I referred earlier to the fact that there are 43,000 

Saskatchewan children living in poverty and 79,000 people are 

dependent on the social assistance plan. Mr. Speaker, poverty 

and lack of employment opportunities are the root cause of 

many social ills and crimes including child prostitution. 

 

Unemployment, poverty, and the inability to provide for one’s 

family and loved ones inflicts a debilitating emotional and 

psychological humiliation that results in family breakdown. 

This is particularly true when there is little or no hope for 

employment and improved family prospects because of the lack 

of appropriate education and skills or family circumstances. 

Inevitably, the ones that suffer the most are the children — too 

young to understand and fend for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Children Off The Streets research project by  

the Regina Aboriginal Human Services Co-operative lucidly 

describes the conditions that give rise to child prostitution. And 

I quote: 

 

Poor children suffer greater risks and have a markedly 

inferior quality of life, compared to economically 

advantaged children. 

 

Poor children have more than twice the rate of emotional 

and behavioral disorders, poor school performance, regular 

tobacco use and the lack of social skills. 

 

They have a greater risk of chronic health problems and are 

more likely to grow up in one parent families where there 

is overcrowding in the home, disturbed family 

relationships, and parental psychiatric disturbance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is widespread consensus that while the 

freedom and the fast-paced life of the street do lure some youth 

to leave home, the vast majority of children are fleeing from 

intolerable home situations, plagued by physical and sexual 

abuse, and alcoholism and other addictions. 

 

This verse from the Alberta report on child prostitution titled 

“Nobody Understands” says more than volumes of reports and 

statistics about how these children feel: 

 

Cold, scared, haven’t eaten in three days 

It’s like a game out there, but a board game, that is. 

Try & make money — but don’t end up dead. 

See — if you look at it from my eyes, 

You would see that we hookers aren’t so bad 

Most of us are children — 12, 13 years old 

So that makes us children of the night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I noted earlier, child prostitution has not in the 

past attracted much public attention or concern. The reason, Mr. 

Speaker, to put it bluntly, is because most of the victims are 

native children. It grieves me to say this, but I suspect that if the 

large majority of victims were white children, there would have 

been great public outcry a long time ago, and concrete 

government action would also have been taken long ago. 

 

The victims of child prostitution are mostly aboriginal children 

because aboriginal people are largely outside the economic 

mainstream. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today people of Indian ancestry make up 

the fourth largest group in Saskatchewan’s population. The 

majority no longer live on reserves or isolated communities. 

Instead, they live in both rural and urban settings in all areas of 

the province, caught in a twilight zone between their traditional 

reservation culture and the urban mainstream culture, and often 

living in ghettos in substandard housing, owned sometimes by 

absentee landlords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the beginning of settlement more than a 

century ago, aboriginal and non-aboriginal cultures have been 

in conflict. Traditional cultures have been eroded by white 

people’s value system and education system which forces 

Indian and Metis children to learn not of their history and their  

  



1602  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

successes, but of their failures. 

 

Education is the key to resolving this clash of cultures and 

cultural conflicts and to providing the native students with the 

required skills in education to tear themselves away from the 

vicious and perpetual circle of minimal education — no skills, 

no jobs; welfare; poverty; violence; crime; child prostitution. 

Any vestiges of stereotyped and negative images of aboriginal 

peoples in instructional materials and in classrooms must be 

replaced by positive ones. Education programs must be adapted 

so that children who’s learning styles are influenced by their 

cultural backgrounds are not at a disadvantage. 

 

I urge and challenge the Minister of Education to ensure that the 

education system and curricula accommodate the needs and 

aspirations of aboriginal people. Not until aboriginal people feel 

like full and equal partners in the economy and society will we 

be a community of the whole. And not until then will the root 

causes of child prostitution be eradicated for good. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the long-term solution. In the meantime 

we must act immediately to target and charge those who prey 

on those children and who live off their avails. It is the 

government’s responsibility to provide the means whereby all 

citizens enjoy life in a safe and a healthy environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities and community organizations are 

willing and they’re chomping at the bit to do their part and 

government must do its part. Presently, you are not providing 

the legislative protection required for the children of the night, 

and so in effect you are contributing to the continued neglect 

and abuse of our children. Why are you failing to act? Why are 

you dragging your feet? There is no time to be lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the life expectancy of a child prostitute is eight 

years. Within eight years she or he will either be dead or 

destroyed from drugs and abuse. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the time 

for studies is long past. The government has it within its powers 

to do the right thing. Manitoba has passed legislation that treats 

the children as the victims they are, and targets and penalizes 

the pimps and the johns. 

 

In Alberta, all parties of the government, each party, have 

agreed to the necessity for such legislation. The federal 

government on April 14, 1997 passed Bill C-27, amendments to 

the Criminal Code to enforce harsher penalties on those 

involved in the child prostitution trade. 

 

My Bill 209, An Act to Implement Measures to Combat Child 

Prostitution in Saskatchewan parallels the Alberta, Manitoba, 

and federal legislation, and would be a major step for the 

enforcement of laws to protect Saskatchewan’s children from 

the abomination of child prostitution. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to list some of things that I hope to 

accomplish with the passage of this Bill: (1) identifying 

prostitutes under the age of 18 as victims of sexual abuse and 

the men who prey on them as sexual abusers; (2) expanding the 

coverage of The Child and Family Services Act in order to  

protect young people 18 and under if they are being sexually 

abused and exploited through prostitution; (3) permitting 

government authorities and Justice officials to offer the 

treatment and services that child prostitutes desperately need to 

overcome abusive situations in their home life or drug 

dependency problems; (4) and finally, the measures to combat 

child prostitution would allow Social Services officials to 

accept gifts for the purpose of establishing safe recovery houses 

for child prostitutes — such safe houses are considered by 

community and outreach organizations as an indispensable 

requirement for combating child prostitution. 

 

So to the ministers of Social Services and Justice, I implore you 

to act now. Please do not resort to Ottawa bashing and buck 

passing. This is too important to be lobbed back and forth like a 

ping-pong ball between Regina and Ottawa while there are 

child prostitutes catching AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) and venereal diseases and dying. 

 

The Liberal caucus will cooperate with you to the fullest extent 

to pass my Bill, or any Bill that accomplishes its intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will close with another verse titled, “Forgotten 

Souls.” 

 

Not because we choose to turn to the streets, 

But because everyone else chose to forget us. 

We do need help — but you have to understand 

That we grew up with neglect, abuse, and hurt. 

We don’t know how or what to say when we need help. 

Until then, we stay as children of the night 

With lots of questions — questions in the wind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I choose not to forget and I will not rest until there 

are no more children of the night. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 209 be read a 

second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And first 

of all let me say that it is my pleasure to make a few comments 

in this debate. And I want to commend the hon. member from 

Humboldt for putting forth this initiative and also for her very 

thoughtful comments on a issue that she feels obviously very 

passionate about. 

 

Certainly it’s the responsibility of opposition members not just 

to criticize but to put forth constructive ideas and I want to 

acknowledge that I appreciate the hon. member doing that. 

 

And that the whole question of child prostitution — which I 

prefer to call sexual abuse — is simply not acceptable, not 

tolerated. And I think that’s been made clear by the Minister of 

Social Services, Minister of Justice, that we on this side 

certainly take that position very strongly. 

 

Indeed we’ve taken the historic position, as a government three 

or four years ago, that there’s a zero tolerance level on family 

violence. I think perhaps the only legislature in Canada,  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

provincially, who’s brought in legislation to deem that as such 

and put a program in place to deal with that. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member that I’m no expert in the 

family service . . . Child and Family Services Act, but I’ve also 

been able to take through some of the amendments to that Act 

in this legislature in the past. And I’ve looked at her Bill very 

carefully, as I know the Minister of Social Services and the 

department have. 

 

And I say this with the most respect possible — I really mean 

that — and that is that the Bill, while I appreciate the initiative, 

really does not add anything that isn’t there already and that 

isn’t being done already. I say this with the greatest of respect. 

It is a good initiative but it is already possible within the current 

Child and Family Services Act and it is already occurring. So 

the two provisions, that is safety and enhanced protection to 

young people 18 and under, is being provided already. And I 

support the spirit of that intent. 

 

Secondly, this notion of gifts is already possible under the Act. 

And so while I applaud the initiative, I agree with the Minister 

of Social Services, that it really does not add anything that isn’t 

there now and isn’t happening now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t mean I don’t value the initiative; 

I really do. I also think it’s important — and I don’t think this is 

federal bashing; I hope the member doesn’t see it this way — 

but I also think it is important, because the Alberta report makes 

this clear too, that the Criminal Code changes that in a sense 

died on the order paper with the call of the federal election, or 

while it is not proclaimed yet, the federal Criminal Code 

changes which would make the gathering of evidence easier and 

make it easier for young people to testify and would allow their 

evidence to be heard in an easier fashion, through screens and 

so on and monitors and so on, that is very important legislation 

that would go a long way to . . . I think even would go further 

than the member’s Bill to actually getting the convictions, 

which has been the major problem. 

 

So this isn’t federal bashing, but the federal government needs 

to also make sure that they’re on board and that the Criminal 

Code amendments are in fact proclaimed. And I see the hon. 

member from North Battleford agrees. So I think that’s a 

partnership more than fed bashing. 

 

But I’m really sad that that died on the order paper because I 

think that that is the initiative that Alberta and all the provinces 

and territories want. I think that would have been very, very 

important. 

 

And I have never heard the hon. member from Humboldt 

acknowledge that that is a problem, that the Criminal Code 

changes should not be speeded up and endorsed. Because I 

think that would make major changes that would be supportive 

to what she’s trying to do here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. member, the points she 

made about poverty, I agree with those. I agree that the level of 

family poverty in Canada is unacceptable and that’s a blight on 

all of us. But as she was speaking, I’m wondering — and I say  

this again with the greatest respect — I’m wondering why the 

member’s party was critical of the minimum wage increase 

which gives more money to working families. I was thinking, 

why the member’s party did not say anything about the federal 

government pulling out of the social housing . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I mean these are valid questions on my 

part. I’m wondering why the member’s party voted against 

part-time benefits for part-time employees. 

 

When they had the opportunity, they voted against those pieces 

of legislation that would have enhanced the income for low 

income families. I wondered again why the member’s party 

voted against this budget on the initial vote which actually gave 

more money to increase the Family Income Plan for low 

income families. 

 

Now why would you have voted against that? Why would you 

have voted against a budget that doubled the money in the 

action plan for children that put $250,000 directly into the cause 

you’re just trying to promote, and put another $12 million in 

other support for low income families, many of them of 

aboriginal background? Why you would have voted against that 

baffles me. It really baffles me. 

 

I’m really wondering about this concern about poverty because 

those things were designed to help. Those things were brought 

in to help and you voted against those. So when you’re talking 

about that 12-year-old on the street with this important story, 

think about why you voted against those measures that would 

have helped her family to get more food for her. 

 

So I think it’s important to think about that. So the crusade has 

got to be a multi-dimensional crusade as well, and a consistent 

one. 

 

Now I would say that to say that the province is doing nothing 

is really unfair. I have to say that with the greatest of respect, 

because whether you like it or not the action plan for children, 

that puts $25 million into the kind of programs that you want, is 

a nationally renowned program. 

 

That doesn’t mean to say it’s perfect and it’s going far enough, 

but it is a nationally renowned program in this sense, that it 

prioritizes the support for children and their families — 

especially poor children and their families. Secondly, it is a 

model for government departments and agencies working 

together. And thirdly, it’s a model for government working with 

the community in a integrated way in partnership. 

 

So I think that that sort of an approach is a strong message that 

we’re not doing . . . it’s not that we’re not doing anything. I 

think that we’re recognized as trying to do a great deal to 

prioritize children in this work to children. 

 

We also — and this is somewhat historic — have signed 10 

agreements with first nations bands and tribal councils to 

support them to develop their own child welfare services, and 

services to children. Now surely all members in this Assembly 

would support that initiative, because that allows and supports 

aboriginal people to develop their own services. 

 

  



1604  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

So, Mr. Speaker, from our point of view, we believe that this 

initiative is positive, but it is already being done. We believe 

that the five-point strategy outlined last week by the Minister of 

Social Services and the Minister of Justice, which is designed to 

get children off the street, to create working protocols within 

the community, between the community and government — 

that is all the parties working together — to organize 

community resources to focus on the very concern that this Bill 

addresses, and then to work towards toward long-term strategies 

— those four objectives are consistent with what the member 

would like to see, I think, and with her Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that we agree that this 

sexual abuse of children is not acceptable. That this is abuse 

that we will, as outlined last week, bring down the full force of 

the law on johns and those who are abusers. We have put 

specific money, the 250,000 plus the additional money in the 

action plan for children, towards this particular problem, which 

would result in additional outreach services, perhaps safe 

houses. I can’t prejudge what the communities are going to 

decide, where they’re going to decide to prioritize. But we’re 

also . . . there’s a commitment to make sure that if there is any 

way we can enhance the legislation, that is ongoing and we will 

continue to look at that. 

 

And of course we will continue to urge the federal government 

to partner here to pass those important changes to the Criminal 

Code, and along with an important informational campaign and 

the educational process that the hon. member from Humboldt is 

promoting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for the initiative. 

I’m going to vote against this Bill, not because I don’t support 

it, but because it does not add anything that is not already 

possible and is not being done already. 

 

And I hope that it’s seen in that spirit; I hope it’s seen in that 

spirit. And that does not mean that I don’t appreciate the 

initiative. But what she’s advocating, plus more, is already 

being done and will continue to be done and I look forward to 

working with her as we deal with this together in a depoliticized 

way. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Is the member wishing to close 

debate? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The hon. member from Humboldt is 

wishing to close debate and it is my duty to warn the Assembly 

that the debate is about to be closed and that any member 

wishing to speak on this must do so now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to offer my thank you to the comments of 

the member opposite regarding child prostitution. Why? 

Because it really outlines for me, in a sense, the lack of 

dedication to action on the part of this government. What this 

government does or does not do in regard to child prostitution,  

or anything else, speaks very loudly to what is really important 

to them. 

 

Now my Bill . . . if one would look into The Child and Family 

Services Act, we would recognize that there is nothing there 

that provides for protection of child prostitutes. Child 

prostitutes are not even named in that Bill from what I have 

seen. We want to extend protection to children that are victims 

of child prostitution; protection in the means of services and 

any other protection that children that are sexually abused in 

their home are entitled to. That is where the difference is. 

 

(1500) 

 

Once children are in fact stated as being child prostitutes and 

that they are being exploited, that constitutes child sexual abuse. 

And it follows, hon. member opposite, that those people 

abusing that person would be then having to face the 

repercussions through the amendments to the Criminal Code 

that have been put forth. 

 

Now you have mentioned that the amendments to the Criminal 

Code have not been passed, if I understood you correctly, and I 

recognize that they have been passed. And we will urge the 

federal government to proclaim that Act. There is no doubt 

about that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at the number of things that 

could be done in order to combat child prostitution — and just a 

few of them that I have put forward in my Bill — one of them 

surrounding the ability of the minister or his officials to receive 

monies or buildings or labour or work or any contributions to 

contribute towards the needs that the many people out there in 

communities have in order to establish safe houses, I am 

amazed that that’s something that is not acceptable to you. 

Those kind of measures are necessary to make clear to the 

public and to yourselves that those things can be done, and that 

it does open up the door for people in this province to recognize 

that there is an avenue that they can donate so that this problem 

of child prostitution can be combated. 

 

I would also like to comment for a moment on the why and why 

and why questions that you put forward about why I didn’t 

support the budget. I would like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that although there are some measures in the budget that 

everyone would agree with, there are many that we cannot 

agree with. If the bulk of the budget is something we cannot 

agree with, then we would have to speak against it. It’s very 

simple. And that is why I did vote against the budget. 

 

Rather than ask the why’s and the why’s and the why’s and 

mentioning your $250,000 announced for youth outreach 

initiatives, I would like to remind your government of how they 

could spend some money towards this initiative. 

 

First and foremost, I would ask you to please take the half a 

million dollars from now on that you put forward for every 

Roughrider party that lasts for one day and throw it out to the 

children that need it, to those people trying to help children. 

That half a million dollars was double the amount that you put 

in for one whole year to combat child prostitution in the form of  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

youth outreach. I disagree with that kind of priority. 

 

I also would like to mention the $250 for the . . . plus 31 million 

for purchasing and upgrading a Guyanan power company — a 

major risk. 

 

We have a bigger risk right here on our streets that we could put 

that money towards. That’s a combination and a total of $246 

million. I would like to use some of that towards child 

prostitution. 

 

There are other monies that I could mention here that we could 

certainly redirect, and depending on government priorities, I 

guess it’s up to you. Ultimately you hold the purse-strings. 

 

I would also like to mention just one more statement. We have 

been in contact with Egadz in Saskatoon. There are 200 . . . 

over 200 child prostitutes in Saskatoon right now. There is a 

population of 200,000 people. Now that ratio of 200:200,000 

means that 1 in 1,000 people living in Saskatoon are child 

prostitutes. That’s alarming. 

 

We have also some mention from Bill Thibodeau of Egadz that 

as he read your measures that you put across, or the minister put 

across the other day to combat child prostitution, his comment 

was that these measures do not go even close to far enough. It 

simply is not going to do the trick. 

 

I think what we need to do is we need to re-examine our 

priorities. There are other provinces around that have really 

looked into this, B.C. (British Columbia) being one of them. I 

invite you to look there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot say strongly enough how 

important this issue is. The problems of our children’s lives 

being decimated on the streets is in fact growing and growing 

and growing. We have many, many concerned citizens out 

there, and the quality of life and the kind of province we want 

to be living in is up to us to determine. 

 

I believe firmly that children need to have adults caring and 

protecting them. That is why the United Nations put forth the 

Rights of the Child. They have no one else to depend on. 

 

This government will leave a legacy someday, Mr. Speaker, and 

everyone in this province will be looking to that legacy. I would 

suggest that they first and foremost look to the needs of our 

children and those minority groups that need it the most. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

Bill No. 234 — The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement Revocation Act (No. 2) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

once again to discuss this government’s unfair Crown 

construction tendering policy or their so-called fair wage policy  

brought in by the NDP members opposite. 

 

I’m also pleased to have the opportunity to bring this Act to a 

vote today because it will clearly show the people of 

Saskatchewan who is in favour of this costly, unnecessary 

pay-off to the unions of this province and who stands for fair 

and open government tendering in this province as well. 

 

It’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP forced through this 

unnecessary labour legislation over the past few years since 

they still have to gain back some political support of unions. It 

doesn’t matter that the legislation wasn’t needed or that it 

would kill jobs or that it doesn’t make any sense. The NDP 

didn’t care at all about that. All they cared about was scoring a 

few political points and paying off a few political debts. 

 

The same is true for the leaked memo prepared by the 

Department of Economic Development — the department that 

we pay experts for advice on very important economic policies 

and ideas. 

 

As I recall, it wasn’t very long ago that there was a leaked 

memo from the department of economics that talked about how 

this policy would be seen as a pay-off to the unions, and that it 

would be costly to the taxpayers. Any responsible government 

would have listened to the advice of the officials on this issue 

and scrapped the whole idea in the first place. But not the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did the NDP government do with its memo prepared by 

the professionals? Well they took one look at it and they 

decided against what was right for the Saskatchewan people, 

against what would create jobs for Saskatchewan people, 

against the advice of their own department, and did what they 

thought was good for them politically, and only politically. 

 

It’s pretty sad, Mr. Speaker, that a leaked memo has to surface 

several months later providing . . . proving that the PC caucus 

was right all along, that the concerns brought by our caucus — 

and the business community brought the same concerns — the 

Economic Development officials brought to the people as well. 

 

From the very beginning, our caucus along with the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business, the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, and other organizations were against the NDP’s 

union-preference Crown tendering policy. 

 

We took this position for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

This policy is unfair to non-union contractors and non-union 

construction employees. It significantly increases the cost to 

taxpayers by as much as 30 per cent. And it forces non-union 

contractors to subsidize union contractors through additional 

fees and the like. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what did the NDP say when those concerns 

were brought up? They said their union-preference tendering 

policy, otherwise know as the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement, CCTA, was not a pro-union policy; that it would 

mean fair tendering and that there would be no increased cost to 

the taxpayers. 

  



1606  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Well last May, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we found out that that 

simply wasn’t the case. Last year we found out that the NDP 

were misleading the public on this issue right from the very 

start and that we were right all along. A leaked memo from the 

Department of Economic Development to the minister, dated 

November 19, 1994, revealed the department recommended 

against implementing this policy. 

 

In fact the memo describes the CCTA as a union-preference 

policy instead of a fair wage policy that the government tried to 

promote, and that union contractors would receive 15 to 20 per 

cent more for their work than they would ordinarily. It further 

states that the CCTA could increase Crown construction tenders 

by as much has 30 per cent. 

 

So I guess the PC caucus and the business community, all we 

say can is, I told you so. 

 

In addition to what Mr. Romanow has told others to sell their 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. I think the member 

knows that he is not to use proper names in addresses to the 

Legislative Assembly of someone that is presently sitting in the 

House, and I would ask him to withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  In addition to what the Premier has told the 

people of this province, he’s also told his members to go out 

and sell, and sell this unfair policy. The memo also states that 

the bureaucrats were instructed to prepare an article for the 

NDP’s party magazine, The Commonwealth. 

 

You have to really wonder about that. The Department of 

Economic Development officials are supposed to be 

non-partisan; they’re supposed to be non-partisan. Yet they 

engaged in this activity on instructions from this government 

that they would prepare information and prepare a policy to sell 

to the people of Saskatchewan in the NDP party magazine, The 

Commonwealth. 

 

The memo also stated . . . also called for a letter-to-the-editor 

campaign and approached a few employers to contact specific 

business and political reporters for pre-announcement, positive 

stories on similar union-preference agreements. One editorial 

has put it: 

 

Getting business to manipulate reporters; writing phoney 

letters to the editor; civil servants writing for The 

Commonwealth — our hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars at 

work. It makes the last 14 per cent SaskPower hike seem 

all that much more worthwhile. 

 

The issue however isn’t over. This so-called internal review of 

this policy certainly wasn’t a valid one. The public heard about 

the many facts about the CCTA from the review, as they did 

about the memo sent to the minister three years ago. 

 

We’ve called on the NDP to scrap this policy altogether. We’ve 

called on the NDP to conduct an independent review of this 

policy. And we think it is the very least that this government 

should do. Unfortunately, I doubt Saskatchewan taxpayers will  

get even that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve brought forward this legislation 

today. By supporting Bill No. 234, all members of this 

Assembly could show that they believe in fair government 

tendering — they believe each and every tender awarded to the 

government should be awarded to the lowest qualified bidder. 

They could show that contracts shouldn’t be awarded based on 

who has more union workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the CCTA is blatantly unfair. Although the NDP 

can’t hide this fact, they certainly try to deny this fact. The 

minister responsible for Labour gets up and puts on his best 

poker face and says things like, there’s no proof that this policy 

is costing taxpayers any money. But there is proof, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s plenty of proof. 

 

The leaked memo outlined how much money this would cost 

taxpayers. The Economic Development minister stood in this 

House last year and said, this policy costs taxpayers money. 

Everyone knows this policy costs taxpayers money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know this policy has caused many a rift between 

government members. It has to have if MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) are standing up for their constituents. It’s 

certain the minister responsible for Economic Development 

isn’t in favour of this policy. I’m certain of that, because it hurts 

job creation and it doesn’t make any economic sense in this 

province. 

 

I’m sure there are other members of cabinet that recognize how 

ridiculous this policy is as well. Those MLAs representing rural 

areas of this province should be ashamed that this policy was 

even considered — rural contractors being forced to hire union 

workers from large centres instead of giving work to their 

long-time, non-union employees. This policy has forced small 

contractors in rural areas to lay off their own sons — their own 

sons, in some cases — to hire union workers from cities to 

complete work. And very few construction workers and union 

employees even believe that this policy makes sense 

themselves. 

 

And this all comes from a party that likes to call themselves 

democrats. They like to call themselves democrats — people 

who believe in fairness; people who believe that everyone 

should be treated the same; people who stand in the legislature 

on a daily basis and say they are the ones that stand up for 

people who can’t stand up for themselves. 

 

That’s what they say in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. They are 

the ones opposite over there that stand before everyone in 

Saskatchewan and say that they stand up for what they believe 

in. They stand up for a principled way of governing this 

province. 

 

They stand up for, in this case — they stand up for, in this case 

— what they think is good for them politically and they could 

care less what it costs the taxpayers of this province. And they 

could care less what it does for anyone but what they think is 

best for them politically. Isn’t that incredible? 

 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

You have a government opposite who says, so what if it costs 

taxpayers money; so what if it’s unfair; we’re going to do it 

anyway because our political hides demand it. That’s what it 

means. 

 

It means pork-barrel politics at its worst. It means bringing in 

legislation to promote an agenda that is unfair; that even the 

most wild-eyed socialist over there in their heart of hearts 

realizes it isn’t fair. They realize that it isn’t fair but they could 

care less about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are a few exceptions. I think the Minister of 

Economic Development knows the policy isn’t fair because it 

hurts job creation and it doesn’t make any sense. But he also 

realizes that he has to have the support of unionized workers in 

this province if he hopes to become the premier of 

Saskatchewan someday. And he’s been waiting a long time for 

that. And I think he’s prepared to pay the price, whatever it 

takes — whatever it takes — just like the government members 

opposite. 

 

And everyone in Saskatchewan understands that about this 

policy, and they understand that about this government as well: 

that when the chips are down, when it really gets tough 

slugging in Saskatchewan, you can always count on the NDP 

for one thing and one thing only — to do whatever they think is 

best for them politically. It doesn’t matter. The end justifies the 

means. The end justifies the means. It doesn’t matter anything 

about anything else. 

 

(1515) 

 

It only matters about politics. It only matters about gaining the 

support, it only matters about gaining the support of people that 

they believe will help them in election campaigns, help fund 

them in election campaigns. 

 

And the minister from Regina here chirping, chirping from her 

seat saying that that’s right. Well it is right — isn’t it, Madam 

Minister? You know darn well what I’m saying is correct. You 

know darn well this policy is unfair. You know darn well it’s 

discriminatory. 

 

And again this comes from a party, this comes from a party who 

on a regular basis stands in this House and says that they 

believe that all kinds of discrimination should be wiped out 

from this legislature. They proudly display all kinds of ribbons 

and everything else to pay lip-service, to pay lip-service to the 

latest cause of the day — to pay lip-service to the latest cause of 

the day. 

 

They do that on a regular basis in here. They stand up with the 

highest level of sanctimony you can possibly imagine and 

suggest that this is fair. They bring in a policy that says, if 

you’re going to bid on a government contract in Saskatchewan, 

you have to be unionized whether you like it or not. 

 

What possible way, what possible way can you defend that as 

the great democrats that you all like to call yourselves? What 

possible defence do you have for that? Is there any defence that 

you have at all for bringing in that type of discriminatory  

policy? Is there any at all to it? Any at all, Madam Minister? Is 

there any, any possible defence for it, member from Albert 

South? Or member from Lloydminster? Or Tisdale country up 

there? 

 

Is there any possible defence for it? Is there any possible 

defence, Saskatoon Eastview? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Southeast. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Southeast. Any possible defence for it at all? Or 

does it have nothing to do with it at all? The only concern is, is 

to make sure you get elected again, is to make sure that the 

unionized people in this province continue to fund your election 

campaigns. 

 

Does it have anything . . . You know I really believe in 

Saskatchewan, people would have a lot more respect for you as 

a party if you’d at least stand up and say yes, that’s right. That’s 

exactly right. We believe in it because we want to promote an 

agenda in this province that says you have to be a unionized 

contractor. That we believe that that’s the proper way to have 

labour peace in this province. 

 

If you’d at least stand up and say that, then people I think would 

have some degree of respect for what you’re doing here. But no, 

you hide behind this false attitude that it’s a fair wage policy. 

You hide behind that because that’s all that there is — is trying 

to suggest to the people of Saskatchewan that somehow or 

another this is fair — when all evidence, when all around you is 

saying no, it’s not fair. Even when everyone is against you, 

political ideology is what you cling to most. 

 

And that’s shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s a shameful 

admission, I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker. When it comes down to the 

decisions between doing what is right and doing what is right 

politically for you, the NDP, you can always count on them to 

do what is right politically for them. And the rest of the 

province — tough luck. Tough luck. 

 

The vast majority of people in this province . . . Mr. Speaker, 

over 80 per cent of all construction workers in this province 

don’t belong to a union, and they shouldn’t have to unless they 

want to. No government should force people to join unions 

under any circumstance because that’s exactly what people 

don’t believe in in Saskatchewan. People in Saskatchewan have 

an inherent belief in fairness. They don’t believe this policy is 

fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the rest of the world is moving ahead, while 

states with right-to-work legislation are growing by 15 to 20 per 

cent annually, Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan NDP have 

taken a huge step backwards. And as long as they keep taking 

steps backwards, we’ll continue to lag behind Manitoba and 

Alberta in job creations, and we’ll continue to be a have-not 

province, and we’ll continue to stagnate growth, and we’ll 

continue to watch our brothers and our sisters and our sons and 

our daughters and our cousins leave this province because there 

isn’t opportunity for them here. 

 

We’ll continue to watch that happen. Each and every member  

  



1608  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

of this legislature, I’ll bet if you searched and talked to every 

one of them, they have many, many members of their family 

that would dearly love to stay in Saskatchewan but they have no 

choice. There’s no hope or there’s no dreams or there’s no 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan. They pick up and they leave. 

And the only time we hear from them is when they phone home 

to tell us how good it is in Alberta. And that’s a sad admission. 

 

It reminds me of a little story, reminds me of a little story that 

I’ve told a lot on the campaign trail. It reminds me of a little 

story that I’m going to share with you that I’ve told on the 

campaign trail. And obviously members opposite wouldn’t have 

been in the crowd — thankfully — at all of those functions. 

Reminds me of a little story. 

 

It happened about, happened about four or five years ago. I was 

invited, I was invited to a little town in my constituency called 

Eatonia to the opening of an airport. And many of my members 

have heard this story but I’m going to share it with everyone 

here today. I was asked to go over to this opening of this new 

little airport. Eatonia is a small town, 6 or 700 — 6 or 700 

people — is all there is in Eatonia but they were going to open 

up this new little airstrip this day; they’re going to open up this 

new little airstrip. And what we’re talking about is a little grass 

airstrip and a telephone booth. That’s all there is — all there is 

there. 

 

But of course you know what it’s like in rural Saskatchewan, 

anytime that there’s something going to happen like that the 

community supports it wholeheartedly. They closed the school 

down; they had all of the kids of the school at that airport 

opening that day; the band was there — the local band — they 

had everybody in the whole community turned out, in spite of 

the fact that it was about September 7, right smack dab in the 

middle of harvest. 

 

But the whole community turned out because they were so 

proud, they were so proud of the fact that they were opening up 

this little airport — this little airstrip. And so they asked me as 

the MLA to come over and say a few words, so I did. I never 

will forget this occasion — went over to it and offered my 

support to the fact that they were opening this and how proud as 

a small community to have this advance in their community. 

 

And then what happened next was they asked another 

gentleman to speak. I’d never met the man before, never met 

him at all before, but he came in to speak to the people that day. 

He got up to the podium and he said, you know this is the 

proudest day of my life. I’ve had many, many occasions to have 

honours bestowed on me but today is the proudest day of my 

life — because they were going to name this little airstrip after 

this gentleman. 

 

And he said, you know I was born and raised in Eatonia, 

Saskatchewan; I grew up there and from there I went to the 

University of Saskatchewan — he got a degree. From there he 

went to the Harvard Business School and got his M.B.A. in 

business administration; and from there he went into business; 

and from there he became the chairman of the board of Pratt & 

Whitney. The second largest aircraft engine manufacturer in the 

entire world is from Eatonia, Saskatchewan. 

And then you know what he said then — and you know what he 

said then? Ladies and gentlemen, but I have one thing that I’m 

ashamed of. I’m ashamed of the fact that I couldn’t do it in 

Saskatchewan — I couldn’t do it in Saskatchewan because there 

isn’t any dreams or there isn’t any hope or there isn’t 

opportunity here. I had to leave Saskatchewan in order to 

become successful and be able to create what I’ve been able to 

create. 

 

That’s what that gentleman said. And you looked around the 

crowd there and I think there wasn’t a dry eye in the place 

because everybody realized what that man said was true; 

everybody realized that that was the saddest testimony to this 

province that they had ever heard. 

 

He wished, he wished, he wished he had been able to do it here 

in Saskatchewan he said, but there was no support here in this 

province. There was an attitude that if you didn’t want to work 

for government or that you didn’t belong to the NDP in this 

province, that you didn’t belong in Saskatchewan. 

 

So he picked up — he picked up and he left this province and 

he created what, by most people would believe, is one of the 

biggest and proudest companies in all of the aircraft 

manufacturing in the world. Sad testimony, sad testimony to 

this province, but I think it’s one that illustrates how clearly this 

province has been mismanaged largely by a socialist attitude 

that says somehow or another we aren’t equal to the rest of the 

world. Somehow or another we have to put up walls around this 

province to keep big bad business out of Saskatchewan. 

Somehow or another we have to protect us and protect the 

people of Saskatchewan from the rest of the world. 

 

That’s what he said that day. That’s what he said to the people 

of Saskatchewan. That’s what this kind of policy does to 

Saskatchewan. That’s what you people opposite believe in. 

That’s what this kind of thing does in terms of providing our 

young people with hopes and dreams and opportunity here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You people stifle development in Saskatchewan. You people 

have done everything within your power to drive our young 

people out of Saskatchewan, and I say to you, you should be 

ashamed of yourself. You should be ashamed of a policy that 

says you have to be treated different if you are non-unionized 

and if you are unionized in Saskatchewan. Discrimination of the 

worst kind. Discrimination of the worst kind. 

 

I suggest to you that if this was taken to the Supreme Court of 

Canada, it would be struck down. You would be laughed out of 

court. Unfortunately, unfortunately, no one has the resources to 

take the Government of Saskatchewan to court except in a few 

cases — the farmers are doing it in Saskatchewan. And they’re 

going to thoroughly thump you on that one, I suspect. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that at the end of the day, at the end 

of the day, at the end of the day what we can fully expect from 

this government is policies like this. It’s policies like this that 

hurt Saskatchewan and that have always hurt Saskatchewan. 

 

(1530) 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

It’s an attitude of failure. It’s an attitude I don’t accept. It’s an 

attitude that this party doesn’t accept. And we will never accept 

that, Mr. Speaker, because it is wrong. The people of 

Saskatchewan know it’s wrong. I think the NDP knows it’s 

wrong but they don’t care — because it’s right for them 

politically — and they should be ashamed to bring in this type 

of policy. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I challenge each and every member of 

this Assembly to do the right thing now and vote in support of 

eliminating, eliminating the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement and supporting The Crown construction agreement 

revocation Act that we have before us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Would the member move the motion, 

please? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

Bill No. 234, The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

Revocation Act, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to have the opportunity to say a few words about The 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

The member from Kindersley or somewhere around there — I 

think it’s maybe Kindersley — are very opposed and his party 

is very opposed to working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The government on this 

side of the House will not participate in fighting against 

working people of the province of Saskatchewan. We will not 

participate in telling workers that they’re making too much 

money or they have too many benefits. We will not participate 

in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason why we have a Crown tendering . . . a Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is to have some fairness in the 

system. Fairness between workers; fairness between companies. 

This is what this government is all about — fairness — and 

that’s exactly what we’re trying to do in workers versus 

companies and business. 

 

Under the previous administration, before the NDP formed 

government in ’91, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a lot of 

spin-off companies created because of legislative changes to 

The Trade Union Act by the Conservative government. 

 

Why did companies spin off to non-union construction 

companies and spin off . . . Some companies, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, have hundreds of companies that are all really the 

same company, but to avoid fair wages, decent benefits to the 

workers, what did they do? — create another company so that 

they could bid on a particular contract and avoid the fairness. 

 

Do you know that Ontario wouldn’t do that? Manitoba — 

Conservative Manitoba — wouldn’t do that. But what did we 

do in Saskatchewan? We did it. 

 

I have no idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it’s because of political 

donations to the parties opposite. I don’t know that. But I’d say 

one might say that it could be because of political donations by 

the large corporations to the members opposite, that maybe 

that’s why they allowed spin-off companies in the ’80s. I don’t 

know that, but that’s what some people say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

If we would have either of those parties governing the province 

today it would be like Alabama North, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There would be no minimum wage. There would be no fairness 

for workers in the workplace. 

 

There are reasons for the CTA, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s 

to promote and maintain a stable, qualified workforce on 

projects, and ensure that all employees working on projects are 

treated fairly. 

 

The agreement was the result of the previous administration’s 

legislation that allowed construction companies, as I mentioned 

earlier, to double-breast. That’s where a company which has a 

collective agreement in place can establish a spin-off — a 

non-unionized entity — to bid on contracts. 

 

It was felt that there was a need to ensure that unionized 

workers had access to a least some of the construction jobs 

tendered by government. This was considered desirable because 

it would keep skilled tradesmen in the province of 

Saskatchewan, encourage apprenticeship training, and provide 

wages fair to workers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — not one-sided, not just for big business or big 

construction companies, but a balance between workers and 

construction companies; fairness for everybody to make a 

decent living in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s little stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the opposition 

parties like to say about the Crown Tendering Agreement. And 

I just want to correct some of those stories — that false 

information about the CCTA, just for the record, as the member 

from Saskatoon mentions. 

 

In 1997 the Crown corporations under the agreement planned to 

source $220.269 million in capital projects. They estimate that 

the projects which would qualify under the CCTA would 

amount to $38.561 million. About 17 per cent of the Crown 

projects will fit under the CCTA and they’re still saying, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that it’s not fair. 

 

Well it isn’t fair to the unionized workers of this province, and I 

agree with that. They would have no minimum wage, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They would have no benefits for workers. It 

would be Alabama North in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

wonder about child labour — what their feelings are on child 

labour is, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It is important to note that there is nothing in the CCTA stating 

that you have to be a union firm to bid on the CCTA contract. 

But do the members opposite say that? No they don’t. They like 

to spread little innuendoes and little falsehoods about the 

CCTA, but it’s not fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

  



1610  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Just like you have to pay union-based wages and benefits, and 

hire a certain number of employees from the union halls, which 

strengthens our apprenticeship programs and keeps workers in 

Saskatchewan living in Saskatchewan and working in 

Saskatchewan. We are not bringing in employees, or as many, 

from outside of the province. 

 

Our economy is growing; it’s bustling. We have a very vibrant 

economy — something that the opposition members will not 

admit to. But we know it here that the province of 

Saskatchewan is doing very good. 

 

In construction . . . house construction is way up, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We need a lot of workers in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we need a strong workforce, both union and 

non-union. And that’s what this government wants — is 

fairness. 

 

Where a contractor not subject to a collective bargaining 

agreement secures work in a project, it is agreed by the parties 

that the regular employees of that contractor will be exempt 

from the collective bargaining agreement mandatory 

requirement to join the union, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is agreed under the terms of the CCTA that there will be no 

lockouts or work stoppages during the course of the contract. 

Do we hear anything about that from the members opposite? Do 

we hear from them that the CCTA prevents lockouts and strikes 

during a job? 

 

No, we don’t. They’re just worried about the worker getting too 

much salary. Well what is too much salary, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? I don’t know what too much salary is. I don’t know 

what too much benefit is. I don’t understand that. The workers I 

know struggle to make a living just like the rest of us. 

 

But no, the members opposite are very much against workers 

getting a decent salary and decent benefits in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I’m going to take my place now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I’m going to vote against the Bill from the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:40 p.m. until 3:43 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 12 

 

McLane Gantefoer Draude 

Osika Bjornerud Belanger 

Hillson Julé Boyd 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

 

Nays — 25 

 

Van Mulligen Tchorzewski Johnson 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Calvert Teichrob 

Pringle Koenker Trew 

Bradley Renaud Cline 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Jess Langford 

Murrell   

 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Bill No. 210 Removed from Order Paper 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Before proceeding to 

the next order of business, I have a ruling to make with respect 

to Bill No. 210, being item No. 7 under the private members 

public Bills and orders, second readings. 

 

I draw to the attention of the members that, until the disposal of 

Bill No. 234, The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

Revocation Act (No. 2) moments ago, this Assembly had two 

Bills on the order paper with the same purpose. Bill No. 210, 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act 

proposed by the member from Cypress Hills, is in fact identical 

to Bill No. 234. 

 

It is the practice of this Assembly that in such instances, once 

the Assembly has given or refused second reading of one Bill, 

the Speaker must prevent any further consideration of the other 

Bill. 

 

Order. I refer members to recent rulings of the Chair, dated June 

1, 1994 and May 9, 1994. Because the Assembly has refused 

second reading of Bill No. 234, it is necessary that I order Bill 

No. 210 to be removed from the order paper. 

 

(1545) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill No. 70 amends The Archives Act. The Archives Act is the 

legislation which sets out the powers and duties of the 

Saskatchewan Archives Board in managing the documentary 

history of Saskatchewan. Our government is committed to 

ensuring that the documentary heritage of this province is 

properly acquired, preserved, arranged, described, and made 

available to the public. 

 

There is only one amendment in this Bill. This amendment 

speaks to obligations undertaken by the Archives Board when it 

enters into agreements with donors of documents. Clearly the 

Archives Board wishes to obtain and preserve documents that 

reflect important milestones in our history. In doing so, the 

rights and wishes of donors should be respected. By ensuring 

that donor agreements are respected, we are in a better position 

to attract donations that will help build a fuller and more 

complete story of our proud Saskatchewan heritage. 

 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

Mr. Speaker, we all understand the need to achieve a balance 

between providing information and protecting the rights of 

donors. If we did not protect the rights of donors, we would be 

left with no information to share because donors would be 

reluctant to deposit their documents. The Saskatchewan 

Archives is one of the few public Archives to attract many 

private donations which have helped to create the most 

complete and well-rounded Archives in North America. 

 

This legislation is about balancing the interests of public access 

to archival information with an individual donor’s right to retain 

some authority over his or her donation. This is particularly 

important where agreements were entered into between the 

Archives Board and donors prior to the introduction of The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

We don’t believe that new legislation should rewrite the rules 

which were agreed to on an individual and private basis by the 

Archives Board and the donor. The provisions of such 

agreements must be respected and be the paramount 

consideration in the relationship between the donor and the 

Archives Board if we are to preserve the integrity of our 

Archives and encourage its continued support. 

 

We believe this amendment is in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people and enhances the ability of the Archives 

Board to fulfil its mandate. I hope that members on all sides of 

the House recognize the merit of this amendment and show 

their support for this Bill. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move second reading of Bill No. 70, 

An Act to amend The Archives Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 

pleasure today to speak to the Assembly on The Archives Act 

which was read for the first time in the Legislative Assembly 

yesterday. 

 

We understand that there are two parts to the freedom of 

information legislation that this government passed in 1992. 

The first part is to ensure that certain information about private 

individuals cannot be disclosed without their consent. The 

second part of the legislation deals with access to public 

information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government passed this legislation, 

which was introduced by the former Tory government, they 

stated that despite their initial opposition to the Tory freedom of 

information Act, they believed it could service Saskatchewan 

well if administered in the proper spirit. 

 

In today’s information age, it is important to have freedom of 

information legislation. However, the NDP government stated 

in 1992, when they passed the Bill, that they would be 

monitoring the situation and would make the necessary 

amendments to the legislation, which they initially deemed to 

be a watered-down version of legislation in other jurisdictions. 

 

It is clear, Mr. Speaker, that this government has done nothing 

to monitor the effects of this legislation. Too often the 

government utilizes this legislation as the freedom from 

disclosing public information rather than access to public 

information. Private citizens are often amazed at the 

information that this government does not want it to know. 

 

Because of this constant secrecy, when the government 

introduced this legislation yesterday, it sparked the interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Although it is possible that this is 

non-controversial legislation and that it is necessary for the 

proper function of the Archives Board, Mr. Speaker, the people 

question the motives of this government. Mr. Speaker, people 

are asking themselves, what does this government have to hide? 

And maybe you don’t. Maybe your government and the 

previous governments have nothing to hide, but, Mr. Speaker, 

let me say that by refusing on a regular basis to provide basic 

information on government investments and invoking such 

secrecy legislation, you beg the question, what is the 

government hiding? 

 

It is my understanding that in other jurisdictions, that cabinet 

records are made public after a period of 10 years rather than 

the period of 25 years embodied in this legislation. What is so 

magical about 25 years? Could this period not be shortened to 

10 or 15 years, in the spirit of democracy and open and 

accountable government? This is one of the questions which we 

will be raising in the Committee of the Whole before we make a 

decision on this legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. Now the hon. 

member for Moosomin has just risen to make his remarks to 

this Bill and already the Chair could not hear him. I simply 

remind all hon. members that each of you have an opportunity 

to debate this Bill here in second reading, and assuming it goes 

on to committee, again there. And I ask for the cooperation of 

all hon. members and I thank you for that anticipated 

cooperation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair, and just 

for sake of me stumbling over my tongue, I will refer to you as 

Mr. Speaker from now on for clarification. 

 

I have a few brief points that I would like to make regarding the 

legislation before us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, documents that are sent to the Saskatchewan 

Archives are kept confidential for quite some time. In fact I 

understand they are not viewed until 20 years after being 

donated. In my mind that’s a long time, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

my view that after 20 years, especially in situations where 

documents are considered the property of a politician who is no 

longer is a politician, I think it’s unreasonable to deny public 

access. 

 

It would appear to us that this piece of legislation before us is to 

indeed maybe take away the ability of individuals to look at  

  



1612  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

documents through the Blakeney years. And one begins to 

wonder if there’s maybe something about the documentation 

that might be available or that we would have access to now 

that would suggest that the expropriation or the buying-up of 

the potash mines in Saskatchewan was not a very good business 

decision. And I’m sure that this amendment has a lot to do with 

the fact that former premier Allan Blakeney doesn’t want to 

release information about the Saskatchewan government’s 

buying up the potash industry in our province. 

 

And one must ask why this information shouldn’t be released at 

this time. Is it because information from the department 

suggested at the time that it wasn’t a good idea? That it would 

indeed ruin Saskatchewan’s potash industry — which we have 

seen through the years it did, but we see a substantial 

turnaround in the last three years. And I certainly commend the 

government for the initiative they took in 1995 recognizing that 

private industry could do much better than Crown corporations. 

 

Do these documents suggest that the present Premier was in 

favour of nationalizing the potash industry? The fact that he 

made a move, to indeed put the potash industry back in private 

hands. 

 

I’m not sure what these documents entail however. Twenty 

years after these decisions have been made they are history. 

And if a person endeavours and wants to present that type of 

information to the Archives, and as we’ve already heard, in the 

Archives you can only make information available if the person 

contributing it wants to make that available, it would seem to 

me that when a person contributes documents to the Archives 

Board, that they do it with the understanding that this will 

become public sooner or later. 

 

I would think, Mr. Speaker, that individuals who would feel that 

there is information they don’t really want to become public, 

would not indeed pass that information on, would not put it in 

the property of the Archives. Because down the road whether 

it’s 20 years, or 30 or 40 or 50 years, that information is bound 

to become public. So I don’t know exactly where the 

government is going with this present Bill. 

 

Bill 70, I think is unfair. I think it’s a sign of a closed 

government, a sign of individuals hiding something. And that’s 

the last thing we need in this province. Talking about a sign of 

government being closed, I understand in Public Accounts 

today, the government made another move, just to hide 

information from the public through a motion they made in 

Public Accounts with regards to CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

And it seems to me that in a lot of cases the government uses 

arguments that when . . . government members while they were 

in opposition certainly wanted to have more information and 

more openness, and I find it inconceivable that the government 

would choose to hide information rather than becoming more 

open and accountable, such as we find the Acting Government 

House Leader on many occasions refers to. If he wants to 

release information, it’s open and accountable. If he doesn’t 

respond to a question, well it’s just he doesn’t really 

acknowledge the fact that no, this isn’t open and accountable. 

So this motion before us, this Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, just is 

something that raises some questions about the openness; and 

it’s not directly dealing with the government of today, but it’s 

dealing with the information that may be available in the future. 

And that information is at the prerogative of any individual or 

government as to whether they put it in the Archives. 

 

And I would think that if a person submits documentation on 

any issue to the Archives Board, that they would certainly be 

doing it with the knowledge that it will eventually become 

public. If they don’t want information to be public even 50 

years from now, they won’t bother doing it. So I’m not exactly 

sure what the real purpose is and why we would now need to set 

some limitations. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, there are some 

concerns we have. We look forward to certainly raising those 

concerns in committee, and however I can’t support the Bill in 

its present structure. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I wish to speak very briefly on this and 

I’m pleased that Madam Minister is still present with us. I have 

a point I wish to bring before the legislature . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. I just want to 

remind the hon. member that commenting on the absence or 

presence of other members is simply not acceptable in the 

legislature and I know it was an oversight on the part of the 

hon. member. With that admonition I recognize the hon. 

member for North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I have listened to the comments of the minister 

and of the members for Athabasca and Moosomin with some 

interest, and I would like to put forward a point that I hope the 

minister will respond to. 

 

I understand that at times the Archives do receive donations 

which if they became public immediately, would be the subject 

of personal embarrassment, and that’s the reason for sealing for 

a period of time, when issues such as the hon. member from 

Moosomin has pointed out, potash nationalization is simply no 

longer an alive political issue in this province today. It is now 

an historical issue and it’s important that students of the history 

of this province have access to that. 

 

However my concern is somewhat opposite to the member from 

Moosomin. My concern is not so much that things may not go 

to the Archives because they will eventually become public. 

 

I wish to ask if there is a danger in this legislation that someone 

who has public documents that he or she does not wish to make 

public, could they then become the subject of a donation to the 

Archives so that they would automatically be sealed? 

 

(1600) 

 

And I want to know what protection is in this legislation so that, 

as I say, if I have public documents that I don’t wish to get out, 

and I don’t wish to be the subject of a freedom of information 

application, I simply donate them to the Archives, 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

 they’re automatically sealed for 20 years, and they won’t be 

seen again for a long, long time. 

 

Now as I say, I throw that out more as a question than as a 

criticism, but I would invite Madam Minister to respond to that. 

Has the department, have the draftspersons, anticipated this 

possibility and this problem, and has it been addressed in the 

preparation of this legislation? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Does the minister wish to 

close debate? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — It is my duty to inform 

the Assembly that the Minister of Municipal Affairs is 

exercising her right to close debate on Bill No. 70 — The 

Archives Amendment Act, 1997. It is also my duty to inform 

members that if they wish to enter second reading debate, they 

must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would not 

have risen and would have waited until we considered the Bill 

in Committee of the Whole, except that the members opposite 

on both sides have made some quite erroneous statements or 

misrepresentations of the facts as they are, and I don’t want to 

let that lie for another day. 

 

For one thing, the agreements that the Archives enter into with 

various donors are all subject to different terms. It’s a standard 

form of agreement but you could say as a donor, that you didn’t 

want your papers in the public realm for 25 years, or 50 years, 

or 20 years after your demise, or whatever the terms are. 

 

The problem arose when the freedom of information Act did 

not, when it was passed in 1992 — didn’t provide exceptions to 

allow for the integrity of those agreements. So that would mean 

that if someone had made an agreement for their papers to be 

not open to the public for 25 years and they’ve been only there 

for 2 years, and if someone made a freedom of information 

request, the statute would always override the agreement. So we 

need a statute of similar force in order to respect the integrity of 

agreements, particularly those agreements. 

 

I mean a donor now would be aware that there’s freedom of 

information legislation and so on. But someone who donated 

material in the ’60s, ’70s, ’80s, any time prior to 1992, would 

think that the agreement that they were honouring . . . that they 

were entering into with the Archives would be binding. And the 

freedom of information legislation would supersede that and 

allow the integrity of the agreement to be broken. And that’s a 

question of fairness, because that would be an abrogation of the 

terms that the donor agreed to. And if the donors couldn’t be 

assured that the agreement was secure, obviously there would 

be a number of valuable donations that the Archives would not 

be able to attract. 

 

A member of the third party made reference to a 20-year 

automatic period. There is no automatic period, and in fact it’s  

only by nature of the agreement. Usually the donor will . . . and 

in most cases donors will allow historians, writers, researchers 

who have a valid reason for wanting the information, they will 

give them their express permission to go into the Archives and 

to seek that. Newspaper reporters or journalists might have 

slightly different motives, but it would depend, again, on . . . 

With the consent of the donor, anyone could have access, if the 

donor consents. 

 

The case that the member from North Battleford raises about 

having items automatically sealed, nothing is automatically 

sealed and nothing is immune from the freedom of information 

legislation unless we pass this amendment, which would give 

the agreements similar force. 

 

And I do have to say on this point that, for example, the 

Thatcher administration did not submit any records to the 

Archives. So that whole period, the period of history — sad 

piece of history it was — but from 1964 to 1971, there is not 

any record in the Archives. They shredded it all. And so this is a 

very important amendment, very important to the continuing 

quality of our archival collection for the future of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next 

sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Police Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

The Police Act, 1990 serves as the framework pursuant to 

which RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) services are 

provided to rural municipalities and to the majority of urban 

municipalities. 

 

The Act currently establishes a process through which urban 

municipalities are able to contract, either through the provincial 

government or directly with the federal government, for RCMP 

services, depending on the size of the urban municipality. 

 

One of the long-standing issues in this community has been the 

disparity which exists between urban municipalities and rural 

municipalities regarding the funding for such RCMP services. 

Rural municipalities and urban municipalities under 500 people 

currently do not provide any direct funding for the RCMP 

services which they receive. 

 

As a result, larger urban municipalities have long expressed 

their view that a fairer system would be to redistribute the 

municipal portion of policing costs over all municipalities that 

benefit from the policing services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue is a difficult one but one which this 

government was compelled by fairness to address. Accordingly, 

extensive consultations and negotiations were initiated with 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 

and the RCMP in an effort to reach a consensus solution that  

  



1614  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

21would be fair to all parties. 

 

These negotiations are being conducted in the context of a 

number of new initiatives in RCMP rural policing. Subdivision 

reorganization by the RCMP will provide for staff 

redeployment to a number of rural detachments. The RCMP are 

also considering moving their record entry functions to their 

new central dispatch centre, thereby dramatically cutting down 

on the paperwork for RCMP officers in the field and increasing 

their time on the road. 

 

The RCMP are also working on establishing a new radio system 

which will support greater use of laptop and mobile computer 

terminals. This will allow RCMP members to receive updated 

electronic files without returning to their offices. A similar 

project in New Brunswick has increased on-the-road time for 

officers by 20 per cent. 

 

In further support of enhanced RCMP rural policing services, 

the government will be providing an additional $1 million to the 

RCMP provincial policing budget base. This initiative alone 

will provide for additional RCMP staff for 12 rural 

detachments. 

 

Perhaps most significantly, this government is also considering 

the RCMP models of policing proposal which would reduce the 

administrative work of 45 smaller RCMP detachments, thereby 

freeing up officers at these units to spend more time policing 

the community and surrounding municipalities. 

 

It should be stressed that in this model, none of these 

detachments will lose staff as a direct result of the model 

change. 

 

There are also important initiatives in aboriginal RCMP 

policing which will further enhance our provincial policing 

framework. Over the past four years, Saskatchewan Justice, the 

Solicitor General of Canada, RCMP, and Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations officials have attended over 250 

meetings with first nations communities throughout 

Saskatchewan. As a result of these consultations, 23 

police-community tripartite agreements covering 35 bands and 

encompassing over one-half of the on-reserve population of 

Saskatchewan have been signed. 

 

These established local police management boards to set 

policing priorities and work with the RCMP, arrangements for 

elders to work directly with the RCMP to ensure that the 

policing is consistent with first nations’ culture, and on-reserve 

RCMP officers on the larger reserves as well as additional 

clerical support and police liaison officers who will be working 

with victims. In a number of these locations, police officers will 

be living on the reserves in the communities which they are 

policing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives will facilitate restorative justice 

initiatives whereby our aboriginal communities will be 

encouraged to find solutions to problems at the local level as 

opposed to being forced to rely on the formal legal system. We 

are confident that these initiatives will reduce crime both on the 

reserves and in the neighbouring communities. 

I would also note, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has been 

able to significantly improve the services at no extra cost to the 

province. This has been done by moving RCMP positions from 

the provincial police service contract, wherein the province 

pays 70 per cent of the costs, into tripartite contracts under the 

federal first nations policing policy where the province is 

required to pay only 48 per cent of the cost. Again these savings 

allow us to focus on and enhance our rural policing network. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consultations with SARM, SUMA, and the 

RCMP with respect to cost redistribution are not yet finalized. 

Accordingly, this Bill is intended to facilitate the 

implementation of a new model for redistributing part of the 

cost of RCMP services, the details of which will be contained in 

the regulations. 

 

This Bill provides for the following major changes. The 

introduction of a global agreement between the provincial and 

federal governments to provide RCMP services in those urban 

municipalities that previously contracted through the provincial 

government but now consent to participate in the global 

agreement. 

 

Secondly, amendments to existing agreements between urban 

municipalities and the federal government for RCMP services. 

The province of Saskatchewan will undertake the financial 

obligations of those urban municipalities who consent to 

amending their agreement. 

 

And finally the establishment of a cost-distribution formula to 

redistribute the costs to provide policing services from those 

urban municipalities that choose to participate in the 

redistribution processes outlined above, to Saskatchewan’s rural 

municipalities and urban municipalities under 500 in 

population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will note that participation in the global 

agreement by urban municipalities is subject to their electing to 

participate. Similarly, only those urban municipalities that 

consent to amend their direct agreements with the federal 

government will be participating in the cost redistribution. 

 

The negotiations which are ongoing with respect to the 

distribution formula itself will reflect SARM’s strong advocacy 

on behalf of rural municipalities and SUMA’s diligence in 

protecting the interests of urban municipalities both large and 

small. 

 

We sincerely thank SUMA, SARM, and the RCMP for the 

professional and constructive approach they have brought to 

this ongoing discussion. With this amending Bill in place, we 

are confident that a fair and functional agreement can be 

reached that respects the legitimate concerns of all parties as 

well as their best interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Police Act, 1990. 

 

(1615) 

 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First as a 

general comment, the hon. members will recall when this 

session was called into session, the legislation coming before us 

was described as housekeeping. And I think that was indeed a 

fair and apt description of the legislation which was initially 

presented before us. 

 

Now as we get later in the session we see one Bill after another 

which has important ramifications for the people of 

Saskatchewan, far more weighty and important pieces of 

legislation than those which came before us up until this week. 

And that is of concern as we seek to do our job in making sure 

that all pieces of legislation are subjected to the closest of 

scrutiny and that we have input from all persons who are 

affected. 

 

Having made this comment, I would just say that the principle 

behind this legislation — namely that all residents of the 

province will have to contribute something towards their police 

services — is one that we accept and one which is reasonable. 

However, having said that, there are a number of problems I 

and my colleagues have with this legislation. 

 

First of all, it appears that no exception is made for those rural 

municipalities in smaller communities which have made private 

arrangements for police services. Now the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, I understand is quite familiar with the RM of 

Corman Park, and there is a municipality which has its own 

police force. Will the RM of Corman Park have to contribute to 

provincial police servicing agreements or will an exception be 

made for them? 

 

Of greater significance too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see no set 

amount of funds. We do not know how much is going to have 

to be paid by rural municipalities for police services. Why does 

that have to be hidden in regulations? Why can they be not told 

up front what the cost is going to be? Not only is the cost not in 

the Act, what’s more, the minister has not seen fit to make any 

announcement this afternoon as to what the level of support is 

going to be. 

 

Surely it is incumbent on the government to announce what 

municipalities are going to have to pay for police services. This 

is a new departure, making rural municipalities pay for police 

services, and they have a right to know while this legislation is 

still being debated in the House, as to how hard they are going 

to be hit. 

 

Now the minister in introducing this legislation said that there 

has been some disagreement between urban and rural 

municipalities in the sense that urban people have had to pay 

something towards their police services and they feel, with 

some justification, that their rural neighbours ought to be 

making a contribution as well. 

 

And coming as I say from an urban municipality, that is a point 

of view that I certainly don’t totally reject. But our rural friends 

are asking us how much are we going to be hit, what actually is 

behind this, and most important of all, why right now? Why 

does it have to come down in 1997? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems incomprehensible that a problem 

which has been let go for years and years now surfaces in 1997 

of all years — the year of reassessment, the year of vanishing 

revenue-sharing grants . . . (inaudible) . . . they say in one of the 

RMs in my constituency, the RM of Meota, grants slashed from 

53,000 down to 18,000. Are they now going to have to pay a 

large amount towards police services? I guess the answer is yes. 

What about the RM of North Battleford? How much have they 

lost in revenue sharing? How much will they now have to pay 

towards police services? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, 1997 is the year of reassessment. That has 

placed tremendous pressure on our rural municipalities in 

taxation matters. 1997 is the year of the slashes to grants to 

municipalities. In the case of our rural municipalities, the 

average cut is at least 50 per cent, if not higher. 

 

So we have rural municipalities that are trying to deal with 

reassessment. They’re trying to deal with their provincial grants 

being cut in half, or worse. They’re trying to deal with an 

Assessment Management Agency that can’t seem to get out the 

correct figures to them in order to tell them where they stand. 

They are trying to deal with legislation that says that they must 

be contributing to a library region. They have no right to opt 

out, so every municipality has to contribute to a library region. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that not by way of opposition, 

but just simply to point out so many things have come together 

for our rural municipalities all in one year. And surely, you 

know, enough is enough for any one year. 

 

And the principle that all municipalities should be contributing 

towards a library region — maybe that’s not a bad principle — 

but again, it’s something else. It’s another small thing that has 

hit our rural municipalities all at the same time. And many of 

our rural municipalities are facing problems with their tax base 

which may come about if rail line abandonment occurs. 

 

So my question I put before the government is, why now? We 

understand the principle in the amendment to The Police Act. 

We understand the principle that all Saskatchewan residents are 

going to have to make some contribution for this service. But 

surely, with a bit of foresight, a bit of planning, this didn’t have 

to come in the same year as reassessment, in the same year as 

you took the machete to the municipal grants and the municipal 

grants did the disappearing act — or you wrote the municipal 

grants in disappearing ink. 

 

It didn’t have to come in the same year as you decided that they 

had to pay more for library service. It didn’t have to come in the 

same year as they’re facing the chaos of not being able to get 

proper assessment figures from the assessment agency. 

 

So before we can approve, before we can approve this 

legislation, we think we’re entitled to know, and more 

important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of rural 

Saskatchewan are entitled to know: what is the plan? How 

much are they going to be hit? How much are they going to be 

expected to contribute to policing services? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not a case that the government is  

  



1616  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

having to decide or having to figure out what is to be paid. I 

think they know. They know what rural municipalities are 

going to have to pay but they haven’t chosen to tell us, either in 

the form of putting it into legislation or in the form of a 

ministerial statement. 

 

We would be remiss if we let this Bill just simply go through 

with not the slightest idea as to what we had committed our 

rural municipalities for. At the very, very least we cannot 

support this Bill unless and until the government indicates what 

our rural municipalities are going to be forced to cough up — 

what they’re going to have to cough up and say, on top of . . . 

on top of all the chaos caused by reassessment; on top of the 

education grants disappearing; on top of the municipal grants 

slashed; on top of assessment in confusion; on top of library 

costs going up. 

 

This is just one more hit that comes on top of everything else. 

It’s not that the principle of contribution to police costs is 

wrong, but your sense of timing is just terrible. And together 

with your terrible sense of timing, is your refusal to come clean 

and tell the people of rural Saskatchewan exactly what you have 

in mind; what is going to be their bill for police services. And I 

cannot see the Liberal opposition allowing this legislation to 

just sweep through until the government indicates that publicly. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say there are many 

people that my colleagues and I will want to consult with. But 

we really even can’t do a lot of consultation until we know the 

bottom line; until we know what this government has in mind. I 

invite the government to make a public announcement as to 

what really is planned here in terms of what rural municipalities 

will have to contribute to their policing costs, and pending that 

information being supplied, I now move that this debate be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 68 contains 

housekeeping amendments to The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation Act to ensure that there is legislative authority for 

the first nations fund and the associated entities fund, to receive 

a share of the profits from first nations-run casinos. 

 

The amendments also expand the purposes for which payments 

may be made from the first nations fund, bringing the 

legislation in line with the framework agreement on casinos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first nations fund supports economic, social, 

educational, and cultural development for first nations people. 

The associated entities fund allows a portion of casino profits to 

be directed to Metis people and to organizations providing 

programs and services for vulnerable children, youth, and 

families through Saskatchewan’s action plan for children. The 

first nations fund and associated entities fund are examples of 

Saskatchewan’s commitment to work cooperatively with 

aboriginal people to generate jobs and revenue. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 68, The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I welcome this 

opportunity to say a few words on Bill C-68 and I thank the 

minister for a few brief remarks. I note that in the Bill there is 

some mention of retroactivity, and that always raises a red flag 

in my mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this Bill deals with a 

very important aspect of this government’s gambling expansion 

policy, an aspect that has not been dealt with to a large extent 

by the members opposite. 

 

It deals with the various funds that are to be put aside by the 

casinos in Saskatchewan to share monies that are to go to 

charities and other enterprises that are in place to help first 

nations people and first nations communities to improve their 

standard of living. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we are to have 

gambling in Saskatchewan, we have to ensure that this money is 

getting to where it is supposed to go, and then the amount that 

was agreed when the framework agreement was signed over 

two years ago when the original gaming corporation Act was 

adopted by this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re told this Bill simply brings into the 

legislation what is already reality. While that may or may not be 

true and may or may not be the government’s motivation with 

this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to ask the question, 

why now? Why wasn’t this dealt with soon after the framework 

agreement was signed with the FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations)? Why wasn’t this dealt with 

during the last session or prior? Can we trust the government 

when it tells us that this legislation only puts into words what is 

already reality? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope we can trust that explanation 

more than we can trust the government’s projections on the 

profits to be expected by Casino Regina. Of course, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by now we all know the numbers by heart. At first, we 

and the first nations communities were told to expect a $20 

million profit. Then on the night that the casino opened we were 

told the projection was now $10 million. Later on that sunk 

again, and now we expect no more than $4 million in profit. 

Well as the members opposite like to argue, that’s better than 

losing money. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is better than losing 

money, like we did in the NST fiasco, also known as gigatel. 

 

(1630) 

 

But at the same time, while the government, and in particular 

the Minister of Economic Development, was over-inflating 

expectations to justify gambling $37 million on the casino, real 

people have been affected by the more realistic profit of 3 to $4 

million. Because of the success of the native-run casinos in 

North Battleford, Prince Albert, Yorkton, and White Bear, and 

because of the way current agreements are set out, the FSIN-run 

casinos were on the hook for a bigger chunk of their profits 

flowing to various trust funds, all because the government’s 

projections were way out. 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

One wonders if this was caused by the government’s 

incompetence at running the casino, or because it negotiated 

this agreement in bad faith, knowing the Regina casino wasn’t 

likely to make the profits that it had predicted. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill raises a lot of questions about the 

trust funds that have been set up, both the first nations fund and 

the associated entities fund. My colleague, the member from 

North Battleford, and I will be asking the minister responsible 

for this Bill to give us some updates on these funds with regards 

to how much has flowed into these accounts since the casino 

began operation in Saskatchewan. And more importantly, we’ll 

want an update on how much has flowed back out to the first 

nations people they were set up to help. 

 

This was the intention of the framework agreement signed in 

February 1995, an agreement that gave our native community a 

stake in Casino Regina, as well as the ability to set up and run 

their own casinos around the province. And in terms of their 

own casinos, we must say that they have been successful. 

Whereas the government-run casino has fallen far below its 

expectations financially, the native-run operations have greatly 

exceeded theirs. 

 

Could this be another example where it’s simply best for 

government to simply run the province and stay out of 

business? It could very well be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 4 of the Bill — that is, before 

changing the existing legislation — under the current law, the 

uses for the first nations fund are clearly delineated: under the 

current law, the money can be used for economic development, 

social development, justice initiatives, educational 

development, recreational facility operation and development, 

senior and youth programs, cultural development, community 

infrastructure development, and health care initiatives. 

 

Those are all very worthy uses for money raised through 

gambling. I think it’s very important that when a government or 

another body raises money through gambling, profits should be 

used for very specific purposes so people can see that there may 

be some good coming from allowing gambling in the province. 

 

And that in theory is what the first nations trust fund is for — to 

ensure that this money gets back to the community. And this 

legislation expands the uses for this money to include charitable 

purposes in accordance with agreements between the 

governments and the FSIN. This seems to be a good idea, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, although we’ll want some clarification as to 

what these types of charitable purposes might be. 

 

I can’t help but think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at one time the 

provincial government promised to do much the same thing 

with the profits it reaps annually from VLTs (video lottery 

terminal). This is the money the government isn’t willing to 

share with anyone, dumping it instead into general revenue for 

heaven’s knows what. 

 

At one time, at one time the government promised a small 

portion of the $127 million it collects from VLTs. It promised it 

would be used for a specific purpose — to go back to  

communities to help with municipal projects. But of course, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that did not happen. And the government 

makes no apologies for that. 

 

But I digress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll continue to digress 

until this government begins to live up to its commitments and 

return some of the VLT revenue to the communities that need it 

to fund their own economic development, recreation, or 

community infrastructure initiatives. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill, I understand, puts in place the 

necessary legislation to ensure that the native-run casinos 

contribute a fair share to first nations fund, which I understand 

is, as well, already or should be well under way. 

 

It’s important that all the casinos in this province contribute 

their allotted portion to the trust funds that are established to 

ensure that the money gets to where it’s supposed to be going. 

The same goes for the associated entities fund. 

 

It’s interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as the 

legislation now stands, monies are theoretically distributed to 

agencies based on 25 per cent of the Gaming Corporation’s 

profits — projected profits, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would hope 

because this is the case, the government’s projections for profits 

at the casino will be a little more accurate from now on. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill also allows the government to 

contribute unspecified amounts of money to both of the funds 

that have been established. We’ll have a number of questions 

about this in terms of the amounts that may be appropriated 

directly from the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be asking for a number of specifics 

regarding these changes in committee. We need assurances that 

everything is now in place, well after the casinos have opened, 

to ensure money is getting to where it’s supposed to be going. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, the government is 

currently looking for a buyer for Casino Regina. We’ll want 

some answers from the minister how any eventual sale of that 

casino will affect these agreements, if in fact it will have any 

effects. 

 

We need to know these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people 

of Saskatchewan need to know these things. This Bill, in my 

mind, raises more questions than it answers, and we’ll have to 

have some clear and concise answers on these questions before 

we can offer any support for this type of legislation. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, move to adjourn debate on this 

Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health 

Care Decision Makers Act. 

  



1618  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

Many citizens in our province have been calling on government 

to introduce legislation in this area. Almost every other 

jurisdiction in Canada already provides for health care 

directives, sometimes commonly referred to as living wills. 

 

The groups and individuals that we consulted told us that 

Saskatchewan citizens want to be able to give directions 

regarding their future health care, in the event that they lose the 

capacity to make such decisions themselves. Under this Bill, 

any person over the age of 16 who has the capacity, will be able 

to provide a written document that gives directions regarding 

his or her future medical treatment. 

 

A person’s health care directive would become effective when 

that person loses the capacity to make health care decisions. In a 

directive, a person may provide or refuse consent to medical 

treatment and may also appoint a proxy to make health care 

decisions on his or her behalf. 

 

Saskatchewan residents want to be able to make the same 

decisions in a health care directive that they would be able to 

make if they had the capacity to do so themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that during the consultation 

process the groups and individuals that we met were very 

supportive of the provision respecting proxies. They expressed 

clearly that people should be allowed to designate who would 

make health care decisions on their behalf. 

 

This legislation also contains provisions respecting substitute 

decision making. The Act will provide a list of persons who are 

authorized to make health care decisions on behalf of an 

incapacitated person. This list will be utilized in circumstances 

where an incapacitated person does not have a health care 

directive nor a personal guardian to act as a substitute 

decision-maker or, Mr. Speaker, has a directive that does not 

appoint a proxy nor provide direction about a specific situation 

which has occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instructions given in health care directives or 

given by proxies or substitute decision-makers are subject to the 

same limitations as instructions given by individuals while they 

are competent. This legislation contains provisions designed to 

protect makers of directives from fraud and undue influence. A 

health care directive cannot authorize an illegal act. 

 

The legislation also ensures that people who follow the 

instructions in a directive do not incur liability if they have 

acted in good faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that this Bill has achieved a 

broad degree of consensus among the diverse groups that will 

be affected by it. Various groups have called for legislation in 

this area. This legislation was the result of extensive 

consultations with health care providers, representatives of 

religious organizations, seniors, persons with disabilities, and 

others who express an interest in health care directives. 

 

For example, in November, 1992 the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Speak report was released. This report, prepared for the  

minister responsible for seniors, urged the government to 

introduce health care directives legislation. The Saskatchewan 

Seniors Speak report was the result of an extensive consultation 

process involving seniors from across the province. Health care 

directives legislation was among the first priority 

recommendations of this report. 

 

Many Saskatchewan residents already have health care 

directives. However, there has been no court decision in 

Saskatchewan respecting their effectiveness. This legislation 

will ensure the legitimacy of health care directives and provide 

a framework for their use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care directives legislation reinforces the 

personal autonomy of Saskatchewan residents. It recognizes the 

importance of self-determination, and it also recognizes that 

individuals want to exercise choice in their medical treatment. 

 

In closing we would like to thank those with whom we have 

consulted for the considerable time and effort they spent in 

helping us to develop this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I feel 

called upon to make the point that when the present session of 

this House began, the government informed this Assembly and 

the public that most of the legislation that the government 

would be placing before us for our consideration would be 

non-controversial and of a housekeeping nature. 

 

To this point, much of the legislation that we have seen indeed 

does in fact meet that description, particularly the Justice Bills 

we saw earlier on in the session. Many of them, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, came from the uniform law commission of Canada, 

and consequently, parallel and identical Bills will be introduced 

in the Parliament of Canada and every legislature in this 

country; so certainly ones that have gone through considerable 

consultation, ones that are certainly non-controversial in nature, 

and ones which are certainly not of any controversial nature to 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

Well I’m disturbed now, I’m disturbed now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that as we come to the latter part of the session we 

have legislation before us which indeed is the subject of 

enormous public interest and concern and which ought to be the 

subject of great public debate, and not only by members of this 

House but of the people of Saskatchewan generally. 

 

There are many people who would like to be involved in this 

debate, who deserve to be consulted and deserve to be heard. 

And I can’t believe this legislation was simply drafted late at 

the end of last week to be presented just before the weekend 

started. Surely the government knew about this at an earlier 

time, and surely it could have been presented more timely to  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

allow the proper public input and the public debate that is so 

necessary in this very important area that touches each and 

every one of us in a very personal way. 

 

As I say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not mean to imply that I 

personally or the Liberal opposition are necessarily opposed to 

this legislation. I’ve had discussions with my loved ones and I 

assume all other members of the House have as well. 

 

And incidentally, I say for the benefit of members opposite that 

I do in fact have loved ones — it may come as somewhat of a 

surprise to them — but I’ve had discussions with them as to the 

circumstances under which I would want to be resuscitated, the 

circumstances under which I would want heroic measures 

undertaken to save my life, and the circumstances under which I 

would prefer that no heroic measures be undertaken on my 

behalf. 

 

To place this into legislation . . . and incidentally, again I say to 

members opposite that I will not be delegating them as my 

proxy to determine when I want to be resuscitated. The Minister 

of Health will not be named as my proxy to determine what 

measures ought to be undertaken to save my life. However all 

kidding aside, this is, as I say, a very serious matter which 

touches each and every one of us in a very deep and personal 

way. 

 

Now similar legislation was introduced three years ago in the 

province of British Columbia. And when it was, there were 

public hearings around that province. Now the Minister of 

Health told us in this House a few moments ago that he has 

consulted widely and broadly, and I’m certainly not disputing 

his word, but any consultations that took place were certainly of 

a private nature. There was no opportunity for public hearings 

and public consultation, and I think there should have been. 

 

While there are obvious groups such as community living and 

persons living with disabilities, there are obvious groups such 

as that who might have a particular interest. The fact is this is 

legislation which touches each and every one of us, ourselves, 

aged parents, and potentially anyone close and near and loved 

by us. And I think that we would be derelict in our duty as a 

Liberal opposition if we didn’t guarantee the broadest possible 

public response to this legislation before it passed through this 

House. 

 

I throw out a couple of particular issues that I think require 

public discussion. For instance, I note in the legislation that 

when there is a disagreement between siblings, that the word of 

the elder sibling will hold sway. 

 

So I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that obviously when 

siblings cannot agree as to what is best for an aged parent, this 

creates a problem. But why have we arbitrarily decided that the 

word of the elder sibling will be given more weight than the 

word of the younger ones? I think that’s something that has to 

be looked at here. 

 

Well the Minister of Justice in speaking to the media last week 

about this Bill was quick to make the point that euthanasia is 

not part of this legislation and is not contemplated in this Bill.  

And there’s not going to be a special section inserted to cover 

the member for North Battleford, I take it. 

 

None the less, it has to be pointed out that in some cases the line 

is very thin. And by that I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is 

my understanding that the more advanced painkillers can in fact 

hasten the moment of death. But if they are administered for the 

purpose of relieving pain as opposed to hastening death that that 

is the distinction we have drawn. 

 

However, it is admittedly a very fine distinction and one that 

must be looked at, because the fact is some treatments which 

are beneficial to the patient and, say, may relieve pain will none 

the less certainly have the effect of hastening the time of death. 

 

The other thing I notice about this legislation — and I would 

invite the minister to comment on when he comes to speak to 

this matter later — is that of course normally one’s proxy, to 

put it very bluntly and crudely, normally one’s proxy will have 

a vested interest in our demise in the sense that our proxies, 

being close family members, are also the persons likely to be 

named in our wills. 

 

That is a reality, and I know that that is something contemplated 

by the minister in preparing this legislation. And consequently, 

I see in section 24, that there are of course some penalties, small 

fines, the fine of $1000 for any misuse of a health directive. 

And there’s also provision there that if someone misuses a 

health directive, if someone misuses a health directive, that he 

or she will be barred as a beneficiary of the estate. 

 

However, what I do not see in this legislation is that that 

person’s spouse would also be barred as a beneficiary. And 

under The Wills Act, if you have acted improperly in the 

witnessing of a will, not only are you barred but also your 

spouse. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think this is mere academia 

because if we take the example of, say, a son-in-law putting 

undue pressure on an 83-year-old, that undue pressure would 

bar the son-in-law from inheriting. But in all likelihood the 

son-in-law is not going to inherit anyway. It would be the 

daughter. 

 

And the daughter, the son-in-law’s wife, would still continue to 

inherit so consequently there is no penalty there for the 

son-in-law exerting undue influence on an aged parent-in-law. 

The only penalty that would exist would be a thousand dollar 

fine which, of course, in today’s world compared to what most 

estates would be worth the thousand dollar fine is not a big 

deterrent. 

 

So I would encourage the government to look at this. But more 

than that, I simply point this out as one small example that . . . 

wouldn’t we benefit from public consultation? Wouldn’t we 

benefit from public hearing? This is, as I say, a matter which 

touches each and every person living in Saskatchewan at least 

potentially. This is something that touches us all in a very 

private and personal matter. 

 

  



1620  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

And so I don’t think it has to be brought in on the dying days of 

the session, pardon the pun, to be rammed through and passed 

very, very quickly. I think that it would benefit from this public 

consultation and public hearings that it has not had and will not 

receive if the government has its way. 

 

So with those comments I say that we really do need more input 

here. I think the legislation could benefit from greater input. I 

agree that the people of Saskatchewan — I am confident — will 

want to have this additional say, this additional legal tool to be 

able to have some input into what medical treatment they are 

given in the case of a serious emergency. I think that is, that is a 

right we all wish and to say, I assume we have all discussed 

already with our loved ones. 

 

But this really is not something that should have come in the 

closing days of the session without public consultation, without 

public hearings. Please let us have this public input on an issue 

which touches each and every person in this province in a very 

deep and very personal way. 

 

And with that, I will simply say that well, while I will not be 

asking for the services of members opposite to be my health 

proxy, in the event that they wish me to be named in their 

health directives that I will certainly be open to discussing the 

matter with them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I now move this debate be 

adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this Act has been brought forward because of 

an inadvertent change — one of the reasons — an inadvertent 

change in 1990 whereby it took away the powers of the 

government to enable it to make unilateral changes to marketing 

boards the same as other provinces have. 

 

But the proposed Act will do a number of other things. It will 

clarify the role and power of government regarding provincial 

marketing plans, but enabling only. Any changes contemplated 

to individual plans will be reviewed on their own merits in 

consultation with stakeholders. It will harmonize with other 

jurisdictions the authority of governments to amend marketing 

and development plans, as I said. 

 

It will enable establishment of regulations that would allow 

commodity groups to participate in national research and 

development check-offs. And it will enable introduction of 

regulations to increase flexibility in the Saskatchewan 

Agri-Food Council’s supervisory powers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments do not change the current 

functions and structures of the marketing boards. Rather the 

legislation enables the government to make changes if required. 

 

I just want to say a few words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 

questions that were asked today in question period in terms of 

what this Act does. There is some indication that this legislation 

will take away the rights of producers to have a vote. That is not 

true. Producers will have a right to a vote. 

 

This Act will allow the government though . . . for example, if 

producers decide on their own that they want to change a 

marketing system, and didn’t need a vote of producers, then 

they could come to the government and request that, and 

government, through Executive Council, could enable that to 

happen. 

 

The other thing that this could do, Mr. Speaker, and I think this 

is one of the most important parts of legislating, the member 

from Thunder . . . or not Thunder Creek, Arm River, says it 

gives the government a lot of power, and that’s exactly what I 

was going to say. It does give the government significant power 

to make unilateral changes to marketing boards. 

 

And I know that some will say, well you’re destroying single 

desk selling and all the like. Well that’s not true; we still believe 

in the consultation process. 

 

But if for example there was a major packing plant looking to 

locate in western Canada . . . give you the example in Manitoba 

where Schneiders basically came in and said, we’ll put a plant 

here for 40 or $50 million while you kill the marketing board. 

The Manitoba government chose to do that. Were the producers 

happy? At the beginning, no they weren’t. Are they happy now? 

I think the answer is yes. 

 

(1700) 

 

There is some talk from some people about the fact that the 

price of pork went down. Well in Manitoba there is a floor price 

that is lower than what producers got previously, but they now 

have the opportunity and are paid premiums that are not 

disclosed. The marketing board has paid the premiums if they 

deliver so many hogs on certain dates, of certain index, certain 

quality. 

 

But if a plant were to come to western Canada and say we want 

to locate, but we would request that you remove the single desk 

power marketing board, in Saskatchewan we couldn’t do that. 

So the government would not be able to make a decision that 

may be of economic benefit to the entire province, whereas 

Alberta and Manitoba can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we have to have the same power. Is this a 

power grab? No. This is an effort to make sure that the 

Saskatchewan citizens are treated equally to other citizens 

across Canada. 

 

If this is wrong in terms of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, if they 

do not believe this is right, then the question I would ask is, is 

every other province wrong as well? Is every other province 

wrong when they have the same power? I’d like members of the 

opposition to answer that question when they’re replying to the 

second reading speech. 

 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

So the reality too, Mr. Speaker, is that there was a question 

brought forward by the Liberal opposition which made a 

statement from, I believe quoting Mr. Jim Morris, the CEO 

(chief executive officer) of Sask Pork International, saying that 

the layoffs at Moose Jaw were a direct result of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is difficult for me sometimes to be calm in 

matters like this. This is absolutely fabrication — absolutely 

fabrication and irresponsible not only on the part of the 

opposition, Liberal opposition, but also in Mr. Morris’s 

comment on this matter. Because we know . . . everybody — 

not everybody, many people know the problems they’re having 

in Moose Jaw. It’s very, very complicated. But I can assure you 

that the reality, it’s got nothing to do with this legislation. 

 

In fact decisions on Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were 

being made prior to this legislation being introduced. I’m 

disheartened by the fact that some people are responding this 

way. I’m disappointed, but people will be people and they don’t 

always make correct judgements. And I’m not going to 

overreact, Mr. Speaker, for one reason. I believe in 

Saskatchewan we need every producer producing hogs to fill a 

market that is demanding of our pork products. Small 

producers, medium sized producers, and large producers. I’ve 

said that . . . if I said that once, I’ve said it a hundred times. We 

need everybody producing. 

 

SPI in the past, through single desk marketing, has served 

producers very well. Will it in the future? The producers 

themselves are asking themselves . . . are asking this question. 

But I’ll tell you, in any other jurisdiction where there is a 

marketing of hogs, you have a marketing organization. 

 

Manitoba, you have a marketing structure, a strong structure. In 

the United States you have large marketing co-ops. Because 

producers know, especially if you’re a small producer, you need 

the security of a group marketing the product. And I think . . . I 

commend those people in Saskatchewan who are looking at 

themselves internally, like the dairy producers who said, can we 

maintain our current systems of individual province pooling. At 

the end of the day said no, we can’t do it. They went to a 

western pooling. What has that done? It’s given dairy producers 

in Saskatchewan the opportunity to produce more milk. It’s 

been good for this province; it’s forward thinking. 

 

SPI’s internal discussions, I think that’s very futuristic as well. 

Analysing the structures that you have and seeing if that 

structure can serve or will serve you to the best . . . as it has 

served you in the past so very well. We have to continue. We 

did it with the Canadian Wheat Board. It was analysed and I 

think proven by the barley vote that the majority of people 

know that that institution still provides a very strong marketing 

system for farmers. 

 

Is it the same as it was when it was first built? I don’t think so. 

In fact had the Liberal government had a commitment to the 

Wheat Board — the federal Liberal government — the 

legislation would have been passed. The legislation would have 

been passed before the election was called. This is what puts it 

out in my mind, where the federal Liberals surely stand on the 

board because they could have passed that legislation and gave  

the board more flexibility, and modernized it, and more powers 

to serve farmers well. 

 

That’s what we have to do with all our institutions. You have 

three options. You can leave status quo, you can get rid of them, 

or you can change them so that they suit you for the 21st 

century marketing needs. And I think unless we continue to do 

this, and review it and review it, that we will stagnate and we 

will be behind the other provinces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is a step I think in the right 

direction. It’s only enabling. It has go through Executive 

Council and all of cabinet for anything to happen. It was never 

in my . . . as far as I know, it was never used prior to 1990 in 

Saskatchewan. I would hope that it would never have to be used 

in the future for anything but positive purposes. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I ask members to support this Act, 

and I move second reading of Bill No. 67, The Agri-Food 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased to rise today because I think this is an important 

change in agriculture in Saskatchewan. It’s certainly an 

important change for the government members, because 

apparently somebody across there, Mr. Speaker, has had a 

conversion on the road to Damascus when it comes to 

marketing boards. 

 

Up until now we have always heard that the only way to sell our 

agricultural commodities has been through some kind of 

socialist mechanism, such as single desk selling — be that the 

Canadian Wheat Board; be that the Chicken Marketing Board; 

be that SPI; or even the dairy quota system. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, this Bill moves away from that 

concept. And as I read this Bill though, it gives the minister 

sweeping unilateral powers to change or eliminate marketing 

boards, check-offs, and the like, as he sees fit. And this is truly 

a conversion — truly a conversion — the elimination of 

marketing boards. Now where have we heard that before? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly not from the government opposite. 

This is the first time, I believe, that they have talked about the 

elimination of marketing boards, and we support that, Mr. 

Speaker. We believe that this is a positive move for agriculture 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve always believed that producers of all kinds, and 

consumers, are best served by free and open competition in the 

market-place. We see in many areas of production how small 

cliques of producers have come to have a stranglehold over 

particular commodities, and this is unfair. And the minister is 

right to try and fix this problem. 

 

The minister talked about Alberta and Manitoba competition 

for, say the $50 million plant that he talked about from 

Schneiders, that went into Manitoba. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 

is a lot of competition with Manitoba and Alberta. I just wish 

that this government would recognize that fact in other areas of 

the Saskatchewan economy, not just in the marketing board  

  



1622  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

area. In areas such as taxation and the effect that has on 

business, the effect that has on the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that the minister has moved from his position of only 

marketing boards — and I’m glad to see that he has moved — 

this caucus, the members of our caucus look forward to the day 

when he can come all the way over and support the abolition of 

larger national marketing boards such as the Canadian Wheat 

Board, such as the dairy boards. Because, Mr. Speaker, those 

eliminate the ability of Saskatchewan producers to expand. 

They eliminate the opportunities of Saskatchewan producers to 

market as they see fit. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the dairy board, while the minister says has 

pooled now in western Canada, nevertheless 40 per cent of all 

of the dairy industry is centred in one province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — 40 per cent. It’s not Saskatchewan, it’s not western 

Canada, but it’s in the province of Quebec. With 25 per cent of 

the population, they control 40 per cent of the dairy industry in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. And they get to do this though, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the powers of the marketing boards. And 

the same thing is present in Saskatchewan. 

 

The reason that the hog producers wish to see the end of SPI is 

because it limits their ability to expand. It limits their abilities to 

find markets for their own products. And there are many, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, speciality markets in the hog industry. I know 

of one hog producer who ships overweight, over-fat hogs to the 

Toronto market, outside of SPI, because there’s a premium on 

that particular market, Mr. Speaker. And he has the ability to 

fill that contract because SPI is not interested, or else for some 

reason they’re ignoring the market. I don’t know why they’re 

doing that but they are. 

 

And that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not sure what kind 

of pigs they are but they’re all pigs to me. If they’re not bacon, 

they’re ham. So that’s my knowledge of the hog industry. I’ve 

never raised a pig. I’m a grain farmer. And you can’t eat the 

squeal and you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear either, 

which sometimes this particular government tries to do. 

 

But in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, they’re not trying to 

make a silk purse, because this is a valuable product. And I 

think the only thing you can make out of a sow’s ear is those 

burnt things that they sell in little bags in the stores — piggy 

porks or something like that they’re called. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Piggy puffs. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes. And one of the presidents of the 

United States used to eat them. 

 

An Hon. Member:  The Ag and Food minister knows all 

about those. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, the Ag and Food minister is the 

expert on those particular things. I’m not sure if he raised any 

hogs but he certainly seems to have a good working knowledge 

of that particular type of hog operation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if it’s good in the hog industry to eliminate  

the marketing boards, if it has some value in the dairy industry 

to expand, then surely in other industries, Mr. Speaker, there are 

other benefits to be had. And we would certainly encourage the 

minister to move in that direction. 

 

One of the areas of marketing boards that is the most restrictive 

in this particular province, Mr. Speaker, is the feather industry 

— the poultry marketing boards. I believe that there are 

approximately 97 members of this particular industry in the 

entire province of Saskatchewan. They have the quotas locked 

up and nobody else can get into the industry. 

 

Expansion either takes place within their own little clique as 

they absorb some of the other members, or there is no 

expansion because no one new can come in unless he buys up 

existing quota from a current producer at an exorbitant price, 

Mr. Speaker. So we can’t expand in this province. 

 

And if someone in industry wanted to move into this province 

and take a large amount of the chicken, of the eggs, of the 

feather industry, and process it in some manner, Mr. Speaker, 

they couldn’t do so. Because the animals, the chickens, simply 

are not available in this province unless there is major 

expansion, which can’t happen under the current system. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the measures I hope that takes 

place when this Bill passes this House is the relaxation of the 

feather industry regulations and the quota systems and the 

marketing boards to allow a significant expansion in that area. 

 

It is somewhat disturbing though, Mr. Speaker, that this entire 

measure, this entire move, is taking place at the current time 

under the current circumstances. If it’s good today that the 

marketing boards be eliminated, then surely it would have been 

good last year or the year before that. 

 

So I have to ask myself what has changed in the Saskatchewan 

economy? What has changed in the market-place for hogs that 

has made this a viable option for the government today to go 

against their normal ideology to move away from marketing 

boards? 

 

The only thing that I can see that has changed today has been 

the move by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to enter into hog 

production in a major way. I believe they are proposing to build 

16 large-scale hog operations around the province. That’s the 

only thing that I can see that has driving this particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

While I’m sorry that the government hasn’t proceeded sooner 

on this, that it takes a move by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to 

drive a change in this particular government, I have to say that 

I’m glad at least that they have recognized the need for this 

particular change. And if it takes the Wheat Pool to make that 

change, well so be it. We’re prepared to accept that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would like to note a couple of areas of caution though. And 

clearly, as legislators we must always pause before we give 

sweeping powers to the government, in particular an NDP 

government, to override the democratic rights for the sake of  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

that ill-defined group, public interest. 

 

And as much as I may agree with the minister that many 

marketing groups represent vested self-interests, I think we 

should proceed with some caution with this Bill, with the 

understanding that the use of these sweeping powers should 

only be as a last resort where extensive efforts at consultation 

and mediation with producer groups have failed. Because 

obviously these are the producer groups that you hope will 

expand their industry, that will grow, while new people come 

into the market. But the expertise at present remains with those 

that are already in the industry. 

 

(1715) 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we will want to examine the Bill closely in 

Committee of the Whole to ensure that the Bill does not give 

the government the opposite power to which the minister is 

expressing. In other words, the power to establish marketing 

boards without the consent of producers. Because what we 

already have too much of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are oligarchies; 

and I described one with the feather industry, where a small 

group control the market and restrict the access of everyone else 

into that market. To make those changes would mean that we 

can expand and that new entrants would be allowed into the 

market-place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to express our general support for 

this Bill and we look forward to dealing with it at length in 

Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I will have something to say to this Bill, but I would 

prefer to say it in the next sitting, and I now move to adjourn 

debate. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 15  The Department of Health 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me, beside me 

is Lawrence Krahn, who is the executive director of the medical 

services and health registration branch of the Department of 

Health; and to his left is Drew Johnston, who is senior health 

professions analyst with the health planning and policy 

development branch of the Department of Health. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minster, your 

officials, welcome to you. 

 

Mr. Minister, just a couple of short questions regarding this 

amendment. As I understand, that one of the reasons for this 

amendment is to tighten up with the Saskatchewan health 

numbers and particularly to fraudulent uses of those cards. Just 

a confirmation if that’s correct, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is correct. The fine for misuse of the 

card is increased from 500 to $5,000. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. At this time of the 

year right across Saskatchewan, a lot of hunters are filling out 

their licence application forms. Many unhappy hunters, I might 

add, because of this government’s ill-thought-out $11 surcharge 

on hunting licences. But on those hunting licences is . . . one of 

the stipulations to apply for a hunting licence is you have to use 

your health number. 

 

Does the minister view this as possibly a problem — by doing 

that, that could cause some fraudulent uses and actually some 

misuses of a person’s or individual’s health number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, the member knows that I don’t 

like to be political in my answers. But I’d like to say to the 

member, at the risk of sounding political, that if he thinks the 

hunters are upset about the $11 surcharge, he should talk to 

them about Liberal gun control some time. 

 

But we’re digressing from the subject matter before us. I don’t 

think it’s a concern that people are using their health 

registration numbers. Health registration numbers are used quite 

commonly, even in the private sector, in the sense that some 

individuals who are credit granters or maybe cashing cheques 

may be asking people for their health registration cards or their 

numbers. 

 

And we looked at the matter of whether that should be closely 

regulated, and we concluded that it wasn’t really practical or 

feasible to regulate it any more than regulating the use of 

drivers’ licences, for example, because it seems to be part of 

doing business in the private sector and the commercial world 

now, that health numbers are commonly referred to. 

 

So in this area we’re dealing with a government agency, namely 

the agency that would issue the hunters’ licences, and we think 

that misuse of the numbers in that context is less likely than 

other contexts. So it isn’t something that gives us a great deal of 

concern. 

 

And we feel that society has moved beyond the point where any 

government could adequately actually control the use of these 

numbers. They’re just very commonly used now. 

 

Mr. McLane:  As you are moving into your new health 

information network, there will be a lot more information, a lot 

of confidential information, that will go along with a person’s 

identification number through his health number. 

 

Have you discussed those issues as it relates to using it for 

hunting licences and some of the other uses you talked about? I 

know, actually I’m not sure about all libraries, but a lot of 

libraries ask for that number as well. Do you have a concern 

that as your health number and your health card will relate to a 

lot of information in your new system, if indeed it does come 

into fruition, that can be a major concern for a lot of people. 

 

And it might be appropriate to address the issue of whether 

people have to use their health identification number to get a  

  



1624  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

hunting licence or a library card. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think the concern is very legitimate 

in terms of making sure that personal health information is very 

secure. And I think if the province moves forward with the 

health information network, for example, then I think the 

member’s point is correct, that in conjunction with that, the 

province would have to bring about certain additional privacy 

and security of information measures to deal with that situation, 

and the one would certainly go with the other. 

 

I think that in terms of actual use of the number, obviously the 

provincial people that give out the hunting licences would use 

the number to confirm the residency in the province of 

somebody applying for a licence. And in any situation where a 

government agency has to determine whether somebody is a 

resident of the province, certainly whether or not they have a 

health registration number is a good indication of that. 

 

And it doesn’t concern me that a government agency would 

want that number to be indicated. What would concern me is 

whether that number could be used outside of government to 

access information. 

 

Any information system will have to be so designed that that 

wouldn’t be feasible; that you would need probably a separate 

number, like a PIN (personal identification number) that we use 

when we go to the bank or the credit union, to access our health 

information. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman . . . or Deputy Chairman, thank 

you. I really don’t have a question but I just want to mention to 

the minister that, as I understand it, this is more of a minor 

housekeeping Bill and it’s certainly trying to make sure that the 

health care cards are protected from fraud and misuse. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, you will find that the utilization of health 

cards and the implementation of the health card system is 

something that the public has certainly been acceptable of — 

and more acceptable. I think as I’ve indicated before — and 

believe, Mr. Minister — that there may be other ways in which 

we can utilize the card to make it more effective certainly, in 

our health care system. And I would just like to bring that to 

your attention again. 

 

And just suggest that I think it’s important that we certainly 

protect how the cards are used and acknowledge the fact that 

they have been just another symbol of health care, wellness, and 

how it’s working in the province of Saskatchewan — how 

people have accepted this method of communication and this 

identity with their health system. 

 

So I’m pleased to see that it’s something that’s moving ahead. 

And I trust your department is looking at other ways in which 

we can make it even a more effective tool in the implementation 

and care-giving in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’d like to thank the member for those 

comments, Mr. Chair, with which I certainly am in agreement. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 

opposition for their cooperation. And I won’t thank the officials 

just yet because I believe they’re staying for the next Bill. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1730) 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, just a couple of questions as 

well on this Bill. Mr. Minister, in your press release, news 

release that you issued with this Bill, you talked about 

addressing the issue of access to these therapists. Can you tell 

me in your Bill where this occurs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Actually you would not find this in the 

Bill. It occurs as a result of something that isn’t in the Bill. In 

the previous Occupational Therapists Act there was a provision 

that said that to see an occupational therapist you would have to 

be referred there by a physician. And that provision is not in 

this Bill; so that you can go to an occupational therapist 

yourself if you feel that you’re in need of occupational therapy 

services. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Since that is the case then, can 

you tell me . . . and the idea is excellent of the people being able 

to access the service providers that they need to on a timely 

basis. And it cuts down on red tape, it cuts down on expenses 

and all those types of things. 

 

However as well in your news release, you talked about that 

some health districts will have the ability to request that their 

people do, their residents do have to go to a doctor for a referral 

to an occupational therapist. Why would you want to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It will depend upon the individual case, 

whether a district has an operating policy, as opposed to a law 

or regulation, feels that a physician referral is required. 

 

There are some situations where, if a person is suffering from a 

particular disease or condition, there may be reasons why it 

would not be a good idea to be treated by a physical therapist or 

an occupational therapist. Professionally I believe this is 

referred to as contraindications to treatment. 

 

And I think the districts will be free to adopt policies or 

protocols; say in some situations you should get a physician 

referral before seeing an occupational therapist to make sure 

that it’s a safe thing to do. But there will not be any law or 

regulation saying you must. And in most circumstances indeed, 

I think there won’t be such a requirement. But we wouldn’t 

close the door to . . . we wouldn’t make it illegal for somebody 

to say in this situation, if you have this condition, before you 

see an occupational therapist, you should see the doctor. 

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

I suppose in the same way that sometimes — not by law or 

regulation but just by practice — it might be said that before 

one professional sees an individual, another professional should 

be consulted. But that would become a matter of professional 

practice as opposed to a matter of provincial policy. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well I have a problem with this one. Because 

I agree that if a person’s physician says that you shouldn’t see 

the occupational therapist, I would think that’s incumbent upon 

the therapist and the individual to decide what kind of treatment 

they got. I wouldn’t think that it should be policy that’s set by a 

health district to say that: well I don’t think that this person X 

should be able to go directly and see an occupational therapist. 

Why wouldn’t you . . . If you’re going to have this open, 

accessible service to the people of this province, why would 

you allow health districts to intervene? It’s up to the medical 

doctors to do that. 

 

Maybe an example would be chiropractor. Are you going to 

come and . . . are you going to say to people that before you can 

go and see a chiropractor, your health district is going to have to 

say yes you can or no you can’t? I think you . . . I think there’s 

been an error here and I’m wondering if you’re going to try and 

rectify this. 

 

We talk about the Canada Health Act and principles across 

Canada. How will we ever be able to maintain that if we don’t 

even have the same types of service and accessibility within our 

own province from health district to health district? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there’s nothing in the legislation itself 

that really addresses this issue in the sense that the legislation is 

designed to regulate the profession of occupational therapy. In 

terms of the day-to-day practice, I think there may have been an 

illustration that in some cases professionals may arrive at some 

protocol that you need to see a physician before seeing an 

occupational therapist. 

 

But there is nothing in the legislation that would need to be 

changed to say that’s a good thing or not a good thing. That’s a 

matter of practice under the existing law’s regulation in the 

jurisdiction of the health districts and the health professionals. 

 

So I appreciate the member’s point. I understand what the 

member’s saying and I’m not sure I entirely disagree with the 

point either. But my point would be, in terms of this legislation, 

it simply says you don’t have to have a doctor’s referral to see 

an occupational therapist. It really doesn’t go into the details of 

situations where you might want to. 

 

I think the point that was being made before is, in some cases 

medical professionals may decide that there is some reason why 

you need to. This legislation does not really speak to it directly. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Yes, I understand that. I guess I have one or 

two last questions. One is, if what you say of course is true — 

and we have to rely on that — why would you issue a press 

release to accompany this particular piece of legislation that 

does say that? 

 

And the reason I ask you where I would find this in this  

legislation is so that I could vote against it. It’s not there so we 

can’t vote against it; so maybe you can tell me where I should 

go and what to watch for so that the next time that this tries to 

come through, I’ll know what to watch for; so we can make 

sure that you don’t make the same error when it is in the 

legislation somewhere. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ll take the member’s comments to 

heart, Mr. Chair. Perhaps we can do a better and more accurate 

job of press releases in the future. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 54 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to move the 

committee report the Bill without amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I do that, I’d 

like to thank Mr. Krahn and Mr. Johnston for their assistance 

and I’d also like to thank the opposition for their cooperation 

with respect to the Bill. And with that, I move that we report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like 

to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 

for answering our questions. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 1 —The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right is John Edwards, director of municipal policy and 

legislative services. To his right is Jim Anderson, senior policy 

analyst. On my left is Paul Raths, director of the municipal 

development branch. And Perry Erhardt is legislative officer. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 

questions, Madam Minister, in reference to the . . . I believe the 

Act is speaking on the assessment in general. While the Act 

itself I believe is more of a housekeeping . . . just a couple 

points I wish to raise. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan in terms of the assessment, there are 

a number of communities that may be having a bit of trouble 

with the assessment and the period in which the assessment has 

taken place. Have you had any communities that are come forth 

and had a large number of problems with assessment and the 

Bill in general in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that there are 

two towns and one or two of the northern villages that already 

have their assessment notices out. Our understanding is that 

reassessment is going slowly in some of the other northern  

  



1626  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1997 

villages but progressing. And we haven’t had many calls from 

them for assistance or for an order extending the deadlines that 

they need to meet. So hopefully that’s a sign that everything is 

going reasonable well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just a couple of 

other questions in terms of the . . . at one point in time, there 

was a number of administrators that spoke about the need to 

have a workshop on the west side of northern Saskatchewan — 

north-west side — and that was met with not much optimism 

and excitement by your officials in La Ronge. And I’m just 

wondering what the reason might be for not having two or three 

or four sessions to indicate the ramifications of the newest 

estimate and why your department would not make that offer to 

other administrators. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there have been two 

meetings held in La Ronge in November of 1995 and a 

workshop in November of 1996. The workshop was reasonably 

well attended by representatives of the two towns and most of 

the northern villages. But what we have been doing is using a 

one-on-one basis, having our advisory personnel who is 

stationed in La Ronge go and actually visit the municipalities 

and the councils and the administrators that asked for help. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And just to draw a quick point 

that in reference to some of the changes, and especially when it 

comes to municipal governments, I strongly encourage the 

minister and various members of her staff to make as much 

effort to attend community meetings with mayors and 

councillors and administrators, and have a lot more one-on-one 

discussion and dialogue on some of the changes that occur here, 

that ultimately affect them at the local level in northern 

Saskatchewan. As we know, in northern Saskatchewan there’s a 

tremendous amount of land mass, and having one or two or 

three seminars in La Ronge, which people believe is central, 

certainly won’t get the information out to these communities. 

 

So while I can appreciate the hospitality of, you know, Lac La 

Ronge, I believe it’s important that we reach out to other 

communities and have seminars in the far North, in the west 

side and the east side, and of course the central area. So I would 

encourage the minister to look at those options. 

 

The second part of my brief question period today on this whole 

Bill is in terms of assessment. Many of the mining sectors, 

mining companies that operate in northern Saskatchewan 

contribute on an annual basis, lease fees for operating some of 

their mines in terms of the land lease fees. 

 

How is reassessment going to affect the income to the Northern 

Revenue Sharing Trust Account if indeed the lease fees from 

the Crown lands that are being leased by the mining companies 

does indeed go into the NRSTA (Northern Revenue Sharing 

Trust Account)? 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the lease payments for 

mining operations are not tied to assessment. So they wouldn’t 

be affected then by reassessment and there will be mill rate  

factors that have been adopted to protect the mine tax revenues 

for the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clauses 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15  The Department of Health 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, having so successfully 

made a motion just now, I’ll once again move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its  

  



May 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

title. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. It now being near 6 o’clock, this 

committee will stand recessed until 8:30 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 8:30 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1591 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1591 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Federal Leaders’ Debate 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1592 

 Buena Vista School Drama Production 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

 Science Fair Winners from St. Dominic School 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

 Child Care Week 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

 Working Women’s Share in the Economy 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

 Dr. Ali Rajput Selected for World Health Organization’s International Committee on Parkinson’s Disease 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

 Teachers Enrich Students’ Education 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Producer Marketing Boards 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1596 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 

 Main Farm Access Road Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1597 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

 SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1597 

 Health Care Bill of Rights 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

 Health Care Reform 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

MOTIONS 

 Hours of Sitting 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1599 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 227  The Saskatchewan Health Bill of Rights and Responsibilities Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 303  The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 .................................................................................................................. 1600 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 303  The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 



 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1600 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 209 — The Measures to Combat Child Prostitution Act 

  Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1600, 1604 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1602 

 Bill No. 234 — The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act (No. 2) 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1609 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1610 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 Bill No. 210 Removed from Order Paper 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1610 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1610, 1613 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1611 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1611 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1612 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1613 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1615 

 Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1616 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1616 

 Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1617 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1618 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1620 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1621 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 15  The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

 Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

 Bill No. 1 —The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

 Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1997 ................................................................................. 1626 

 Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 .................................................................................. 1626 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 15  The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

 Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

 Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

 Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

 Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1627 

 


