






















































Hansard: March 13, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 141 
 March 13, 1997 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise on 
behalf of concerned citizens with respect to youth crime in our 
communities. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
establish a special task force to aid the government in its 
fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 
Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 
crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 
violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 
police officer; such a task force to be comprised of 
representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 
community leaders, representatives of the Justice 
department, youth outreach organizations, and other 
organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also rise with petitions from 
concerned citizens of Saskatchewan on the issue of youth 
crime: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
establish a special task force to aid the government in its 
fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 
Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 
crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 
violence; such task force to be comprised of 
representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 
community leaders, representatives of the Justice 
department, youth outreach organizations, and other 
organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 
 
And as are bound in duty, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies for not 
standing quicker. Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present to 
this Assembly from individuals across this province who are 
raising the issue of provincial sales tax. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 
to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 
long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in years 
ahead. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals from 

across this province. Some areas in Saskatoon, Regina, 
Wroxton, Warman, Martensville, and many other communities. 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the 
following petition and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 
to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 
long-term plan to further reductions in the PST of the years 
ahead. 

 
And this comes from the people of Unity, Saskatoon, Paradise 
Hill, and all over Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 
revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 
levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 
property taxpayers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Outlook, Hawarden, Hanley, 
Kenaston areas, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 
present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 
to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 
long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 
years ahead. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Today these folks come mostly from the Wilkie-Unity area of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we have a lot more of these to 
come. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reduce the PST by two points in the ’97 provincial budget; 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime. 

  



142  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, 
the Saskatchewan health ombudsman Act. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move first reading of a Bill, the Saskatchewan 
government post-employment code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to present notice of a written question 
if I may. I also give notice that I shall on day no. 11 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how much does the government 
pay per month for rent — in rent, pardon me — for the 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
office at 117 Third Avenue West in Melville; how much 
has been budgeted for the renovations at the provincial 
building in Melville for the relocation of the SERM office 
to the provincial building; and how much does the 
province currently budget per year to hold provincial court 
in Melville? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Environment: regarding 
the big game damage compensation program: (1) is there a 
$500 deductible for individuals claiming compensation 
under the program; (b) if yes, why is there a deductible; (2) 
how many acres of Saskatchewan crop are at risk of 
wildlife depredation and/or consumption; (3) does the 
Environment department have a long-term plan to deal 
with this problem in the future; (4) does the department 
plan to cultivate and to plant more palatable crops on each 
quarter section of wildlife land and/or Crown land to help 
alleviate this problem; (5) if the $11 licence is found not to 
be necessary in the future to fund this program, will the fee 
be eliminated? 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women in Agriculture 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Agriculture Week and I am pleased to speak in support of 
women in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know about the traditional role of women in 
agriculture in this province. We know that the farm wife who 
managed the household, made meals for the men, sewed the 
clothes, and did her countless hours of chores. 
 
That traditional farm wife got very little recognition for her 
work on the farm, for her financial contribution, for her 

emotional investment in the farm along with the farm family. 
That traditional farm wife was a real person, Mr. Speaker, and 
without her contribution the business of agriculture would not 
have succeeded to the extent that it has in this province. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the role of women in agriculture is 
changing. In the last two years at the University of 
Saskatchewan, over 50 per cent of the students have been 
women. According to the latest federal census, 21 per cent of 
farm operators in Saskatchewan were women. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those figures are from the 1991 census, and 
so I’m confident that the percentage of farm operators who are 
women is actually higher than 21 per cent today. Mr. Speaker, I 
would never quote a statistic from 1991 or 1992 in this House 
without acknowledging that it may be a little bit out of date. In 
this case I’m sure the percentage has risen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today women are taking charge of farms. They are 
handling finances and doing a very fine job. They have many 
issues of concern. And, Mr. Speaker, I commend them very, 
very much and wish them all the very best in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Computers in Agriculture 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as part of 
the Agriculture and Food Week here in the province, I would 
like to recognize a new piece of farm equipment that is making 
an impact. 
 
As we all know, farming has always required various types of 
equipment — the cultivator, the seeder, the sprayer, swather, 
and the combine to just name a few. The equipment has 
changed over the years as technology has developed, but its 
general purpose has remained essentially the same. 
 
However, new, highly specialized equipment has been 
developed because of the diversity that has occurred within the 
industry. One of the new pieces of equipment, Mr. Speaker, and 
the one that many may not equate as being essential for farmers, 
is the computer. 
 
The use of computers as a farm management tool is steadily 
increasing across Saskatchewan. They are being used in many 
farming areas, from deciding what to grow and when to sell 
produce to assist with the bookkeeping, business planning of 
the operation. 
 
The computer provides producers with the capability of 
accessing a wide variety of information and technology. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I am aware of a new computer technology that 
actually controls the tractor to prevent overlap in spraying and 
seeding, which will save on input costs. 
 
With computers, producers have an immediate access to such 
information as weather reports, market, and agricultural events. 
The computer, Mr. Speaker, has become an essential tool for 
our farming community, along with the seeder, the cultivator, 
and the combine. Thank you. 
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Paul Bodnarchuk’s 105th Birthday 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all reach 
certain milestones in our lives and I have one in particular that I 
would like to share with the members of this Assembly. 
 
In my constituency, I want to recognize the 105th birthday of 
Mr. Paul Bodnarchuk, celebrated on February 27, 1997. At the 
present time, he is a resident of the first floor of the Melfort 
hospital. He was born in the Western Ukraine in 1892 and 
arrived in Star City, Saskatchewan in 1911. 
 
A farmer, Mr. Bodnarchuk, was well known for his skill as a 
cantor at St. Nicholas Church and the Ukrainian Orthodox 
Church. Mr. Bodnarchuk still enjoys smoking a pipe and visits 
from his family. He has been a resident of Gronlid, Diefenbaker 
Place, Pioneer Lodge, and Nirvana Pioneer Villa in Melfort. 
 
Please join with me today in extending our very best wishes for 
plentiful health and happiness to Mr. Bodnarchuk on the 
occasion of his 105th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Oil and Gas Exploration and Development 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker. For the past few days now, I’ve 
had the pleasure of standing before this Assembly and giving 
positive economic news regarding my constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. I do not want to break the streak, Mr. 
Speaker, so today I want to comment on one more positive 
economic news, that not only benefits my constituency but the 
entire province. 
 
Statistics show that February sales of Crown petroleum and 
natural gas rights were $31 million, which brings the fiscal year 
to $140.8 million, the second highest level for a fiscal year. 
Seventy-eight percent of the February sale was in the 
Weyburn-Estevan area. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, a record was set with the purchase of 
a sixty-four and three-quarter hectare parcel of land in the 
Weyburn oil and gas pool at over 1.8 million or at an amazing 
$28,203 per hectare. Furthermore, four special exploratory 
permits were issued to encourage exploration in the central part 
of the province. These four bids, Mr. Speaker, totalled 9.5 
million. 
 
The new records and new commitments, Mr. Speaker, are clear 
evidence that Saskatchewan’s economy is growing. Oil and gas 
exploration development is one of the many sectors of our 
economy proving that the economic agenda that this 
government established for the people of Saskatchewan is 
working. With restored confidence comes renewed growth. This 
government has restored the confidence and we are now 
witnessing the growth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rafferty-Alameda Dams 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to a 
story in the Leader-Post today both Rafferty and Alameda dams 
are expected to fill to capacity this spring, preventing an 
almost-certain flood on the Souris River were it not for these 
two dams. 
 
Of course just four years ago the Deputy Premier said he could 
take a walk across Rafferty without getting his chin wet — 
there’s no water; there hasn’t been any water there, there’s no 
water within miles of the boat launch and there never will be, to 
quote the Deputy Premier. 
 
Proving that, while he may know about fine dining, he knows 
very little about water management, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to once again invite the Deputy Premier to come 
down and take his jaunt across Rafferty-Alameda. 
 
And while he’s in the area, there’s some very good restaurants 
in Carnduff and Oxbow and Alameda that would provide him 
with an excellent meal for his $40. I’ve taken the liberty of 
copying the restaurant listings from the yellow pages for the 
Deputy Premier’s information and I look forward to seeing him 
down in our area in the restaurants. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sled Dog Championship 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 1 and 2 
at Candle Lake, the first annual Oval Sled Dog Championship 
Derby was held. This is a special event because this is the first 
time in Canada that an oval dog championship was held. 
 
The Lieutenant Governor and his wife both attended this event 
and they also participated in the dog sled race. I also had the 
opportunity of entering into the race against the mayor of 
Candle Lake. I did well, Mr. Speaker — I won the race. 
 
I would like to thank the sponsors: the community of Candle 
Lake, the PA (Prince Albert) Musher Club, the CanNorth Oval 
Sled Dog championship derby. They did a wonderful job in 
organizing this event. I wish them well in the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Songbird 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canada recently 
honoured the best of the best in the industry with the Juno 
Awards. Among some of the names we will recognize were 
Shania Twain and Celine Dion. 
 
As Canada continues to develop and nurture musical talent we 
may see a young local woman become one of the newest 
shining stars. Stephanie Thomson is the daughter of Dennis and 
Loretta Palmier of Fort Qu’Appelle. I had the pleasure of 
working with Mr. Palmier on the Fort Qu’Appelle and District 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
  



144  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

Stephanie is releasing her debut album “Almost Blue” and 
debut video tomorrow here in Regina, March 14. This is a 
project that’s been two years in the making. I will also have the 
privilege of attending a debut in Fort Qu’Appelle on Saturday 
night 
 
To achieve this milestone, Mr. Speaker, along the way 
Stephanie won first prize in a 1994 Bud Country Talent Search, 
has sung at the Big Valley Jamboree, the Merritt Mountain 
Music Festival, on the Nashville North Stage at the Calgary 
Stampede, and has been the opening act for Martina McBride. 
 
Most recently, a television crew from Saskatchewan came to 
Vancouver to tape the recording session for “Almost Blue” and 
they were so impressed with her talents they featured her as one 
of five up-and-coming Canadian country stars on CBC’s 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Prairie Roadhouse. 
 
I am sure all hon. members will join me in offering best wishes 
to Stephanie and wish her much success in all her future 
ventures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The internationally acclaimed 
Canadian writer Margaret Atwood once said, and I quote, 
“What would happen to our individual identity if every morning 
we looked in the mirror and saw the reflection of someone 
else.” 
 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, when a nation like Canada 
looks for its cultural reflection and sees instead The Fresh 
Prince of Bel Air or the latest take-off on the O. J. trial. 
Specifically, what happens to Canada and our sense of 
ourselves if we lose the institutions which have helped shape 
and define our identity? The short, irrefutable answer is that the 
loss of identity is the first step towards loss of sovereignty. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I want to publicly state in this 
Assembly my support for the national effort to save a most 
important Canadian institution, the Canadian Broadcasting 
system, the CBC. 
 
For 60 years the CBC has given us programs that reflect 
Canadian identity, Canadian values, Canadian history, Canadian 
lifestyles. It is so much more than a news-gathering device, to 
which we on this side say, thank heavens. Canadian musicians, 
writers, actors, are joined with the Canadian people through the 
CBC. 
 
The CBC is part of the lifeblood of this nation and this 
province. It is crucial that it be allowed to remain so. Therefore 
I want to commend and endorse the efforts of Ours to Keep 
committees here in Saskatchewan and across the nation, Mr. 
Speaker, that is much more than a . . . so that, Mr. Speaker, 
Canada is much more than a geographical spot on the map. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Property Tax Reassessment 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
issue of reassessment was raised in the House yesterday, but 
today I want to direct my question to the Premier because it is 
such an important issue and it cannot be ignored. Mr. Speaker, I 
quote: “Has democracy succumbed to bureaucratic 
dictatorship?” That question was posed to the Premier yesterday 
at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention in Saskatoon, and clearly illustrates 
that the bitter feelings over reassessment continue to fester. 
 
Rural leaders have made their position clear. They want to wait 
a year to work out the obvious problems in the reassessment 
process. The Premier himself has admitted what people have 
been saying all along, and I quote: “Reassessment is not perfect. 
Are there inconsistencies — yes.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem with reassessment are more than just 
inconsistencies, and the people of this province deserve to have 
their concerns addressed and the problems resolved before the 
reassessment process proceeds any further. Mr. Speaker, will 
the Premier finally listen to his residents and make changes to 
the forced reassessment process before they are forced to take 
drastic action and break the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by first 
of all expressing my hope that the hon. member’s concluding 
words of the question were not an invitation by the hon. 
member — I’m sure they weren’t — or suggestion that any 
law-abiding citizen in Saskatchewan would break the law as the 
question seems to imply. And I hope that in his follow-up 
question he makes that absolutely clear. 
 
The fact of the matter is that since 1987, as the former Devine 
administration passed the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) administration laws, something with 
which we concurred in, people in Saskatchewan decided at the 
request of the RMs (rural municipality) and urban 
municipalities to come to grips with the question of assessment, 
now 30 years overdue. For 30 years everybody has been afraid 
to pick up this political hot potato. For 30 years people have 
shirked their political responsibility at all levels. 
 
Now as a result of SAMA, which is controlled by the RMs and 
the urban municipalities, we are ready to proceed. Let us roll up 
our sleeves and get on with the job of modernizing the tax 
assessment basis for taxation in Saskatchewan, plus provide all 
the tools — as we have — for local governments to achieve the 
same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rail Line Closures 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already seen 
the confusion the government has created by not thinking 
through its reassessment plan. Not only does this show how 
irresponsible government is being, it also shows the  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

government’s short-sightedness. Another example of the 
government’s lack of long-term vision is how the closure of rail 
lines will impact the municipalities’ tax burden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some examples of the huge hit 
municipalities will suffer if rail lines close. One example shows 
that if a 40-mile track of line closes in the Imperial subdivision, 
it will directly affect six communities, including Imperial, 
Stalwart, Liberty, Penzance, Holdfast, and Simpson. The tax 
loss will be staggering — over $83,000, Mr. Speaker. The total 
loss of education taxes will be approximately $48,000, more 
than half the total amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In another area, 10 communities, including Broderick, Elbow, 
Strongfield, and that line stand to lose about $120,000, Mr. 
Speaker — $120,000. 
 
Will the government explain who is going to shoulder the lost 
revenue when these lines are shut down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, perhaps the hon. Liberal member would tell the 
Assembly and the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
where he was and where the provincial Liberal Party has been 
over the last three or four or five years when the Liberal Party 
in Canada, in Ottawa, embarked upon its massive program of 
branch-line abandonment and railway deregulation. They were 
nowhere, Mr. Speaker. They were absolutely and completely 
silent. 
 
And we said when they did away with their Crow rate, we said 
when they’re going on branch-line abandonment, that this 
would wreak a lot of havoc and a lot of difficulty for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. Silence from the Liberal Party 
opposite — silence and complicity of the provincial Liberal 
Party, in the hip pocket of the federal Liberal government in 
this whole issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are we at? We are with the provincial 
governments of the West in standing up for branch-line 
abandonment programs, which we oppose, but a short-line 
railway program, which we support; doing all that we can 
working with our rural municipalities and our farm 
communities to try to keep this vital link of transportation alive 
— something which you people worked to destroy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Deadline 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, stand 
up for the people of the province. Stick up for rural 
Saskatchewan for once. Take a leadership role and look after 
your people, instead of blaming the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this House are aware as well that 
the deadline for farmers to register for crop insurance is 
Monday. This is a new program. Many farmers remain sceptical 
about any program offered by this government, as a result of  

the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) fiasco. And there’s 
a delay in the grain transportation system in this province 
because of weather and because of the lack of leadership by this 
government. Resulting is a very dismal sign-up record for crop 
insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, given these facts, will you extend the deadline for 
crop insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I think that the Liberal 
member opposite and the Liberal Party opposite suffer from a 
great deal of the lack of credibility . . . a lack of credibility. No, 
no, the hon. member talks about lack of leadership. Safety net 
funding reduction by Ottawa, a cost of $250 million. Crow 
benefit elimination by the Liberal Party has cost us $320 
million. Deregulation of the transportation system, a cost of $65 
million. I could go on with respect to pesticide registration and 
the costs of recovery. I’ve got a list of 10 items, all of which 
cost the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you get up . . . He says I’m the Premier. Why weren’t you 
with us when we were objecting to the Liberals in Ottawa doing 
all of this? Where is the provincial Liberal Party? Don’t be in 
the hip pocket of the federal Liberal Party. Stand up with us. 
 
With respect to crop insurance, we have paid down $150 
million of the crop insurance debt to make it affordable to the 
people of Saskatchewan — to your silence. 
 
We’re standing up for the farmers of Saskatchewan; you have 
abandoned them just like you and your railway friends have 
abandoned them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contaminated Groundwater 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe that most 
members of this House would agree that governments must do 
what it can to ensure that there’s a clear balance between 
industry development and environmental concerns. 
 
However today’s edition of The Western Producer paints a very 
poor picture of Saskatchewan’s Environment department. It 
tells the story of Perry Anton, a farmer from south-west 
Saskatchewan who claims a Calgary oil company is to blame 
for contaminating his groundwater and the subsequent death of 
dozens of his cattle. 
 
An autopsy of one of Mr. Anton’s cows found a chemical that is 
used in the oil industry to remove rust from pipes. And Ocelot 
oil denies the charge. And in the words of the Environment 
minister, “Our people have been in touch with the company, 
and when they say they have never used it, we believe them, I 
guess.” 
 
Will the minister explain why his department is letting this 
matter go on without conducting a proper investigation of its 
own? 
  



146  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. We have been dealing with Mr. 
Anton for several years on this very unfortunate issue. We have 
a number of reports prepared on the situation, in fact it 
measures several inches deep. And we are continuing to 
correspond with Mr. Anton, to work with him. Most recently 
we have offered to test his cow herd at our expense and to do 
any autopsies on any future animals that perish. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Chair is having a great 
deal of difficulty being able to hear the hon. minister, and I’ll 
ask members on both sides of the House to allow the answer to 
the question to be heard. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  As I said, Mr. Speaker, we are working 
with Mr. Anton and doing what we can to help resolve this 
unfortunate situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rules for Lobbyists 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, questions have recently been 
raised about whether the Premier’s former chief of staff is 
exercising undue influence as a paid lobbyist only a short time 
after ending his tenure with this government. As a result, I 
would like to inform this House that I will be introducing a Bill 
in short order entitled, the Saskatchewan government 
post-employment code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of such a Bill would be to prevent 
top-ranking government and Crown corporation officials from 
leaving office and immediately begin lobbying the government 
or Crowns whose services they’ve just left. As such, these 
individuals would be subject to a one-year cooling-off period. 
 
This government already has such rules in place for cabinet 
ministers. Will the Justice minister indicate whether he is 
prepared to extend this law to cover top-level bureaucrats, as 
the federal government and three other provinces have done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I thank the member for his question. 
 
I want to assure the member and all members of the House, in 
fact we are considering the kinds of options that he has put 
forward in the House today. We’ll be looking at whatever 
suggestions he may have in legislation and we have been giving 
this matter some thought and will be giving it further 
consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Murder Case 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Justice. 

Mr. Minister, four months ago the Justice department laid 
murder charges against four individuals for the brutal murder of 
14-year-old Darrelle Exner. Those individuals have been in 
custody since then. But today, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, 
the Crown prosecutor announces there is no reliable evidence to 
charge three of the four and releases them. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you be certain enough to lay charges and 
deny bail for four months, and then suddenly decide, whoops, I 
guess we have no reliable evidence? Mr. Minister, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve an explanation — what happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
well knows, this matter is before the court and I cannot make 
any comment. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I was expecting that 
type of an answer, but I have another question that hopefully we 
get answered down the road. And this question is . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, one has to wonder whether or not, if there is no 
reliable evidence, that the minister has a handle on his 
department. The Milgaard case, the Martensville case, the 
Latimer case — botched, botched, and botched. And now once 
again it looks like another case may have been botched. The 
Crown prosecutor said it. There was no reliable evidence to 
proceed with charges against three of the accused. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, any way you look at this 
situation, something has gone terribly wrong. Either three 
innocent men were jailed for four months for a crime they did 
not commit, or three guilty men have just been released. Which 
one is it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I previously 
said, I’m not in a position to comment on this and I will not do 
it. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, there 
you go again telling businesses what’s good for them instead of 
listening to what they’re telling you. The Regina chapter . . . 
chamber is saying that we need more than a targeted tax relief. 
The president of the chamber says a 2 per cent cut would be a 
good start. 
 
Madam Minister, that’s exactly the same position as the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) Party. That’s exactly the same 
position as thousands of people who have signed our PST 
(provincial sales tax) petition. And more keep coming in every 
day. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to listen to business 
groups who need a tax break? When are you going to listen to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers who also need a tax break? Will you 
lower the PST to 7 per cent in next week’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

the member opposite for the question. And first of all, when 
you’re dealing with a Tory question you have to set the record 
straight. What I was not talking about was the budget. I made it 
clear yesterday that the budget is coming out in about a week, 
and until that time I’m making absolutely no comments about 
the budget. 
 
But what I was referring to, that is important, is the support the 
business community has given to this government for our 
targeted tax cuts. And I’d like to take this opportunity to read 
the letter. It’s a letter from the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, and it says: 
 

It is important for the business community to recognize 
many of the forward-looking decisions that were 
announced in previous provincial budgets. 

 
Then they list our targeted tax cuts to business and say they’re 
working, and conclude by saying: 
 

Most importantly, your government’s attention to the 
deficit and debt has offered small firms one of the most 
important elements they need to create job stability. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of setting 
the record straight, possibly targeted tax relief does work. But, 
Madam Minister, yesterday our leader met with the board of the 
Saskatchewan chamber. They are saying the same thing that the 
Regina chamber said — targeted tax relief is not enough. They 
told them to make sure we set the bar high and continue to call 
on you for a broad-based tax relief through a cut to the PST. 
 
Madam Minister, I agree that targeted tax relief works, but only 
for those sectors that are targeted. Wouldn’t a broad-based tax 
cut that puts money back into the pocket of every consumer and 
into the till of every business be even more effective? 
 
Madam Minister, every day Saskatchewan business, money, 
and jobs continue to hemorrhage across Alberta and Manitoba 
borders. It’s time to stop the bleeding. It’s time to cut the PST. 
Why don’t you do that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite seems quite attached to his question. And I’ll 
say to the member opposite, I’m equally attached to my answer. 
The budget is coming in a week and we will wait for that. 
 
But I must say it is a little amusing to have the Tories talking 
about tax cuts. If there’s anybody in this House responsible for 
high taxes, it’s them. It’s them. They’re the ones who brought 
the flat tax to this province. They’re the ones who tried to 
harmonize the sales tax. They’re the ones who drove up the 
debt so that we have to pay a level of interest which, by the 
way, if we weren’t paying that level of interest, we wouldn’t 
need a sales tax in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, they can ask the question as 
many times as they want — all they should remember is, it’s 
only seven more sleeps till the budget. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Funding 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan are growing more and more frustrated 
with the shrinking financial commitment of this government 
towards education. The devastation we are seeing in the Regina 
education system is being played out in rural areas as well. 
Provincial grants to rural school divisions totalled about $167 
million this fiscal year — $22 million reduction in the past three 
years. 
 
Results are clear. Three schools face possible closure in the 
constituency represented by my colleague from Saltcoats; four 
others may close their doors in the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency, Mr. Speaker; seven schools may soon close in just 
two constituencies. 
 
If education is a priority as indicated in the throne speech, when 
can the people of Saskatchewan expect to see an adequate 
financial commitment from this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see 
that after several days in the legislature the Leader of the 
Liberal Party finally asks a question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, what I find so amusing 
about the question is that this Leader of the Liberal Party was 
the former chairperson of a school division in this province and 
he oversaw the closure of schools in his own school division. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say to the member exactly 
what the Minister of Finance said: it’s seven more sleeps; wait 
till the budget. The budget will be delivered on March 20, and 
you will hear the details of the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring to the attention of the minister that, as she 
indicated this week, schools have closed in the past and will 
continue to close. There’s no disputing that — there’s no 
disputing that. 
 
I would also like to bring to her attention that the Wadena 
School Division, along with the people of Margo, last year 
closed the school. A kindergarten to grade 6 school — 19 
students affected. 
 
The school board of Canora closed the school in Rama last 
year, a kindergarten to grade 6 school — 23 students affected, 
Mr. Speaker. 
  



148  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

Today what we are hearing though is that communities like 
Annaheim, communities here in Regina with schools of 
enrolments in excess of 200 students, are in jeopardy of being 
closed. In rural Saskatchewan, we’re seeing schools of 150 
students in jeopardy of closing. 
 
Will the minister be able to reassure boards of education that 
their funding concerns will be addressed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I find 
interesting in the member’s question is that it’s okay if he closes 
them down but it’s not okay if other people close them down. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said last week when I had the 
opportunity to answer this question, is that in this province of 
Saskatchewan, over several decades schools have closed. They 
have closed as a result of demographics. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province, we’ve had school closures of 12, 20, and so on, 
schools per year when there were 10 per cent increases in 
educational spending, 20 per cent increases in educational 
spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a week to the budget. We’ll all get the results 
of the budget. It’s seven more sleeps. And all I can say to the 
members is stay tuned; it’s coming; it’ll be here in a week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I guess maybe that’s one of the 
reasons why I haven’t asked the question of the Education 
minister, because I knew what the answer would be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, a letter I received recently from 
the Kamsack Board of Education indicates that it can no longer 
bear cuts to its funding allotment. The correspondence states 
and I quote: 
 

The only thing left to reduce is that portion of the 
instruction which directly affects the quality and type of 
education our children will receive. 

 
It goes on to indicate that: 
 

We cannot afford to mortgage our children’s future with 
respect to education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these sentiments have been endorsed by at least 
two other school divisions — Melfort and Tisdale. What 
commitment will the Minister of Education make today that 
will ensure all Saskatchewan residents have the same access to 
quality education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I think that when you 
look at the results of what the public has to say about public  

education in the province, the public in this province 
overwhelmingly support our public education system. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, it is getting better. People overwhelmingly 
support public education in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is seven days to the budget. We have 
seven more days, seven more sleeps. I know the member really 
wants us to talk about the budget today, but we’re not going to 
do that. The Minister of Finance will deliver her budget I think 
at 2 o’clock, March 20, next Thursday, and we’ll all be here to 
hear the results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Utility Rate Review Process 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) told this House yesterday that any proposed increase 
in auto rates will be subject to the government’s present 45-day 
review process, in spite of the fact that this process has been 
proven to be little more than a farce. The fact that only a 
handful of people attended the recent meetings to review the 
proposed increase in natural gas underlines little if any 
confidence in the present system. 
 
This is why I was pleased to hear the vice-president of 
SaskEnergy indicate recently that this government is proposing 
changes to the process. As Ken From put it in a February 12 
news item: 
 

I think the public really wants the utility to charge them 
fairly. Until they see an independent body doing that, I 
don’t think the public will be satisfied. 

 
Will the minister in charge of our Crown agencies tell this 
House when the process will be updated and the new one put in 
place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 
opposite for the question. I think the options that the members 
would put forward would be quite welcome, if they wish. There 
are obviously processes that have been used in the past that 
have been very large failures in terms of the public usefulness 
of them. 
 
The wars between lawyers on two sides battling whether or not 
something should be higher or not has no access by public 
citizens at all; so that is an answer that has had very little utility 
in the past. 
 
So the question of whether there are better processes than this, I 
think is an open question. The Crown review has heard from the 
public. We are in the process of discussing a number of 
governance and management issues with respect to the Crowns, 
and if members opposite have good suggestions with respect to 
the process, let them advise us. 
 
I can say that in the meantime, that the 45-day review process  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

has, while with its warts, has given the public access to a 
discussion that allows them to hear the answers to questions on 
major themes that concern them. 
 
We will look forward to continuing to improve the transparency 
of our Crowns and look forward to your advice in that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9  The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 9, 
The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, 
The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 
1997 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, 
The Tourism Authority Amendment Act be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I welcome 
this opportunity today to speak on behalf of the energetic and 
visionary people of the Humboldt constituency in reply to the 
Speech from the Throne. I say with a great deal of sincerity that 
I hold these people very near to my heart and I intend to uphold 
the traditions and values that they cherish so very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Humboldt constituency are an 
exemplary model of liberalism. They are a people who value  

free enterprise, a social conscience. They are self-starters, risk 
takers, and they possess common sense. They are a faith-filled 
people who place a great deal of emphasis on family, 
community, sharing, and a concern for their neighbours and the 
world around them. And I am proud to be their representative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin my speech I would like to take a 
few moments to commend some very fine people for their 
contributions to this Assembly and their province. 
 
I wish to commend you, Mr. Speaker, for your effective manner 
in dealing with the business before this Assembly. And I wish 
also to commend you, Mr. Speaker, for initiating a 
province-wide tour of schools to promote an appreciation for 
democracy and the work performed by elected representatives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to welcome the new member 
from North Battleford to our caucus and this Assembly. He 
brings with him his life experience, his enthusiasm, and his 
respect for all people. We’re more than happy to have him with 
us. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, welcome to the pages. This is a great 
opportunity for them to witness and to be part of democracy in 
action. And I truly appreciate the support that they provide for 
us throughout the time the Assembly is gathered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to express my gratitude to the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, the Clerk, the Deputy Clerk, and the entire 
legislative staff for the support services they provide. 
 
In addition, every member of this Assembly is fortunate to have 
the support of their constituency assistants, their constituency 
executives, and their family members. I wish to express my 
deepest gratitude to every one of them for their support and 
friendship. It means a great deal to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the throne speech and I 
thought how wonderful our province could be if all that was 
contained within that speech was actually happening. But as the 
speech came to a close, the words of one of my constituents 
describing the NDP (New Democratic Party) government came 
clearly to mind: flowery rhetoric that is not followed by actions. 
They talk the talk, they say, but they certainly do not walk the 
walk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard this type of comment repeatedly in 
the last few years and so I have recognized that people are 
actually experiencing something different than the 
accomplishments that this government is professing. 
 
This government is proclaiming that people of this province are 
in better shape than ever before. Well as social service critic, 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard a different story from the many 
people in this province who are disillusioned. I have heard from 
the unemployed and those victims living in abject poverty. And 
I have heard from those people who say that they will find a 
way in spite of this government’s oppressive policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



150  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, Lynda Bigknife-Watson is with Chili 
for Children and after the Speech from the Throne, she told 
reporters that her program serves 20,000 lunches a year to the 
poor, and she says they are seeing more preschoolers and adults 
in food lines. She is troubled by the increasing number of 
people while funding decreases. And I’m sure she is troubled, 
Mr. Speaker, by the lack of vision and wisdom in this 
government’s policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to quote Lynda Bigknife-Watson: “If a parent is a 
sole supporter in their family they need to find full-time 
employment and they need suitable pay.” This is an 
observation, Mr. Speaker, from a person who sees poverty day 
after day. And you can bet that she, and others like her, are 
going to hold the NDP accountable for those bowls of chilli. 
And you can bet she and others, including myself, will be 
listening carefully to the budget address to see what monies are 
being allotted for training spaces to assist people into the job 
market or their own entrepreneurial activities. 
 
What concerns me the most, Mr. Speaker, is our children. Large 
numbers of our children are living in poverty. You see, the 
Premier and his government have made promises, promises 
about eliminating child poverty, but they have not kept any of 
them. Mr. Speaker, in a campaign speech in 1991 the Premier 
said and I quote, as many people have heard before: “By the 
end of the first term an NDP government will have had this 
problem beat.” 
 
It’s almost six years later and this government is into its second 
term. The term following the term that they said they were 
going to beat the problem. Now, since the Premier made that 
promise, more kids line up for more and more community food 
programs in centres all over Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1991, Mr. Speaker, the Premier believed that his government 
had it in their power to beat this problem. Now the only solution 
he offers is to blame the federal government. The truth of the 
matter is, I believe that the Premier does have a certain amount 
of power to beat the problem, but it won’t happen unless he and 
his government start believing in the abilities and the talents of 
the people he is governing. 
 
Government can improve the situation for our people by 
improving the climate for small business, for medium-sized 
businesses, for farmers, and for individual entrepreneurs. We 
simply cannot choose otherwise, because food bank numbers 
are increasing. Despair is not uncommon among our young 
people, and the dignity people possess is being eroded. 
 
In Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the development of an 
underground food bank in the last few years. Many families are 
hungry but they refuse to make their hunger openly known to 
others because of the stigma attached to those in poverty. And 
so church members have set up a food bank, but it is not on 
Main Street. It is quietly operated through the church to protect 
the dignity of those who cannot bear the thought of anyone 
knowing — knowing that they cannot find a job to adequately 
provide for their family. 
 
No wonder people are losing confidence in this government.  

This is a government whose prime focus has been on power at 
any price. The members opposite are misleading the very 
people who elected them. Mr. Speaker, they refuse to recognize 
or speak of the reality at hand. 
 
Honesty, integrity, and compassion are essential ingredients of 
a just society that we would all hope government members 
would strive to possess. However it appears that these virtues 
are becoming obsolete in the world of government because of 
the lack of commitment to those virtues. It is becoming 
increasingly difficult for this province to move ahead and 
become the kind of place that we can all say we’re proud to call 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without placing a high priority on our moral 
obligation to our people, we will continue to operate with a 
distorted sense of values that continue to detract from the truth 
at hand. The truth is, Mr. Speaker, that this province is in a 
shambles because of misdirected priorities by the Premier’s 
government. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are fearful of their health care 
system because of unnecessary funding cuts to services and 
staff in our hospitals and nursing homes — funding cuts driven 
by this government’s underlying motivation to centralize and 
maintain absolute control over everything. The doctors and 
nurses know that and so does everyone in the community. 
 
This province has more money on hand than it has ever 
dreamed could be possible, due to their high taxation, windfall 
revenues in the oil and gas sector, and VLT (video lottery 
terminal) revenues, and transfer payments from the federal 
government. And still we close down all that is meaningful in 
our rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people throughout the province are talking 
incessantly these days of the government’s lack of caring and 
concern for their viability. They speak of the NDP’s lack of 
humanity, of their exclusion of people in the decision-making 
processes. The people are fully aware of this government’s 
predetermined agenda to cut costs to health, education, and 
social service at any cost, without consideration being given to 
common sense planning or the lives of people, without allowing 
businesses, communities, and people to have some say in 
determining the direction to be taken. Mr. Speaker, good 
government should be about building up, not tearing down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan has never been awarded the 
respect or the consideration by this government that it really 
deserves. Farmers, who deserve our allegiance for contributing 
so much to the lifeblood of this province, have been handed out 
disrespect by this government in the way of broken promises 
regarding GRIP money that rightfully belonged to them but was 
snatched away to balance the budget, the discontinuation of the 
RUD (rural underground distribution), and rural gasification 
that would have assisted them so much with value added 
diversification in the agriculture industry; escalating fuel prices, 
high taxation and utility rates, etc., etc., etc. 
 
(1430) 
 
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

Mr. Speaker, people know that rural Saskatchewan is being 
systematically dismantled by the NDP government. Rural 
people claim, and rightfully so, that this government could care 
less about their existence. Everyone knows the importance of a 
strong infrastructure needed to support vital growth in all our 
communities. The people know that we need our schools, our 
hospitals, and a good road system if rural Saskatchewan is to 
survive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has to deal in a concrete and 
positive way with the main concerns facing the people of this 
province before it’s too late. Economic development and job 
creation go hand in hand on the road to prosperity. Without 
economic development there can be no sustainable jobs for the 
future. Saskatchewan remains a have-not province. This is 
totally unnecessary and unacceptable. 
 
People of my constituency and people throughout this province 
know that entrepreneurial activity is the way of the future. And 
they also know that restrictive labour policies, high taxation, 
and sky-rocketing utility rates, fees, and unnecessary 
government interference is standing in their way. Everyone 
knows this except the NDP. 
 
The New Democrats talk about economic growth and job 
creation, but they just can’t seem to bring the two together. And 
so what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a feeling of helplessness and 
futility, of pessimism and distrust that is shared by both 
individuals and the business community. When nothing is 
happening it means we have stagnated. 
 
I suggest the Premier and the honourable minister of no 
economic development listen to the definition of the word 
“stagnant.” According to Webster’s New World Dictionary, 
stagnant means “without motion, not flowing or moving, a lack 
of movement, lacking in activity or interest, sluggish.” Need I 
say more, Mr. Speaker? 
 
These very words — sluggish, without movement, lacking 
activity or interest — are an apt description of the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Why can’t the NDP see what everyone else does? Why? They 
can’t see it because they just don’t understand. They don’t 
understand or place value on the immense power of human 
potential within the people of this province. They don’t 
understand that as government they are here to create an 
environment conducive to growth that will assist in the fruition 
of this immense human potential. 
 
It is government, Mr. Speaker, who can assist in providing 
opportunities for people to reach that potential. But the 
members opposite don’t understand the fact that they are here to 
serve and not to be served. I believe it is the responsibility of 
government to seek out the best in our society, to encourage, 
develop, and strengthen it. But rather than taking responsibility 
for unravelling the economic and social fabric of our province, 
this government continues to ignore the reality at hand and it 
continues to blame others. 
 
Resorting to blame, Mr. Speaker, is a sign of weakness —  

avoiding the issue and not solving the problem. It is clear that 
the Premier’s government do not feel any obligation for their 
mistakes, misrepresentations, and miscalculations. 
 
But thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, that the people of my 
constituency, the people of the Humboldt constituency and, I 
know, many others in this province, are tenacious and wise 
people. They see through all of this and in spite of the stifling 
policies of the present government, these people continue to 
possess strong characters, determination, and vision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are a faith-filled people who believe 
that out of chaos will come order. They continue to persevere in 
the face of this adversity and they will not be put down. 
 
A fine example of this tenacity and determination, Mr. Speaker, 
was evident two weeks ago when 3,000 signatures from the 
people of Humboldt and area were placed on a petition in their 
fight against service and staff cuts to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in 
Humboldt — 3,000 signatures collected in just two days and 
presented to the district health board. Three hundred people, 
many of whom were seniors, rallied to attend that district health 
board meeting to make known that they would stand firm and 
combat further destruction to their health care system and their 
community. 
 
I applaud these people, Mr. Speaker, and I admire these people. 
They know the meaning of interdependence and community. 
They know when they’re being sacked, and they intend to put 
an end to this government’s ludicrous policies that speak 
nothing of substance or coherent planning. And they will finally 
put an end to this government in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I look across the floor, I see the purveyors of the 
provincial health care reform — or should I say the merchants 
of misery? Surely, this can’t be the medical scheme envisioned 
by Tommy Douglas. Was it his idea to pit cities, town, and 
municipalities against one another? I think not. 
 
And yet that is the situation we find everywhere. People 
scrambling to keep the doors open to their seniors’ complexes 
and community hospitals. Doctors in rural centres find little or 
no time off for themselves and their families. Nurses are 
exhausted due to staff cuts because of the instability in the 
system. 
 
Concerned community leaders present common sense 
cost-saving plans, more services for fewer dollars, but they are 
being ignored by the district manager in sync with the Health 
minister. What is the use, people say, they just don’t care. The 
Premier does not even care about us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shudder to think of the gross indecency of this 
government’s destructive policies. And I dare say that Tommy 
Douglas would not recognize his medicare nor would he 
condone the insensitivity and cruel tactics of this so-called 
socialist government. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has exhibited a 
divide-and-conquer approach and is driving a wedge between 
urban and rural residents. They have done this in relation to  
  



152  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

municipal governments, school boards, and health facilities. Is 
this the proud legacy they wish to leave? 
 
I know that I sound a bit angry and I know I’ve raised the ire of 
a few members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but it should be 
understood that as an elected representative I am simply 
expressing the feelings of indignation of the people of my 
constituency and of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I care particularly about the youth of 
our province, the youth of Saskatchewan. Some of our young 
people are fortunate enough to have the financial and moral 
support of their family and community, but there are also many 
who are feeling despair and don’t know where to turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many who desire and have the ability to seek out 
continued education can no longer afford it. One has only to 
look at the recently announced tuition increase at the University 
of Saskatchewan to be sceptical. Tuition at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) will increase by an average of 10 
per cent per year for the next two years. That means a first-year 
medical student will see tuition increase to $5,200 next year and 
$6,000 in 1998-99. So what are they to do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And even if they do spend years at university, they find 
themselves unemployed because there is little or no opportunity 
for them to find work in this province, their own province. For 
working students, a minimum wage job or part-time job is not 
the answer. Despair sets in, Mr. Speaker, and some of these 
young people will be forced to go on social assistance. 
Disillusioned and impoverished, many resort to addictive 
behaviours to kill their pain. Some will simply leave 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As elected representatives we need to understand that through 
our policy directives and legislation, we bear a heightened 
responsibility for the moral state of society. The morale of our 
youth can be strengthened through policy directives that afford 
them the opportunity to find and live out their purpose in life. 
 
Through honouring and encouraging the vision for 
Saskatchewan that our young people brought forward in 1995 
when they met in Prince Albert at Forum ’95, we can do our 
part — our part — by measuring policy decision-making 
process and making sure that it is in line with and supports this 
vision of these young people. 
 
This vision, I know, may be beyond the understanding and the 
horizon of the current government members. However, our 
young people do understand this and possibly within them lies 
our hope for not only the future but the present. Our young 
people are truly coming to realize today that they are the 
catalysts, the leaders not only of the future, but the leaders of 
today. They are taking responsibility and they are offering 
ideas, visionary ideas, for what their generation can be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of our youth envision a new kind of society, 
one that will bring meaning to the lives of our people. One that 
speaks of creative, productive, and satisfying pursuits, unlike  

the activity that we now experience as economic and social 
development. The hon. minister of stagnant development and 
his cohort, the minister of offloading and taxation, promised 
pie-in-the-sky gambling profits. 
 
But the government didn’t plan well, again, and as usual, didn’t 
listen. They went ahead and they rolled the dice and they 
crapped out. Greed was the motivator, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
gambling policy is simple — there isn’t one. It was a greedy 
grab for money without any thought of the consequences. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the consequences of the NDP gaming 
policy is family breakdown. One only has to look at the 
problems resulting from VLTs to see marital breakdown, child 
neglect, and suicide. 
 
This so-called government finds itself in a balancing act, trying 
to weigh its greed for profits against its moral obligation to deal 
with social issues. And as I see it, government has dropped its 
obligation to protect those in our society who are the least able 
to help themselves. 
 
A good example, Mr. Speaker, is spousal abuse. There is 
inadequate funding available for safe houses or transition 
housing in this province. Where are the priorities of our Premier 
and his government? Mr. Speaker, $500,000 was put into the 
Family Support Centre in Saskatoon. And soon after, that 
funding had been slashed in half and the centre now is forced to 
turn victims away. 
 
As the member from Saskatoon Sutherland mentioned in his 
throne speech, the Family Support Centre is a very valuable 
asset and has proven it is needed. At least 23 organizations and 
agencies validated the need for the centre and the successful 
work being done through the centre. And so I ask the members 
across the way, how much does this government justify cutting 
the funding in half on such an important project? 
 
The other point I’d like to make is now the minister seems to be 
reconsidering the fact, and he’s paid $15,000 to one of his 
cohorts to study the whole thing again to see whether this centre 
is needed. 
 
The well-being of women and children are at issue, and this 
government shows very little concern for the victims of spousal 
abuse. The fact that many women are encountering some form 
of physical or sexual abuse during their lifetime does not seem 
to concern the Minister of Social Services, otherwise funding 
for the Family Support Centre would not have been cut in half. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all aware that the incidences of pedophilia 
are on the rise. Children are the defenceless victims of those 
who prey upon them. Child prostitution is on the increase, and 
again the defenceless members of our society are overlooked. 
 
Where is our government in supporting programs for them, in 
taking immediate, profound, powerful measures to deal with the 
perpetrators of this crime — one of the most unforgivable 
crimes allowed to go on and on, a crime that damages one’s 
body and soul for life. Where is the compassion and the 
understanding from this government? And where is the action 
plan for these child victims and their perpetrators? 
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

And while I’m at it, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the Premier 
about employment equity. While in opposition you called on 
the previous government to introduce employment equity 
legislation. What’s happened to it? You’re the government now; 
you can make it happen — and happen immediately it should. 
 
While women wait for you, they take jobs that pay less and jobs 
that are demeaning. They are women in the workforce who 
have resorted to striptease because of the lack of pay equity and 
management opportunities. Maybe the Premier never intended 
to bring in employment equity in the first place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this government to be very arrogant. We 
have seen many examples of arrogance on high, Mr. Speaker, 
many. All because the government does not feel they have to 
listen to the people. They feel they know better, they feel they 
know best, and they will do what they think is best. 
 
Well that happened in 1982. Remember? And in June of 1995 
you were not listening and the opposition side of this House 
grew larger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the culture of politics is shifting. There is no 
longer an acceptance of politics without principle. Our leaders 
and a good government must look beyond themselves. They 
must have an attitude of servant leadership that nurtures the 
great and immediate desire of all people to participate and 
flourish in our society. Our citizens will accept nothing less. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the government could create an environment 
that would lead to prosperity, then I would have supported the 
throne speech; however, I feel the Premier and the members 
opposite are still not listening because they simply don’t 
understand how to create the environment people are asking for, 
and therefore I cannot support the Speech from the Throne. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe this is my, perhaps 10th or 11th opportunity 
to speak to the Speech from the Throne. And I’m just reminded, 
Mr. Speaker, each and every time we have an opportunity to 
stand up in this House what a rare privilege it is. Whether we’re 
standing up in question period to ask a question or answer a 
question, whether we’re standing up to address a throne speech, 
or a Bill, or to take part in the process of estimates, it is a rare, 
rare privilege that each of us has to stand up in this House. And 
that privilege is granted to us by our constituents — by the 
people of our home communities who give us this privilege. 
And so I don’t begin this speech or any reply to a Speech from 
the Throne without expressing my deep thanks to the people of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow who have extended to me this privilege 
for some 10 and 11 years. 
 
Also I want to, Mr. Speaker, give a word of welcome, as other 
members have, to the new member from North Battleford. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s no doubt in my mind that I’m hoping his stay  

in the House is a short stay, but there is also no question in my 
mind that he will in some ways raise the level of debate to bring 
some constructive debate, constructive comments, from that 
caucus, which is not typically what we have heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not intend my remarks in this throne speech 
today to be lengthy, but I must say, Mr. Speaker, I am 
motivated a little in the task by comments that have been made 
first by the mover of this throne speech, the member from Swift 
Current, and comments made by the seconder of the throne 
speech, the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
I was particularly inspired by both of their very thoughtful 
speeches. Rare in this House, Mr. Speaker, is it that we have 
two back-to-back presentations which are as thoughtful and as 
considerate and as eloquent as were the mover of the Speech 
from the Throne and its seconder. 
 
And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, my attention was 
engaged by both of these speakers because both, Mr. Speaker, 
interestingly, took analogies from the Scriptures. You will 
recall, the members will recall, that in moving the Speech from 
the Throne, the member from Swift Current talked about the 
people and events of the Book of Genesis, of those individuals, 
families, then become a community, then become a nation in 
the Book of Genesis. He talked about that experience and how 
that experience didn’t happen overnight. It wasn’t a sudden 
process. It took, it took years and generations of time. 
 
And then we went exactly to the other end of the Scriptures, 
right to the Book of Revelation, with the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast when she seconded the Speech from the 
Throne, because she talked about the New Jerusalem and the 
vision of the New Jerusalem. And she talked about how 
difficult . . . what labour is required, and what patience is 
required to reach the dreams of a New Jerusalem on 
Saskatchewan soil. She talked about, I think I recall her talking 
about, Aesop and the parable of Aesop and the dropping of the 
pebbles. 
 
Interesting though, Mr. Speaker, both the mover and the 
seconder, each from their perspective of Scripture, drew the 
same essential analogy for life in government in the 1990s. That 
analogy or that illustration or that lesson being that the building 
of a vision — of a New Jerusalem —the building of a nation 
and a community under God is not a rapid process, but a 
process that takes patient, patient labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I have to characterize our government over the 
last five and six years, this has been a process of patient labour 
in building a vision that we share for this province. 
 
Now I don’t, interestingly enough perhaps, Mr. Speaker, come 
with an illustration from Scripture today. But I do come with an 
illustration. Now this illustration I bring, Mr. Speaker, is not 
really all that profound but it is a little story that I used to tell 
my Cub Scouts around the camp-fire. 
 
Now I didn’t quite tell it in this fashion. I’m going to embellish 
just a little. But for me, this old Cub Scout illustration that I 
used to use at the camp-fire, I believe, is quite illustrative of life  
  



154  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

in government in the 1990s, and particularly the life that it has 
been for this government. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a story about three frogs, three little frogs, 
one of whom was a social democrat, two of whom were 
right-wingers. Now I’m not able or prepared to say to which 
political movement these right-wing frogs would line up with 
because that changes. Sometimes they’re Tories and sometimes 
they’re Liberals, and then once in a while we get a Reformer, 
and sometimes we get a Reformer who jumps to the Liberals. 
So I’m not clear how we can identify them politically, but let us 
just say there were two right-wing frogs and one little social 
democrat. 
 
Now the three of them, Mr. Speaker, they leave the marsh. They 
leave the marsh to tour the farm, because they’re curious little 
frogs. Rounding by the barn, Mr. Speaker, what do they find but 
a little cream can — you know the old cream cans about this 
high — and the farmer had left the lid off the cream can. 
 
So the three little frogs think that it would be a great bit of joy 
to jump into that can and sample the cream, Mr. Speaker — to 
jump in. And sure enough the decision was unanimous between 
the three of them — social democrat and the right-wingers. 
They all got together on this project and they jumped right into 
that cream can. 
 
And I tell you the first 10 minutes, Mr. Speaker, it was like 
nirvana. They had never in their life tasted anything like the 
cream in that cream can. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Usually it’s mice in the cream can not 
frogs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well the Leader of the Liberal Party here 
says it’s usually mice in the cream can. No, he’s got the stories 
mixed up. If he insists, I’ll tell him about the mice and the cats 
too, but today we’ll hear about the frogs in the cream can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first 10 minutes I tell you it was nirvana 
and they all just sucked up that luscious cream. They’d never 
tasted anything quite so good. And then I tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
reality set in. How do we escape the cream can? Because when 
they decided it was time to leave, they couldn’t jump out, you 
see, Mr. Speaker. There was no way you could jump out of that 
cream. And try as they would — they’d leap a little — they’d 
hit the wall. They’re all covered in cream; they’re slippery. 
They slid right back down into the cream, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, as the minutes in that cream can began to turn 
to hours, there seems to be some panic starting to set in. And 
the right-wing frogs of course, they really panic. How are we 
going to get out of here? I mean if we don’t get out of here 
soon, we just won’t have the strength. We’re going to just 
perish. We’re going to die in this cream can. And the little 
social democrat frog, he said, don’t give up, keep on paddling. 
 
Well the hours turn almost to sunset, Mr. Speaker. The sun is 
going down and these right-wing little frogs, they finally do just 
say, well it’s over; there is no hope. 

So what are we to do? Well let’s just drink the cream. Let’s just 
drink the cream. Let us eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die. And the little social democratic frog, he says, don’t give 
up. Do not give up, my friends. Keep on paddling. Keep on 
labouring. There will be a way out of this mess. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the sun sets on the cream can. The sun sets 
on the cream can and three little frogs are left to die. 
 
In the morning the farmer comes along and she looks in her 
cream can and what do you expect she sees, Mr. Speaker? Well 
she sees one little social democratic frog sitting on a nice pad of 
butter that he has churned through the night, Mr. Speaker. He 
has churned this butter through the night and there he sits in 
safety on this little pad of butter. And what do you expect he’s 
doing, Mr. Speaker? In the tradition of social democrats, 
reaching out and holding up his friends. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I review the course of governments in 
this province over the last three decades, I tell you I think we all 
got the cream can in the 1960s and the 1970s; we had the notion 
— we had the notion — that the cream was unending. And I 
don’t differentiate so much between all political parties here. 
We thought the good times would never end. 
 
That was a mistake, but I tell you then we made a bigger 
mistake in this province and in this country. We elected a bunch 
of Tories — we elected a bunch of Tories here in 
Saskatchewan, and then we compounded our misery by electing 
a bunch of Tories in Ottawa, and then we’ve compounded our 
misery by replacing the Tories in Ottawa with Liberals in 
Ottawa. 
 
When this government, Mr. Speaker, came to office in 1991, 
Mr. Speaker, there was no cream left in the can. At best what 
we had here was skim milk, and we’re expected to turn this 
skim milk into butter. But I’ll tell you there’s only one way to 
do that, Mr. Speaker — there is only one way to do that and 
that’s to do what we have done for the last five and six years, 
just keep on labouring — keep on labouring to turn the province 
around and to begin to rebuild to that vision of the New 
Jerusalem which motivates us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, there is much in what the 
member from Humboldt said earlier this afternoon to which I 
would take great exception. I’m not going to take up the time of 
the House to debate the rhetoric. But let me say there were 
comments that she made that I take . . . that I join in agreeing 
with her wholeheartedly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She spoke in her remarks this afternoon about Saskatchewan’s 
youth and how within that youth of Saskatchewan there is the 
promise of our future. On this point, Mr. Speaker, I, 100 per 
cent, fundamentally agree. Because I think we all ask ourselves 
the question in this House — I know we ask it in the 
government discussions and benches — we ask it regularly: 
why do we do this? I mean why do we go through this 
labouring and paddling in this cream can with its incessant 
demands and oftentimes criticisms? Is it not, Mr. Speaker, for a  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

single reason? Is it not to craft on this prairie soil, a life that is 
better — not for ourselves, not just for ourselves — but a life 
that is better for our children and their children, for those who 
are the young people of Saskatchewan today, the people which 
the member from Humboldt just talked about? Is that not the 
reason we labour, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now I know since the opening of this House, since its opening 
day, much of the discussion and much of the debate which has 
gone on in this Chamber and beyond this Chamber has focused 
on a certain group of young people in our province. And here I 
refer to that group of young people who have been violent in 
our streets, who have conducted themselves in an intolerable 
manner, attacking persons and property, stealing cars, and so 
on. And this legislature appropriately is struggling with that 
issue. 
 
The danger I think, Mr. Speaker, in this discussion as it’s gone 
on here and gone on beyond this Chamber, is that we may give 
the impression, or we may leave the impression, that somehow 
this group of young people are somehow reflective of 
Saskatchewan young people generally. Mr. Speaker, nothing 
could be further from the truth. Nothing could be further from 
the truth. 
 
This small, small group of, violent sometimes, young people 
involved in intolerable behaviours, do not represent, Mr. 
Speaker, the vast, vast, vast majority of Saskatchewan young 
people. For that matter, Mr. Speaker, they do not even represent 
a majority of young people who find themselves in conflict with 
the law. 
 
You will recall well, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure all members do, 
that when His Honour was here to read the throne speech in this 
legislature, we were joined by several, two at least, groups of 
young people to be part of that throne speech reading. One was 
the Peacock jazz choir from Peacock Collegiate in our city of 
Moose Jaw. Another was another group of young people from 
Moose Jaw who are involved in what we call the Grinning 
Lizard Teen Wellness Centre. It was mentioned in the throne 
speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are young people in numbers, who are giving 
hours of their lives and talent in the pursuit of great goals 
academically, athletically; in the case of our jazz choir, 
musically. In the case of the young people involved with the 
wellness centre, they’re trying to reach out to their peers, to 
make a better world for their peers. These young people who 
were here to witness the throne speech are the kind of young 
people that are representative and are typical of Saskatchewan 
young people today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The trouble is, you see, they just don’t 
very often get in the headlines. They don’t merit the headlines, 
they don’t get the lead on the 6 o’clock news and they don’t get 
the whole legislature in an uproar. Although I must say, with 
compliments to the Regina Leader-Post, I thought it was more 
than appropriate that in the midst of this debate they chose to 
publish an article, and a good article, about the number of  

young people involved in the Scouting movement in this city. 
 
I thought that was good of the Leader-Post to do that. Just to 
remind us you know, Mr. Speaker, on any given day of the 
week, on any given day of the week there are more young 
people involved in Cub Scouts in a troop than there are stealing 
cars. Any day of the week there are more people in a hockey 
rink, any hockey rink, than there are out stealing cars. And I just 
think, Mr. Speaker, this legislature needs to stand up and say 
unequivocally, that the young people of Saskatchewan today are 
some of the best young people we’ve ever known in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I have the great privilege and 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to serve in this government at this 
time as the minister responsible for the child action plan — an 
action plan that has been pioneered and brought to fruition by 
other of my colleagues before me, other ministers of Social 
Services who have served and ministers who have served in 
other portfolios — the now Minister of Finance; the now 
Minister of Education; my now seat mate, the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview, who gave this child action plan in 
Saskatchewan its birth and its impetus. 
 
But I, Mr. Speaker, now fortunately have the privilege of being 
the minister responsible for it. And because of that 
responsibility, I am often afforded the opportunity to be with 
Saskatchewan’s young people and their families, and people 
who are working with families and young people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Humboldt, in her remarks this afternoon, 
talked about the Chili for Children program here. She was 
quoting one of the people actively involved there at Chili for 
Children. I’ve had the chance, Mr. Speaker, to be down there at 
Chili for Children to assist in passing out some of the food there 
and seeing the kids, seeing the adults at work there; it’s a 
wonderful experience. 
 
And as I go there and I see these children, and I think of the 
children in our own homes, Mr. Speaker. And then I think of 
how life has changed in the last 10 and 20 years. We were all 
young once, Mr. Speaker, I think. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Not that long ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Not that long ago for some us, as my 
colleague from Eastview says. But just compare, Mr. Speaker; 
we have in our home, a 13-year-old and an 11-year-old, and I 
think about their lives at 13 and 11 and my own life. We live 
about in the same neighbourhood, not far from . . . well we’re 
just in the same neighbourhood. And I think about our children, 
I think about my growing up in that same neighbourhood. 
 
When I was 11 we had two channels of television, Mr. Speaker; 
they were both black and white, when the TV was working. 
Two channels of television, and one of them was based here in 
  



156  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

Regina and one of them was based in Moose Jaw. That’s before 
the CBC deserted Moose Jaw; but two channels, black and 
white. 
 
Now kids today, they turn on the television and they’ll see 15 
channels, some of them. Oh some folks have a dish out there, 
I’m sure, and they’re looking at 40 channels, Mr. Speaker. And 
these channels are not coming from Regina; they’re not coming 
from Moose Jaw. Where are they coming from? They’re 
coming from Detroit and they’re coming from Toledo and 
they’re coming from New York; they’re coming from 
Hollywood, and they’re putting into our homes all these values 
that have nothing to do with the values of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was 11 years old, I think it would be fairly 
true to say that myself and my generation and our friends, we, 
for the most part if not unanimously, had a mom and dad at 
home. When we went home, there was mom and dad at home. 
And I don’t think, even though my dad did not have a 
high-paying job, I don’t think I ever lost a night’s sleep worried 
that my dad might lose his job. I didn’t worry about that. 
 
The Premier of the province was in Moose Jaw not too long 
ago, Mr. Speaker, and spoke to a group of young people of high 
school age, the high school leadership in Moose Jaw. As we 
were leaving that meeting that night, one of the young people 
came out with us and she stopped the Premier aside and said, 
there’s something I want to talk to you about. What was it? She 
asked the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan if he could 
assist in her mother getting a job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I tell you when I was in grade 11 and grade 12, I wasn’t around 
asking the Premier to find a job for my parents. I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, when I was 11, my grandmother and grandfather lived 
one block away. My other grandparent lived a few blocks away. 
I had aunts and uncles all over town. Nowadays, we don’t have 
that kind of extended family in many cases. We just don’t have 
that. 
 
When I was 11 years old, I remember the public health nurse 
coming to school. She was teaching us how to brush our teeth. 
Now the public health nurses come to the school and teach our 
children about AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). 
 
We have the police coming to our schools. They used to come 
and teach us how to cross the street safely — that’s what they 
used to teach us. Now they come to our school and what do 
they teach our children? What do they have to teach our 
children? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Inappropriate touching. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Inappropriate touching. How to watch 
out for pedophiles on the streets of our cities and towns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for children growing up in the best of family 
circumstances, these are not easy times to grow up in. Now 
imagine then, imagine then, the children who are at programs 
like Chili for Children who are growing up often in very 
difficult, difficult family situations; imagine what it’s like for 
children growing up in poverty, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, why do we keep on paddling in this cream can? 
It’s not for ourselves. It’s for these children and young people 
of Saskatchewan. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, you can take 
any component you desire of this throne speech — any 
component you desire —and you will see the purpose and the 
motivation is to build, albeit patiently and slowly, but to build a 
better life in this province for our people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  And that is why, Mr. Speaker, you will 
find at the very centrepiece of this throne speech the 
commitment of this Premier and this government to addressing 
the needs particular to children who are living in poverty, to 
children in their families who are facing the scourge of poverty 
in this province and in this nation. That is the centrepiece of this 
throne speech. 
 
And I am deeply, deeply appreciative of the remarks that the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland brought to this debate in 
the House the other night on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity earlier this year to be doing a 
little reading of Robert Burns. You may know his very famous 
“Cotter’s Saturday Night.” In that little “Cotter’s Saturday 
Night” the scholars say he was really describing his own home 
and family situation. 
 
He concludes “Cotter’s Saturday Night,” which is a description 
of a simple home and a simple family, he concludes the 
“Cotter’s Saturday Night,” does Robbie Burns, by saying: 
“From scenes (such as) . . . these, old Scotia’s grandeur 
springs.” The grandeur of Scotland, says Burns, is in the scene 
of the humble home. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, my political philosophy is to say 
this: the strength of a nation, the strength of a nation is in the 
strength of its homes; the soul of a nation is born out of the soul 
of its homes — out of the place where we go at night to be with 
those we love. 
 
Our goal surely as legislators and our goal in this Speech from 
the Throne is to strengthen the Saskatchewan home — our 
home, which we all share, and particularly those homes where 
we go at night. That’s the goal. And that’s why we’re in this. 
And that’s why we will not forsake the task irregardless of the 
competition, irregardless of the criticisms that come from across 
the House and come from those right-wing frogs who 
sometimes just get in the cream and want to eat it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to sit down in a minute. I just want to 
share one other observation. And this comes . . . I’m motivated 
to remember this and share it because of the comments of the 
member from Humboldt when she talked about Chili for 
Children. It brought back to me a memory of a time that I was 
at Chili for Children — it was in November last year — and 
they had the children do sort of the Aladdin thing. You know, if 
you had three wishes, if you had three wishes what would you 
wish for? And they’d had the children do that as a little 
exercise. And all of the children had written out their three 
wishes and had a nice little poster and they posted the posters  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

all over the gymnasium. So after the meal was over, I just went 
around and read some of the posters. 
 
And you can predict, you can predict what was on many of 
those little posters You know — if I had three wishes I’d get a 
Nintendo, or I’d get . . . the kind of things that you might expect 
8-, 9-, and 10-year-olds to be asking for. But the one I think that 
— well that I don’t think, I know — I will never forget, a little 
11-year-old girl, and what did she put on her list of the three 
things that I would wish for. Number one, I would wish for a 
job for my mom. Number two, I would wish for a car for my 
mom. And number three, I would wish for a puppy for me. 
 
Now note that list, Mr. Speaker. And if that isn’t a political 
agenda for governments of all stripes, I don’t know what is. A 
job for my mom — employment and the security and the 
dignity that comes with employment. A car — that symbol of 
freedom, that symbol of a decent standard of living for every 
family. And a puppy for me — just a little bit of love, please, in 
my life. 
 
If in the course of this government and this legislature we can 
move our province even a few pebbles closer to making it 
possible for every home in our family to say there’s a job for 
mom and a car for mom and a puppy for me, we will have done 
our work. 
 
This throne speech takes us closer, Mr. Speaker, closer to that 
vision. And therefore I will wholeheartedly stand in this House 
and support this speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
enter into the debate. As we have listened to the members from 
both sides of the House now for a few days, obviously there are 
some who believe that the Speech from the Throne possesses 
within it some futuristic plans, and there are some who believe 
that it doesn’t. 
 
I’ve studied it very carefully. I mean it’s not a very long 
document so I’ve read through it, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to 
go into it a little bit. But it’s going to be difficult. Because as I 
thought last night after I got back from the Ducks Unlimited 
banquet, what would a fellow say if you had to get up and make 
a speech tomorrow on this particular document? And I thought 
to myself, it’s going to be really difficult to say something 
about nothing. 
 
However if you think about it, you can say something about 
nothing if you think positively and think about the potential for 
doing something out of nothing. And so I’m going to try to do 
that for a while today. 
 
Now I don’t want to get right into that, Mr. Speaker, because 
this is the only opportunity that I’ve had to ramble at a little 
extent. I want to take a minute to thank some people who have 
attended in my constituency and I think that’s an important part 
of the throne speech and the things that have happened in our 
own constituencies. 

For example, Mr. Speaker, I would like seriously to take a 
moment to thank the Speaker of this House for the trip that he 
took to our constituency this past year. In the program of 
course, that people have talked about earlier, we were included 
where Mr. Speaker took it upon himself to go around to the 
schools of our province to advocate to the children of our 
province the necessity of a democratic process and the reality 
that the one we have not only is working but is good in spite of 
the criticisms that we have received. 
 
I want to share with you, Mr. Speaker, the comments of one 
lady that phoned me from Hazlet, Saskatchewan after you and I 
attended to that school. The person that called was a young 
woman who teaches part time at that school but was not in the 
school the day that we were there. 
 
She said that ordinarily her son comes home from school when 
she hasn’t been there and she will say, what did you do today? 
And he’ll say, oh, not much. Well did you learn anything? Well 
not really. Well where are you going? Where are you going? Oh 
I’m going to watch TV. And that’s the last she sees of him. 
 
Well this day she said he came into the door bubbling all over. 
Hey mom, guess what? And she said she said to him, well 
what? He said there was two fellows at our school today, and 
boy, were they ever interesting. They even got along. They 
were from two different political parties and they weren’t even 
fighting. And not only that, she says that he said, I know exactly 
now how the legislature works and why we have it. 
 
And she said he went on for half an hour telling all about the 
experience that he’d had. And she was so thrilled by that that 
she took a special time to phone my office to let me know, and I 
wanted to congratulate you for having made that possible. So 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  In other areas, of course, we want to 
welcome all of those folks that are involved in this sitting of the 
legislature. We have pages of course, and everybody has talked 
about them and we want to add those kind of welcomes as well 
to all those that participate in the system. Nice to have 
everybody back. 
 
And it’s good to be here. Myself, I enjoy the opportunity to 
speak in the Legislative Assembly, and I enjoy of course 
passing on now to the people of Maple Creek, the town in our 
constituency that has, I understand, now joined us on television. 
For the very first time in a very long time I will be able to 
deliver messages directly to people, because obviously I would 
have to drive out there with a car and go door to door to speak 
to them in other years. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now I understand that they can just simply turn it on and they 
have the advantage now; they can also shut it off. So probably 
. . . and you know, Mr. Speaker, that I have learned to start most 
of my speeches with a very simple line, and it goes like this — 
it’s my job to talk; it’s your job to listen. Let me know if you  
  



158  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

get done before me. And if you do, of course, if you’re on 
television, you can just shut it off. 
 
But welcome to the people from Maple Creek, the town, and 
those people that are possibly in from the rest of the outside 
community visiting with grandma or grandpa and have a chance 
to turn the TV on to the cable network. We’re on channel 2 
there, and we hope that you will come to learn that the 
democratic process is a good process and that your MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) actually does work. 
 
So here we are, Mr. Speaker, with an obligation to not only let 
the people of the province know what’s going on, but it’s also 
good to know that we have the chance to thank our researchers 
and the people in our staff offices for the work that they do, 
especially when they just send me my speaking notes so that I 
would know what I was supposed to say. I’m glad they got 
here. So I will review them very quickly to see if there was 
anything intelligent in here that I should talk about. 
 
There are some days when we are prepared. But nevertheless, 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know from past years, talking about 
the Speech from the Throne really doesn’t need a whole lot of 
speaking notes prepared. One simply has to listen to the content 
of the speech and put it into the reality of the life that surrounds 
us in our own home constituencies and try to relate that into our 
remarks here so that we can, as the member from Moose Jaw 
just pointed out, help to contribute to the betterment of our 
society and the betterment of life for our people in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s exactly what we’re trying to do. 
 
Talking to the member from northern Saskatchewan a few 
minutes ago, obviously his intention is to try to make life better 
for the people up North because they have different 
circumstances. And we have such a big province with such a 
diversification in weather, and such a diversification in 
distances, that we need to get together like this and talk, not 
only on our feet, but sometimes behind the bar, where we 
discuss with people . . . and I do mean the pole, not the one 
where we have a drink. Just to make sure the folks from Maple 
Creek understand there’s a difference. 
 
We do want to go back there occasionally and visit with these 
folks while some of the other proceedings are going on and find 
out what they really think about life, and what they really know 
about their conditions that we don’t understand. 
 
And it’s surprising how often I’ve found that I don’t know a lot 
of things about people in this province, even though I thought I 
knew quite a bit. And especially when I was younger, I thought 
I knew it all. But as time goes by, we find that there are things 
that we don’t understand about other people within our own 
province. And as we debate and talk, that is a melting-pot that is 
necessary in the process. 
 
We see in the address from the throne, Mr. Speaker, comments 
about trying to cure the problems, for example, of child poverty 
in our province. This is a noble initiative by any government, 
and we certainly would never say anything against that 
initiative. And we would encourage the government to continue 
to try to help young people. 

As the father of six, I understand all too well the need for 
people to get a good, basic, sound start in life. Education is an 
extremely good part of that, but it goes back to the small years 
when a child is growing up. And certainly if you’re hungry, 
you’re never going to have your full potential realized. 
 
And certainly the remarks that were made by the member from 
Moose Jaw a few minutes ago are all valid. Unfortunately 
though, I had a problem. I know that this man is a United 
Church minister. I sometimes attend the United Church myself. 
But I had to say to my colleague, it’s a good thing we’re not in 
church because I’d certainly have to heckle if this was a 
sermon. 
 
And I certainly would have had to heckle because he alludes to 
the fact that right-wingers perhaps drink all the cream and leave 
nothing for anybody else. Believe me, we have a social 
conscience just as big as yours, and we may apply it in a 
different way but our hearts are still in the same place and we 
do sympathize with the children who are in poverty. 
 
We honestly believe though, sir, that we have, Mr. Speaker, 
solutions that might even be better; better than the ones that the 
government is proposing. And we have said from the outset, as 
an opposition party, even though we are at the rating of third 
party status, we’ve always said that we will have an alternative 
and become a true alternative to the government. And then let 
the people choose at the polls next time whether they think our 
ideas are good or not. 
 
I believe they may have some consideration for our thoughts on 
child poverty. You cannot solve child poverty the way this 
government goes about it. Because there’s a fundamental flaw 
in dealing with child poverty with socialistic ideas. And the 
reason for it is because you depend on using other people’s 
money and finances and resources to pay for your problem. And 
that will never work because you will run out of resources 
because there aren’t enough rich people in the world to solve 
the problem if you took all the money that they’ve all had. 
 
Because money really buys you nothing. Money is only a unit 
of exchange and all you can buy with money is what’s available 
to be sold. You have to have goods and products and services. 
You can’t give a child a carrot if nobody grew a carrot; doesn’t 
matter if you pay a million dollars for it. 
 
Look at the currencies of Europe. You can have in Germany 
inflation for three times after the war, and you could carry — I 
heard stories from my grandfather — you could carry around 
millions of dollars in a wheelbarrow and what could you buy? 
A pound of butter. And the next day you might not even get 
that. 
 
So money is only numbers; money is only a unit of exchange. 
What you really need to solve poverty — and stay with me here 
— is something that’s real. And that is jobs. And that is work; 
that is businesses. 
 
Now the member, of course, from Moose Jaw alluded to the 
fact of jobs being great. And he said a nice little story about a 
child who wanted to have a job for her mother, and I think it  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

was a car for mom and a puppy for me. And I don’t know 
where her dad went to in this story, but I’m hopeful that he 
would be here too. 
 
Because . . . In this story, let’s change that a little bit to: how 
about a small business for mom and dad. How about if we have 
two cars, one for mom and dad. And how about if we have a 
few toys instead of just a puppy; and an education in a small 
school some place in Regina, one of those that might be closed 
in the next little while. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Why not aim just a little bit higher, Mr. 
Speaker, is what I’m saying. Because the spin-off effects of 
providing opportunities are much better than providing the 
alternative that this government is suggesting in this throne 
speech. 
 
The approach that is being talked about in this Speech from the 
Throne is simply this: we’ll send people to get educated and 
trained so they can get a job. And that’s good. We do that. I’ve 
done that with my children. However, if there’s no job to go to, 
what good is all the training? 
 
So here we are with a whole group of people who are going to 
have a lot of new training, a lot of new emphasis on all of these 
things that are going to get people prepared for jobs. But we 
have no jobs prepared. 
 
So here’s what we’ve done. We run them through the school 
cycle, 12 years in school. Then we send them on to university. 
And we can get them there for three years or maybe five, and if 
we’re lucky, six. And we’ve taken them out of the job market 
now for 18 years plus 6 and that’s 24 years old now because 
they were six when they started. 
 
So now they’re 24 years old; they’ve never done a day’s work 
in their life. And what do you do? You get them on welfare for 
awhile because they can’t pay their student loans back and they 
haven’t got a job yet. So they go on welfare for awhile. 
 
Now the welfare program says we got to figure out how to get 
these folks to work. So we come up with a job assistance 
program some place, and some businesses offer some incentive 
so that they will put these people to work. So they get a job and 
it’s just long enough so they qualify for unemployment 
insurance, after which time of course they go on the 
unemployment insurance — after they’ve had this short period 
of job — and they run that through to the end. 
 
After that, they have to go back on unemployment insurance. 
And there they say, well we’ve got to retrain you for a new job 
because you haven’t found one yet. So it’s back to community 
college, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) or some place else; back into the training program. 
Now this kid is 30 years old, still hasn’t had a job, and knows 
no place where to go except maybe to Alberta. 
 
However, in the scheme of things, if we had concentrated a 
little more on a right-wing philosophy, which is to have an 

industrial revolution in this province . . . And you will say oh, 
you’re a hundred years too late. Well let’s talk about this for a 
minute. The reality is that Saskatchewan missed the industrial 
revolution. 
 
We were so busy fighting the Dirty Thirties and the war and the 
droughts and the grasshoppers, we missed the industrial 
revolution. 
 
The hewers of wood and the haulers of water. Why did we get 
that tied onto us, Mr. Speaker. How did that happen? Because 
that’s exactly what we are. We have always delivered raw, 
natural goods to the rest of the world and we never process 
them at home. What does that mean? We missed the industrial 
revolution. Because what was the industrial revolution? It was 
the determination to diversify, a thing that we just started 
talking about again. I’ve heard it all my life. I’ve been around 
for quite awhile too. Heard it a lot of times. What should we 
do? We should diversify. We should raise hogs, feed our barley. 
We shouldn’t ship our calves to Ontario. We shouldn’t ship our 
barley to Ontario, and feed our own cows; we should do it at 
home. Nothing new about this story. We’ve heard it many, 
many times before. So we missed the industrial revolution. 
Let’s have it now. Let’s start. 
 
Somebody said, well hindsight is 20/20. Of course it is. And it’s 
no good to have hindsight unless you say at some point we 
missed the boat, let’s get on it or let’s at least start paddling it. 
Now is the time. We’ll have the industrial revolution and we 
will do that because that’s what’s going to happen. 
 
And here’s how we’d get these young people out of poverty — 
we create this job base of real, solid jobs, not shuffling for 
paper from this building to that building over there, from one 
desk to the other. We’ve been paper shufflers extraordinaire. 
But they’re not lasting jobs and they’re not productive. See jobs 
created by government are never productive. They never have a 
spin-off, trickle-down effect, and that’s what we need, is jobs 
with a trickle-down effect. 
 
You’ve all been into the country with the oil industry. It takes 
$16 million to create a job in the oil industry. However, when 
you create one, if you drill an oil well and you’ve got 
production, you have a real product. You’ve got oil; you can 
turn it into gasoline; you can turn it into heating oil; you can 
turn it into soap, I guess. You could even turn it into a plastic or 
whatever. It’s all got spin-off effects. Those are real jobs, things 
that people can do. And their trickle-down effect is, for every 
time you create one of those jobs, you’ve created another 
spin-off of seven or so jobs as well. 
 
That’s an economy. That’s the kind of thing you have to 
encourage. That’s where you want to put your money, is not in 
investments in those companies, but providing the opportunity 
for them to be able to work. That means changing your labour 
laws and getting them on a level playing-field with the rest of 
the world. It means things like short-line railroads that the 
Premier alluded to today, and I thought that was great. I was 
really happy to hear that. 
 
The Premier of this province says he supports the short-line rail  
  



160  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

concept because he believes that that’s good, and I can 
understand that because it is good. And the reason that it is 
good is because it’s probably the only way we’re going to save 
a lot of our branch lines. We’re going to have to do it ourselves. 
We’re going to have to get off our duffs and do it ourselves. 
 
Sitting around waiting for the federal government to do it isn’t 
going to happen. It is not. There’s no way this federal 
government in Ottawa is ever going to remember that 
Saskatchewan exists, so we may as well do it for ourselves. And 
we’ll start our own short-line railroads and we’re going to have 
to do some things. 
 
We’re going to have to provide a level playing-field for those to 
be able to compete, and that means that we have to change our 
labour laws — and you people know that. There are labour laws 
in this province that trickle down from the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) over to the short-lines, and the short-lines 
cannot operate under those circumstances. And today I think I 
heard the Premier recognizing that problem. When he started 
talking about their need and the reality and his support of 
short-line railroads, I heard the message in there that he’s going 
to do what it takes to make it work. So look out, big unions, I 
think you’re targeted; you’re going to get hit. And it’s about 
time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about poverty and rail lines and 
transportation, it’s not all this issue and then the next issue. 
They all roll together. It’s one great ball of effect — cause and 
effect — for our province. We need to diversify. We need to 
have the industrial revolution. We need to have jobs that are 
real. We need to have people then able to solve their own 
problems of poverty by being able to include themselves in the 
provincial economy and in the provincial wealth. And that can 
happen if we go back to the fundamental basis of letting 
business operate, and letting people be the business operators. 
 
So instead of getting mom and dad a job, let’s provide the 
opportunity so that they can have a small business. Not 
everybody can do that, but a lot of people can. Let them be 
entrepreneurs. Let them create their own wealth, and let them 
feed their own children. It’s fine to educate people, but it’s no 
good to provide them with an education and no job at the end of 
the trail, except in Alberta or in the United States. I know all too 
well about that. I have to travel thousands of miles to find out 
where my children are at. 
 
This note that I have here says I’m going to keep my comments 
brief, believe it or not. I don’t think so. It also says on the next 
page I’m going to keep my comments brief. Well I think we’ll 
throw that one out, too. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to talk a little bit though about 
some of these other issues that pertain to the Speech from the 
Throne. For example, we have heard people from the chamber 
of commerces lately criticizing, very much, the taxation issues 
of our province. And I’m surprised that we didn’t go into a little 
more depth in this Speech from the Throne on some of the more 
current issues and some solutions to those problems that plague 
us at this particular time. 
 

(1530) 
 
The SAMA issue has been a festering boil on the neck of 
society for two years already. And the reality is that so many 
people say that they understand what’s going on, but in reality I 
don’t think a lot of folks do. So I want to just talk about this for 
a minute. 
 
The reality is that in years gone by we have depended on an 
assessment that has gone back to values of 30 years ago. And 
somebody said, well that’s terrible; that’s out of date. Well that 
may be true. But on the other hand, suppose all of the values are 
30 years old throughout the whole province. As long as they 
were fairly compared so that taxation was fair from one group 
to the other, what difference did it make? Not a bit. 
 
But in the scheme of things, we must be modern. And so we 
have said, we’ve got to update by 30 years. And we don’t want 
to be out of tune with Manitoba and Ontario or somebody else 
that upgraded and they’re up to 1994. We’ve got to be modern 
too. 
 
So in the sake of needing to be modern and up to date, we’ll 
change the system. That process did apparently start in the 
1980s when the government said, look this is too hot of an issue 
for governments to handle. So they set up an organization called 
SAMA because they wanted to duck the heat. Don’t blame 
them a bit because this is a hot potato politically — always has 
been, always will be. 
 
I said at that time, as a municipal councillor or as a reeve 
perhaps at that time already, I said this is going to be nothing 
but a fiasco. We’re going to have a lot of trouble here. Not that 
I’m a soothsayer, Mr. Speaker, but simply because it was one of 
those things that just naturally looked like it had to cause a lot 
of trouble. The minute you try to shift taxes out of my pocket 
into your pocket, you’re going to be mad. And if I try to pass 
your taxes over to the fellow’s over there, they’re going to be 
mad and they’re going to all try to pass them back to me so that 
I have to pay them out of my pocket. And then I’m going to be 
mad. So everybody’s mad no matter what you do when you 
start fooling with taxation, especially if it includes shifts of who 
should pay. 
 
So right from the start when the plan was to upgrade to . . . the 
timing, we were going to be in trouble. Not that being because 
we’re going to improve the timing and be modern but because 
we’re never going to stop there. The minute you set up an 
organization called SAMA with a big fat budget — I think it 
was at that time $700,000 a year — you had to know that those 
people were going to find it necessary to do something to justify 
their job. And how do you justify your job if you’re on a board 
called SAMA? You make some changes. Well if you don’t 
make changes, then they all say, well you’re redundant, you’re 
useless, we might as well get rid of you. So we got to do 
something. 
 
Well we’ll go to market value assessment instead of production 
value on farm land. Well that was bound to create a stir because 
automatically you distort it right there, any comparison of tax 
base from one municipality to another or from one area to the  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

other of the province. When productivity got out of the picture 
and market value got into it, anybody could distort the tax 
system, and it has started already. 
 
Immediately the oil companies started saying, we’re being 
treated unfairly; and the gas company said no, we’re paying too 
much; and the guys with the pipeline said, heck no, we’ve got 
the worst problem here. And everybody started lobbying. 
Where did they lobby? At SAMA? No, not at all. They started 
at the Premier’s office. May as well go to the top and get this 
problem solved. 
 
So it became a political football when it was supposed to be in 
the realm of the SAMA organization, and of course it never, 
ever did land in that court at all. It automatically became a 
provincial problem, a provincial political problem, and we’re 
kicking that football back and forth here every day. And it’s 
going to continue. It can never be stopped any more. It’s one of 
these revolving kind of things that once it gets started, you can 
never get it stopped. 
 
And so we’re in a mess. And it’s going to be a big mess because 
you’re going to have a tax revolution on your hands out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does the Minister of Education do? She says we can’t 
have a tax revolution on in rural Saskatchewan. That’s terrible. 
My father’s a farmer. So she went back to the drawing board 
and said, we’re going to stop this all and we’re going to solve 
the problem by putting a cap on. 
 
Well I got a phone call the next morning from the mayor of 
Leader, and believe me he’s not very happy. Because that 
means that the costs are going to be transferred back to his 
town. And there’s no way he wants his residents paying for the 
taxes. So back we go, and the fight is on. 
 
Well believe me, the only way that this problem can be solved 
now is by going to folks like the people at the SARM 
convention, the farmers and the ranchers that go there. You go 
to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
where the businessmen and the small communities around the 
province are represented, and the big cities are even included in 
all of this, and you talk to those folks at the grass roots level. 
And you say to them, how can we solve this problem? And they 
said, we’ve got to have a year to try to work out some of the 
problems. And the Premier says, we’re not going to give you a 
year. 
 
Well what is a year in the scheme of things as long as people 
pay their taxes so that you can deliver the goods and services 
that taxes are supposed to buy? What difference would it make? 
Why are we drawing a line in the sand and saying to people, we 
challenge you to not break the law; we challenge you to not 
collect your taxes. What good is that kind of confrontation? 
What is that going to accomplish? You’re collecting the taxes 
on the basis of last year’s assessments anyway. 
 
Like the municipalities are going to continue to operate. The 
schools are going to continue to operate. The plea here was for 
a year to try to solve some of the problems and iron things out.  

And there’s nothing wrong with that because it doesn’t hurt 
anything. Everything will continue to operate. It’s not as though 
you’re shutting the machine of the province down and the 
whole thing stands still. It’s a year to solve some problems. 
That’s not too much to ask when you’ve created the kind of 
fiasco that this whole thing has become. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I do have to say that this 
government is consistent in one way. Everything they touch 
turns to a fiasco. As good intentioned as it could be . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, sir, I’m sorry. You’re not on 
television; you can’t shut it off. And I have a few more minutes 
left here that I’m allowed to whale on the government, and 
that’s what I’m going to do today because this government 
needs whaling on. 
 
It is not Ralph Klein, believe me. You may have stolen a few of 
his right-wing ideas, and you may have a Premier that they’re 
starting to talk about in songs and that sort of thing — at least 
that’s what I thought I heard today was that the Premier was 
becoming a blue something or other . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, my singing voice is not in tune. 
 
But reality is, Mr. Speaker, reality is that we need to point out 
to this government that while they steal a few of Ralph Klein’s 
ideas to help this province to get on the right track, that in itself 
is not enough. Because you have to follow through consistently 
to the end and not cause a fiasco with everything and get it all 
mixed up. And halfway through, after you’ve had a good idea 
that you swiped from Ralph Klein, try to change it back to a 
semi-socialist idea to get back to your left wing to hold them 
together politically. 
 
And none of that can work, you see, because that’s the problem 
with Saskatchewan. We’re halfway a conservative government, 
but they haven’t got quite enough push to end it. And so every 
time they get into something they end up finding, whoops, 
we’ve got to change our mind; we have to appease some other 
group. We got a little lobby group over here; we got a few folks 
over there that aren’t happy. And they try to dish out a few 
nickels here and a few dimes there and they’re throwing money 
in an attempt to put out the brush fires politically. And the first 
thing you know you got everybody mad on every issue that 
comes up. 
 
I haven’t seen one issue in this province that’s come up in the 
last three years that’s been resolved simply or easily. 
Everything that comes up ends up in a great big storm of protest 
and people angry and everybody mad, and three-quarters of 
them going off to Medicine Hat to shop. 
 
And what do they do that for? What do they do that for? They 
do it just to get the heck out of Saskatchewan so they can let 
their nerves settle down. I mean, they’re so frustrated with the 
highway that some of them have told me that once they get to 
Medicine Hat they’re almost tempted not to come home. There 
isn’t a double lane anyway. 
 
But we could spend an hour talking about highways. I’ve been 
on quite a few of them. And I want you to know that if you 
folks think your highways are bad, you really got to come to  
  



162  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

my constituency. I have got a road for you to drive on. I’m 
inviting you all to come with me. I’ve got a truck. We’ll put 
chairs in the back, you can all sit down, and I’ll drive you down 
No. 13 Highway and we’ll take a little detour down No. 18. 
Now if any of you are still in the truck when we get done, you 
get a hundred dollar bonus because this truck doesn’t have a cab 
to hold you in. And if you don’t have a rope to tie yourself 
down, you’re not going to be there. 
 
And I suggest that the member from — the former member 
from the former constituency of Shaunavon — Wood River, 
there we are, really should come along with me because his 
roads are no better. I can attest to that. They’re just as bumpy 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well look at that, Mr. Speaker, 
now everybody has a highway they want to throw in because 
they’re all bad. 
 
Well I didn’t deny that. I don’t deny that. I’m just saying that 
we probably have the worst and now they think they’ve all got 
the worst. Well if it’s a competition, we could all get together 
and we could take a pool on who’s got the worst highway. 
 
The reality is though, Mr. Speaker, that there is a good reason 
why south-west Saskatchewan, in all seriousness, should not 
have the bad highways. And that is because the government 
pulls revenue out of south-west Saskatchewan far greater than 
anything that they put back in. 
 
And I don’t care if you add up health and education and all the 
other great and wonderful things that we get paid for by the 
monies that are taken in. The reality is that with the oil revenues 
that are coming out of that corner of the province on the land 
sale leases, with the revenue spin-off from the gas industry and 
the agricultural industry, the wheat that’s grown out in that part 
of the country, all of those products that are produced — we got 
all kinds of cattle being grown out there, and there’s all kinds of 
calves that are being born right now — every bit of that money 
is tax money as it’s being sold. And those monies are going into 
the pot — into the general revenue pot. 
 
Believe me, Mr. Speaker, if half of the money that comes out of 
south-west Saskatchewan was put back in there, we’d have 
roads paved in cobblestones glued together with cement. I 
almost said gold, but of course we can’t quite afford that. But 
really, we do have the cobblestones, and I’m sure we got people 
that are doing nothing in this province, that we could put to 
work putting the cobblestones one beside the other. 
 
And you think that’s such a bad idea. I was in Europe one time 
and there we were on a road and it was made out of 
cobblestones. And I said, you know those rocks look just like 
the ones at home. And I talked to some folks and I said, well 
when did they build them? And they said 500 years ago. They 
put them rocks, he said, one by one. People had jobs. So that’s 
how they created work — one by one and they cemented them 
together. Five hundred years later I’m walking on the same road 
and it still didn’t have any potholes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to suggest that we build all of 
our roads out of solid cobblestone tops, but I will go the stretch 
to say that there is no reason why we can’t expect a better  

highway system than the one we have with the kind of revenue 
that’s being taken out of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, if we can get all these 
folks to go for a ride with us on No. 1 Highway, I’m sure that it 
won’t take them very long to find out why we pick on the 
minister from SGI. The minister from SGI says we got to put 
the rates up. Why do we have to put the rates up? Well to pay 
for the cost of all the wrecked vehicles. Well why are they 
wrecked? Well he says because the kids in Regina have stolen 
them and they vandalized them and there’s a big wreck on. It’s 
in the media and everybody knows about it. 
 
Believe me, Mr. Speaker, it is no small matter that people steal 
cars in Regina, and we are not happy about this problem. But it 
is also true that the amount of dollars that are going into the cars 
that these folks are damaging or wrecking is very insignificant 
as compared to the amount of money being paid by SGI for the 
big semi-trailers that are whipped off the road in windstorms 
when the highway is covered in ice out at Maple Creek. You 
roll one of them units into the ditch, whether the driver walks 
away alive or not, and sometimes they don’t, but you take one 
of those big rigs and you can pretty well write off $100,000 for 
every one that’s in a wreck. 
 
You take 10 of those wrecks and you got a mile of road built 
already. And you could simply fix these highways and not have 
these wrecks, Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly that would pay 
for the roads, and SGI could afford to give the money back to 
the government to build the roads. 
 
You see, it’s cause and effect. You got to have the gumption to 
gamble a little bit in life and to take a chance on spending some 
money in the right places. You fix the roads; you don’t have 
accidents. You don’t have accidents; you don’t have claims 
against SGI. You don’t have claims against SGI; you don’t have 
to increase the rates and you don’t have a whole bunch of 
people in the hospital with broken legs getting mended, and 
you’ve saved a bunch money on medicare. It all works together. 
 
And the Liberals think we ought to join with them. Well not a 
bad idea. Maybe they’ll join with us, at least in the debate and 
in the fight for equity and fair play for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m a little sorry that I put the other 
Speaker to sleep, but nevertheless this Speech from the Throne 
presents so many possibilities for us to tell this government 
where they’ve gone wrong that I would expect that it would 
probably take me the rest of the day if I got really all going and 
put it all together and talked about everything that needs to be 
done. 
 
There isn’t an issue out in rural Saskatchewan that comes up 
that isn’t negatively impacting in the last six months. My 
telephone jumps off the desk every day with calls from people. 
It has escalated very significantly from the year or two before 
that. Why is that? Because people are becoming more and more 
disenchanted with the service that they’re getting in comparison 
with the taxes that they’re paying. 
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

Everybody’s paying higher utility bills. I’ll get a call about how 
much did my taxes go up on . . . my rates go up on my 
telephone. The other day a fellow phoned up and said, I found 
another dollar on my telephone bill for 911. And I said to him, 
well did you have that before? And he said no, he says, I never 
saw it there before. He says, what’s going on? Well we have to 
find a path to the minister’s office to try and track this down. I 
have no idea why all of a sudden he’s being charged extra. 
 
The fellow down the next road phones me up and says, humph, 
my natural gas went way up. My bill’s up — can’t afford to 
heat my house any more. That’s not uncommon. 
 
I’ll get another call. My power bill’s going up. What the heck is 
going on? Who put my power up this much? 
 
Well these increases have been coming gradually all along. 
When people get the bill, that’s when they notice it. We sit in 
here and we hear about the announcements, and we know it’s 
going to come. We can predict ahead of time, and sure enough 
it goes down the line — every utility you’ve got. I’ll get a call 
on every one of them in the next month. 
 
I’ll get a call on just about every road in my constituency in the 
next month. I’ll get a call on SAMA, and I’ll get a call on health 
care, and I’ll get a dozen calls on education because there’s a 
fiasco in every facet of our life in this province that somebody 
will bring to my attention. 
 
(1545) 
 
And why is that, in a province that’s supposedly booming, in a 
province that supposedly has enough money to have a $5.2 
billion budget where the Finance minister quite frankly doesn’t 
seem to know where she’s going to throw all the money next. 
 
Why do we have all of these inequities? And I’ll tell you why. 
It’s because of the word “targeting”. The Finance minister likes 
to say, we’re going to solve the problems by targeting. You 
know what that really means, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Targeting 
really means political control, putting out brush fires politically. 
Whenever you’ve got a problem you throw some money at it 
and try to put it out. It does not mean building a structure of a 
province that is fair and equitable on a broad basis for all 
people. And that’s why we’re in so much trouble. 
 
That’s what’s got to be happening here when we talk about 
people going to listen to what Ralph Klein’s doing. You don’t 
just throw money at the problem. You follow it through with a 
program — a planned, consistent approach, a solution. There 
might even be some Liberal governments that do that. I’m not 
sure. But of course, I’m willing to acknowledge that there’s 
always a possibility. 
 
The member from Wood River I believe, wants to join me in 
this protest. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in spite of the fact that 
there are probably at least three hours more comments that I 
could make to tell people how bad this Speech from the Throne 
really is — because there’s nothing in it — I do want to give 
these other folks an opportunity to speak. 
 

So in the days to come, folks can be sure we’ll have a lot more 
to say about these kind of programs, and when the budget 
speech comes, we’ll give them another shot. So stay tuned, 
Maple Creek. Thanks a lot. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with 
pride and pleasure that I speak today in support of the throne 
speech and this government. We as Saskatchewan citizens 
should be proud of our accomplishments as we continue to 
grow and prosper under the leadership of our Premier. It has 
taken determination and vision to overcome the financial 
difficulties and yet remain steadfast in maintaining and 
expanding the quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife is 
located in the north-west part of Saskatchewan, with rolling 
hills, grazing and farmland. Agriculture, small business, 
tourism, and oil are integral parts of the economy, each playing 
a vital part in my constituency. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
the people — the people — who provide the vitality, the 
energy, and the creativity to my constituency; people who are 
dedicated to preserving and enhancing our rural way of life; 
people who have made the sacrifices necessary for our 
economic recovery; and people whose ingenuity is creating new 
jobs and opportunities for our communities. 
 
For instance, the Bannack Winery opened their doors in 
Battleford this year. Wally and Diane Bannack are producing a 
vintage product, while enabling other people to grow and 
harvest the ingredients, thus providing opportunities for others. 
 
Our government’s agenda is investing in people — our people, 
Saskatchewan people. We are focusing on job creation and the 
climate is encouraging. Oil drilling activity has been strong, 
resulting in jobs in my constituency and in our province. 
Tourism is the sixth largest employer of Battleford-Cut Knife 
people. Visitors to my constituency spend an estimated 20 
million, helping to support more than 64 tourism businesses and 
events. 
 
Major events, such as the Bunnock tournament in Macklin 
annually attracts over 1,000 people for the August long 
weekend. And the Poundmaker Interpretive Centre has opened, 
promoting first nations history. 
 
We are encouraging the expansion of trade. When the Minister 
of Agriculture was in the Pacific Rim, opportunities opened up 
for the increased development of large pig farms. Public 
meetings are now being held in Evesham, Unity, Marsden, and 
Neilburg for two projects — not megaprojects, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but community projects. 
 
Plants for the pellet plant at Wilkie are well under way. And the 
north-west terminal in Unity is operating and serving the area 
well. 
 
Farmers in my area are diversifying as they prepare for the 21st 
century. Fields of peas, canola, barley, oats, lentils, dill, and 
wheat are some of the crops. And bison, deer, and elk graze  
  



164  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

beside herds of cattle. 
 
Farm women are opening up businesses such as greenhouses. 
Kathy Pagett and Marion Kelly invest hours tending small 
plants so that I and others will have tomatoes and cauliflower in 
our gardens. 
 
And for those of you who do flower arrangements, those dried 
flowers could easily have come from the farm of David and 
Hannah Froelich, who have become one of Saskatchewan’s 
largest producers of dried flowers. 
 
To encourage our young, rural children to remain in our area, 
Wilkie School Division has coordinated a program enabling 
young men and women to work in agriculture-related 
businesses while completing their grade 12. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this opportunity portrays optimism for our rural area 
and agriculture-related industries. 
 
I represent five first nation bands — Poundmaker, Little Pine, 
Red Pheasant, Sweetgrass, and Mosquito — progressive bands 
implementing programs to address their problems. 
 
For the past five years selected residents from the former North 
Battleford youth cottage have attended a developmental camp 
on the Poundmaker Reserve. Sweetgrass also has a provincially 
managed youth offenders’ facility. And I wish to acknowledge 
the initiatives to teach youth about their cultures, their values, 
and their respect — basic life skills — and to develop 
meaningful relationships with elders and members of the 
community. 
 
The Minister of Social Services and I had the opportunity to 
attend these camps this summer and to sample the bannock and 
soup that supervised youth prepared. My constituency has lots 
of bannock. 
 
Red Pheasant’s healing lodge is committed to deliver different 
kinds of preventative, educational, and intervention services 
within the communities — services that are designed to begin 
the process of restoring integration, wholeness, imagination and 
wellness, as ways of life within the first nations communities. 
 
We as a government encourage programs to improve our 
people’s quality of life. Last year, my constituency received 
prevention support grants to fund the Battlefords interval house 
project addressing family violence; the Cut Knife High School 
drinking and driving awareness project; the summer drop-in 
program for youth ages 12 to 18 living in Unity and 
surrounding area; the Battleford Concerned for Youth project to 
host mini-workshops on teen alcohol, drug use, and teen 
pregnancy — all worthwhile projects that are forward-looking. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the negative comments from the members 
opposite about elected health boards do not reflect the positive 
initiatives in my constituency. The elected Battlefords health 
board has just announced that they have partnered a unique 
initiative to provide a new service to residents of this and 
neighbouring health districts — a short-stay suite, the first of its 
kind in The Battlefords Health District, designed to provide a 
temporary accommodation for people who are receiving  

medical treatment and need to be close to health services. 
 
The Greenhead Health District has initiated the care project, a 
program addressing families with special needs children. Twin 
Rivers Health District is going green by starting an energy 
management program, a positive step into the future for Twin 
Rivers and its environment. 
 
The division school boards of Wilkie and Kerrobert and 
Battleford and North Battleford are discussing the possibility of 
amalgamating, coordinating programs and staffing to better 
meet the needs of our youth, our future. 
 
These are community initiatives by community people investing 
in people, and our government’s agenda strengthens this 
investment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have highlighted some 
of the good news in my constituency, a rural constituency that 
has seen change and growth, and that economic growth is being 
enjoyed throughout all of the province. 
 
In 1996, Saskatchewan was one of the few provinces to 
experience substantial growth in oil, uranium, ag-biotech, 
retailing, and manufacturing. On October 1, our population 
stood at 1,024,900 — its highest level since July 1989. 
 
We had the lowest monthly unemployment rates in the country. 
Our spring budget provided 110 million in new provincial 
funding to replace the 1996-1997 federal cut-backs to our 
health, to our education, and to our social service programs. 
 
Our growing provincial economy and our sound financial 
management enabled us to do this. Under the small business 
loans associating program, 677 new jobs and 313 new business 
were created. People initiatives benefited our communities in a 
positive climate — all made possible by our forward-looking 
government policies. 
 
We are investing in people, in our communities, in our 
province, and our priorities are reflected by our fiscal 
responsibility to produce a balanced budget and reducing the 
debt. 
 
We’re investing in education and training, in our transportation 
strategy, and in our programs for consumer protection, the child 
action plan, and our young offenders. But we are not doing it 
alone. We are doing it with our partners — the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Challenges can be stepping-stones or stumbling blocks. And 
this government has had many stumbling stones: a horrendous 
debt, deterioration of the highways and the railway system, high 
unemployment, federal cut-backs. But each year this 
government has identified the stepping-stones to achieve what 
will be the best investment for our people now and for the 
future. And we will continue to do so. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the member from North Battleford  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

and welcome him to this Assembly. And also a warm welcome 
to our pages. I would also like to congratulate the mover and the 
seconder on their excellent speeches supporting the policies of 
this government. 
 
To Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank him for his informative 
tour of my schools this fall. And I am proud to serve with you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with the members of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this throne speech promotes the positive 
agenda of this government for Saskatchewan and for 
Saskatchewan people. Therefore on behalf of my constituents, I 
will proudly support this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter this throne speech debate, which is really the 
opportunity of all members to share in the Legislative Assembly 
and in a very public way some of our ideas and our thoughts, 
proposals for the future, and even to swap a few barbs with each 
other. As you know, basically everything is in order here as 
long as we use parliamentary language. 
 
And I value this opportunity — I always have — to not only 
express some of my views, but to listen carefully to opposition 
members and indeed listen to some very, very fine speeches, 
such as the example we just had from the member for 
Battlefords-Cut Knife. Great speeches have been the earmark 
. . . or the hallmark of this year’s throne speech debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  I want to, before I get into the text of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, I do want to extend my sincere 
congratulations to the new member from North Battleford. I 
wish you nothing but the best in your deliberations in the 
Legislative Assembly and I trust and hope that you will be able 
to represent your constituents with the diligence and 
effectiveness that I am sure you desire and I know that they 
desire as well. So welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Regina Coronation Park, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
constituency that I have been blessed with the honour of 
representing. Coronation Park is in the northern end of the city; 
indeed it butts up against some farm land to the north. It’s a 
constituency made up of working people, family people. There 
are some retired, but primarily the constituency is families in 
the growing process. And it’s a constituency made up of a 
number of communities in Regina, all of them fairly strong in 
their own right and fairly active in lobbying and working to 
make their own communities and our city a better place in 
which to live and raise our families. 
 
(1600) 
 
The housing stock ranges from a few houses in the 
$200,000-plus range — and I stress, a few — to an equally few 
number of houses that are less than desirable, to put it politely. 
But the majority of the houses in Regina Coronation Park are 
more middle class, if I can describe it as that — two- and  

three-bedroom houses, 20 to 40 years old. And of course into 
the mix you throw in a smattering of apartment blocks, 
particularly as we get towards my Albert Street border on the 
east side of the constituency. 
 
The trees . . . or pardon me, the streets are not lined with gold, 
as some people would say. But the streets are lined with trees. 
And over the years the Queen City has done a very good job of 
seeing that Regina gets treed, and they’ve also done a very good 
job of creating green spaces. So the byword in Coronation Park 
is really tree-lined streets, lovely parks and green spaces, and 
just a real pleasant and nice place to raise a family and to live 
your life out in. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention on the south end of the border 
of Coronation Park there is a CN (Canadian National) rail and 
Lewvan Drive underpass well on the way to completion. And 
that will be a most welcome addition to all of my constituents, 
I’m sure, as we try and travel around Regina getting from the 
north end to the south end and back again. It’s been a frustration 
for a great many years as we wait for the trains to finish 
shunting back and forth across that street. So that will be a very 
welcome addition. 
 
There are some, of course, problems with local traffic in that 
community and I know that the city of Regina has done 
virtually everything they can to mitigate on behalf of those 
residents most directly affected. But for the vast majority . . . I 
think it is safe to say this is one example where the minority 
have had they say and the majority are getting their way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the throne speech. Our throne speech outlines 
the priorities of the government, I think, in a very, very good 
way. The throne speech card entitled Investing in 
People - Building Saskatchewan Together is really what it’s all 
about — 1,024, 900 Saskatchewan people, of which I am one, 
all of us are one working together and the government working 
with this 1,024,900 people investing in our future. Interestingly, 
the top line on the throne speech card is “The Top Priority: 
Jobs” — “The Top Priority: Jobs.” 
 
And there’s eight points on this card, on this throne speech card. 
We are going to be working, amongst other things, to encourage 
the expansion of trade. Saskatchewan is the most 
trade-dependent province in Canada. Full stop, period. And of 
course we are a tremendous exporter — our agricultural 
products. Oil and gas are a growing export. The mining 
industry, potash, uranium, all of the . . . Gold is even a growing 
export. All of these things. So we’re going to be doing what we 
can to enhance and encourage expansion of trade. 
 
We’re going to be promoting the expansion and diversification 
of our rural economy. And one of the things that just pops into 
mind that happened is we’ve recently underwritten — or written 
off, I guess is the proper term — $150 million of crop insurance 
debt. Why would we do that? So we don’t saddle today’s 
farmers with the debt from the crop insurance that has been run 
up over quite a large number of years. It’s designed to help 
today’s farmers have affordable crop insurance, an affordable 
plan, not saddled with the sins of the past. And I say sins 
without pointing any particular fingers or anything like  
  



166  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

that. But that’s one quick thing that comes to mind. 
 
In the interests of time, I’m going to move on to the next 
heading, which is “Renew Saskatchewan’s Crown 
Corporations.” Last year we started the review of 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. I know that under this 
administration we have started various international arms of 
some Crown corporations, and it’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that 
these international arms will be providing just a tremendous 
opportunity for Saskatchewan’s Crown corporation employees, 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporation employees that have 
tremendous knowledge built up over, in some instances, many, 
many years. 
 
But whether they’re relatively new to the Crown corporation or 
what we’ll call lifers, either way, Crown corporation employees 
are trained to a very, very high standard. They’re a very talented 
lot. They have done phenomenal work on behalf of their Crown 
corporations, and thereby on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, for a great many years. 
 
The Crown corporations international arm provides an 
opportunity for us to have Saskatchewan workers working in 
other countries where the payroll frankly is paid by these other 
companies . . . other countries, because the international 
projects are all done on the basis of we have to turn a dollar for 
the local Crown corporation — the Saskatchewan Crown 
corporation. And there’s certainly no shortage of examples of 
that. 
 
You look at SaskTel and its cable venture in England that had a 
net profit in excess of $90 million. You look again at SaskTel 
and their venture in the Philippines where they were involved in 
a $40 million telecommunication project. You look at SaskTel 
in the Chunnel where they got a great deal of credit for their 
technological expertise. 
 
And one of the latest examples, potentially we’ve got 
SaskPower in Guyana, which is a very relatively small power 
utility but one that needs some leadership, if I can describe it 
that way, some leadership capabilities that SaskPower can 
provide. And that’s going to frankly mean some opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people to work some term projects in Guyana 
in this instance. 
 
And I frankly welcome it. I know that the due diligence studies 
have been done, and I just hope that this turns out to be an 
absolute winner where we provide employment, jobs for 
Saskatchewan people, and where we can see a return on the 
investment to Saskatchewan Power in this case; but because 
SaskPower will realize a profit on that venture, that helps in 
stabilizing all of our electrical rates. 
 
So I’m really quite excited about some of the things that are 
happening in the Crown corporations sector. And I want to just 
before I leave the Crown corporation sector, I want to point out 
that if we think the status quo is good enough, we’re dreaming. 
It’s just not on. If we stay stagnant, we’re really sliding 
backwards. We’re really sliding down. And our vision for the 
Crown corporations is one of corporations that provide 
employment, that provide stable services, that bring all of the  

best things that we all want for our province, for our children, 
and even for ourselves. 
 
So I’m real excited about what is happening in the renewal of 
Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. We’re going to be 
working to improve access to capital for particularly small 
businesses. We’re going to be pursuing key, strategic projects. 
Again, employment enhancers, jobs being the number one 
priority. 
 
We’re going to be promoting tourism and the hospitality 
industry. That’s an industry that has seen tremendous growth 
over recent years — and I’m not sure I’m being entirely fair 
when I say just recent years. It’s an industry that is clearly 
growing. As us baby boomers get older and older many of us 
have increasingly free time and the desire to see new things. So 
tourism is a growing industry. 
 
We want to foster northern economic and employment growth, 
and indeed there’s many examples of that. The minister 
outlined that in his speech at the end of yesterday and I would 
refer you to that. 
 
We will be participating in an extended national infrastructure 
plan. All of these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by way of job 
creation — a real concern for this government in this province. 
Why? Because we want to govern to the benefit of all 
Saskatchewan people. We’re all in this together. The more jobs 
we can create and fill, the better off everything works including 
. . . I know the Minister of Finance will collect more taxes when 
more people are working. And that’s absolutely true. 
 
Now what’s happening on the job front? I think it’s important 
that we take just a little snapshot look at what has been 
happening. And I’ve got some — I almost hate to do this — I 
have some statistics; but without numbers, I don’t know how 
you could say well, are we gaining on the job front, are we 
losing on the job front, or are we simply standing still? Because 
we’ve got to be doing something. 
 
What is happening? Well, in Saskatchewan in February of 1997 
— 14 days ago — the latest numbers show that there was 
453,300 persons employed in Saskatchewan. Now what’s that 
mean? In itself, nothing. Let’s go to February last year. 
February last year we had 446,400 people working. The gain in 
employment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 6,900 more people 
working in February this year over February last year — 6,900 
solid record of job growth for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan; 6,900 more men, women, and young people 
working in Saskatchewan today than a year ago. 
 
Now what happens to the unemployment numbers? Because 
that’s relevant too. Well this year we have 33,900 people 
unemployed in February — 33,900. I readily admit that’s too 
high. That’s why in the throne speech job creation . . . jobs are 
priority, top priority, priority one — jobs. 
 
Well in 1997, 33,900 unemployed in February. What about in 
’96 then? Thirty-eight thousand seven hundred — 4,800 fewer; 
4,800 fewer people unemployed this year as opposed to last 
year. How can that be? The unemployed and the employment  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

don’t match. 
 
Well what I’m building to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is some people 
would have us believe that we’re exporting our unemployment. 
Well the truth of that — what is it? — the latest figures, from a 
different source, but the latest figures in Saskatchewan happen 
to be for October 1, 1996 — that’s the last quarter for which 
there’s a report — and the population has grown again to 
1,024,900. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the 12th consecutive quarter of 
population growth in Saskatchewan. For more than three years 
the population of Saskatchewan has been expanding . . . has 
been growing, putting to rest the lie that we’re somehow 
exporting our unemployment. We are dealing with the job 
concerns, the creation of jobs right here, in our own way, giving 
it the best efforts we can. I’ve outlined some of them a bit 
earlier and there will be more. But 6,900 more people working 
in February this year than in February last year. 
 
I think that is just phenomenally good news. It’s not good 
enough, not good enough, but it’s phenomenally good news. 
But that’s why jobs and job creation — priority one in the 
throne speech. 
 
Well I want to do a little bit of a contrast in this because I think 
it’s important for my constituents, and people generally, to see 
well, how does Saskatchewan stack up? I know that the 
opposition would have us believe that they’ve got all of the 
answers. They’re very in tune with the economic realities; they 
could manage a province very well. They could see better 
numbers in terms of economic growth, better numbers in terms 
of employment, fewer people unemployed, and of course better 
highways and all those other good things. And I thank the hon. 
member for agreeing with that. 
 
(1615) 
 
Liberals believe that somehow they’ve got their pulse on good 
government. Well this is the same Liberal Party, the same 
Liberal Party that — I’m trying to think, it would be about a 
year and a half ago, a little better than that, when we had the last 
provincial election — the same Liberal Party that had its own 
scratch and sniff “red book”, whited out in selected places 
before it was ever released. And everyone knows the last 
election was hardly a snap election. 
 
The Premier had stated the day he was sworn into office, the 
election would be June 1995. So the election shouldn’t have 
snuck up, shouldn’t have snuck up on the Liberals. 
 
Okay, white out, scratch and sniff “red book,” a “red book,” 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was projecting 8 per cent annual 
growth, was their major method of balancing the budget — 8 
per cent economic growth per year, per year. These are the 
same Liberals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that have supported their 
federal cousins who last year cut $106 million in transfer 
payments in health, in education, and in social programing to 
Saskatchewan — $106 million cut. 
 
Now I’ve been in this legislature longer than just since last  

year. I have yet to hear the official opposition mention boo 
about anything that the federal Liberals do in a negative way. 
Their silence is absolutely deafening. This is the same Liberal 
Party . . . I talked about the 106 million last year, a further little 
over 90 million cut this year — I don’t hear anybody talking 
about that. 
 
It’s the same Liberals that were absolutely silent with the grain 
transportation matter that happened over the past 18 months. 
Absolutely silent, while their Liberal cousins in Ottawa made 
huge changes, changes to grain transportation that even Brian 
Mulroney couldn’t push through. The same Liberal opposition 
that has been silent as we, this government, wrote off $150 
million in debt in crop insurance. Why? So that today’s farmers 
can have affordable, or more affordable crop insurance 
unhindered and unhampered by the debt that had been run up in 
previous years. 
 
Now that tells a bit of a story of what goes on here. But I talked 
a little bit about unemployment numbers and I want to share 
what’s happening. Now if the Liberals in opposition knew how 
to govern a province, I think it would be reasonable to say that 
Liberals, being Liberals, should share some of those good ideas 
with other Liberal provincial parties, and even with their federal 
Liberal counterparts. 
 
I think it’s fairly reasonable that if a Liberal is a Liberal is a 
Liberal that they could share some thoughts. Well this Liberal 
opposition in Saskatchewan is saddled — and that’s a gentle 
term — but saddled with the economic record, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, of their Liberal counterparts who form the government 
in four — four — of Canada’s provinces, four provinces where 
they have Liberal governments, plus the federal government. 
 
An Hon. Member:  How are they doing? 
 
Mr. Trew:  My colleague asks how are they doing? Well 
let’s look. The unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is 7 per 
cent in February, 7 per cent. But what about Liberal New 
Brunswick? What happened year over year in New Brunswick? 
Their unemployment rate in Liberal New Brunswick, the 
unemployment rate went up 2.9 per cent to fourteen and a half 
per cent, more than double the unemployment rate in socialist 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What happened in Liberal Nova Scotia? Year over year, 
unemployment rate goes up 1.3 per cent to 14 per cent. Liberal 
Nova Scotia, an unemployment rate double Saskatchewan’s. 
 
What happened in Liberal P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island)? Up, 
unemployment up 2.7 per cent to 20 per cent. One in five 
working people in Liberal Prince Edward Island are 
unemployed — one in five — unemployed. Liberal P.E.I. 
 
What happened in Liberal Newfoundland? Up, up .8 per cent. 
Unemployment up .8 per cent to 21.4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Liberal Newfoundland has an 
unemployment rate more than three times what Saskatchewan’s 
is. Four Liberal provinces. I guess it’s just the bad luck of the 
draw, right? That’s what the Liberal opposition would have us  
  



168  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

believe, just bad luck of the draw that we happen to be 
governing in real destitute provinces. Bad luck. 
 
Well bad luck that Saskatchewan people and my constituents 
sure don’t need. This is bad luck, that in every single Liberal 
province, governed by Liberals, unemployment rate is double to 
more than triple the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan — 
Saskatchewan, which has for a number of years now enjoyed 
the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Lowest unemployment rate in Canada right here. 
 
At the same time we’ve enjoyed some nice job creation, some 
growth. Not enough. And I’m the first to say that — not 
enough. We have 33,900 people in February of this year 
unemployed. Clearly it means we need some more jobs. That’s 
why in the throne speech, job creation, number one. 
 
Now I’ve dealt with the four Liberal provinces. I wonder what’s 
happening in Liberal Canada? I mean, surely, surely Liberal 
Canada . . . It seems to me we had a Tory, Brian Mulroney, 
campaigned on jobs — pardon me, jobs, jobs, jobs. And did he 
deliver? He delivered unemployment, unemployment, 
unemployment. 
 
Then the “red book” came out, and it seems to me that the 
Prime Minister of Canada campaigned on jobs, jobs, jobs. Well 
what happened year over year? Let’s look. In Canada, in 
January . . . well, or February; you can take either one. But 
January the unemployment rate for Canada was 10.5 per cent. 
I’m talking January 1996. January 1997, 10.6 — higher 
unemployment. The same increase in February — higher 
unemployment. 
 
Well this is the Liberals. Or is it the Tories? I’ve forgotten. 
Who was it that campaigned on jobs, jobs, jobs? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Same old chicken. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Same old chicken, my colleague points out. 
Same old chicken . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now what 
about us guys? What about us guys, the member for Wood 
River asks. Well in New Democrat socialist Saskatchewan we 
had job growth year over year of .9 per cent, taking us in 
February from an 8 per cent unemployment rate to a 7.2 per 
cent unemployment rate in 1997. I already talked about the fact 
that there are 6,900 more people working in Saskatchewan this 
February than last February. But a .9 per cent reduction in our 
unemployment. 
 
Now some people might argue, well this is solely because of 
our geography. And to some extent I have to buy into that 
argument. But let’s have a quick peek. What about Tory 
Alberta, where they just re-elected Ralph Klein again. 
Conservative Alberta. Their unemployment rate dropped .8 per 
cent to 7.4 per cent — .8 per cent to 7.4. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we compare very, very favourably 
throughout the whole piece, throughout the whole piece. 
Bucking the national trend, building a solid base, having taken 
over from the frogs in the cream can, as the member for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow called it — having taken over government at a  

very, very difficult time. Not just difficult for government; 
difficult for 1,024,900 Saskatchewan residents. People who 
have said, this is my home. This is where I want to live; this is 
where I want to earn my living; this is where I want to raise my 
family — 1,024,900 Saskatchewan people have made that 
choice. 
 
It’s for them that we’re all here, and we should be ever mindful 
of that. It’s why we’re here dealing with the priorities that we 
have as government. And it’s for those people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I point out the contrast that naturally the Liberal 
opposition would be silent about. The contrast between socialist 
Saskatchewan and our record of job creation, our record of 
reducing unemployment, versus the four Liberal provinces and 
Canada as a whole, all of whom have Liberal governments. 
 
I think that it behoves us to be aware of what is going on. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don’t for a second believe that somehow we 
have some right given to us by a higher power, by whatever you 
might want to call that higher power. I don’t think we have that 
right. I don’t think we have that right to govern. I think we have 
to earn the right to form government every single day. 
 
And how do we earn that right? I think we earn that right by 
listening to our constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan 
as a whole; listening very carefully, acting wherever we can and 
doing what we can to make sure that our province has a solid 
foundation for a tremendous future — a future that I want my 
children, my grandchildren, to say yes, yes, Saskatchewan is 
home. This is my place of birth. This is the place I want to 
spend my years. Saskatchewan. Home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am delighted, more delighted this year than I 
have been and more excited this year than I have been for a 
number of years, in supporting the Speech from the Throne. It 
will be my pleasure to stand in my place when the time comes, 
and vote yes to this throne speech. I thank you for your 
attention, and it’s again been my sincere honour to say these 
words that I believe represent the majority feeling of the good 
people of Regina Coronation Park. It’s been my pleasure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Deputy Speaker. First of all I 
would like to congratulate and thank the mover from Swift 
Current, and a member from the Southeast Saskatoon, for a 
wonderful speech on the throne. Also, Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to once again thank you for the rulings you’ve been doing in the 
House last year, and I think once again this year, and it’s good 
to see you there. 
 
And also to the Speaker. We need to thank him for the law and 
order that he does for us here in the House. 
 
(1630) 
 
An Hon. Member:  Not an easy job. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Not an easy job, that’s right. I would also 
like to talk a little bit about my constituency as well, Mr. 
Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I also, like the member from  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

Maple Creek, I’ve got Shellbrook now being able to watch us 
on TV and being able to turn us off whenever they want and 
turn us on whenever they want. And I’m sure with me here, that 
Birch Hills I should say, will be watching me all the time. 
 
There’s a little more on the constituency. I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s quite a big area. It covers, to the south, Birch Hills; 
over to the east, Muskoday, also White Fox; and the national 
park to the north. And to the west, we have the RM of P.A. 
(Prince Albert). 
 
Saskatchewan Rivers is quite a diverse constituency. We have 
logging. We have pulp and paper. We also have processing, 
garlic. And we have people, farmers, growing potatoes, 
oilseeds. Some of them are in game farming, also cattle, cereal 
grain. So I want to say it’s quite a diverse constituency. Also we 
have a lot of tourism in that area and fishing, hunting. So I want 
to say that I’m quite proud to be the member that represents that 
Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  Well on a more . . . on a positive note, Mr. 
Speaker, I‘d like to talk a little bit about what we’ve been able 
to accomplish in the last few years as government. Mr. Speaker, 
in 1996 economic indicators — retail sales $5.7 billion the first 
10 months of 1996, an increase of almost 8 per cent. Sales by 
recreational and motor vehicles dealers raised by 21 per cent 
over the same period last year. Housing starts risen by 5.6 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, in the first nine months of 1996. Farmers 
harvesting an estimate of 28.5 million tonnes of major grains, 
which is about 23 per cent above 1995. 
 
An Hon. Member:  If only the feds would help us get it to 
port. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Right. Oil sales increased by almost 25 per 
cent in the first month of 1996. Uranium sales are up by more 
than 64 per cent in this same period. And manufacturing 
shipping raising by 8 per cent over the first 10 months of this 
year. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That creates jobs. Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  Hear, hear! Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the 
federal budget. Deficit reduced on the backs, Mr. Speaker, 
deficit reduction on the backs of the unemployed, the poor, and 
the sick. No job creation strategy for the unemployed. 
Insufficient funding to adequately address the issue of child 
poverty. No commitment to reduce unemployment insurance 
premiums. Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No further commitment for improvements to Canada’s 
infrastructure program, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s . . . You 
know, if you look at what the provincial government has done 
over the last few years, it isn’t something that we’ve just picked 
out of the sky. They’ve had a plan. 
 
And I want to tell you, the federal government under 
infrastructure plan is only for the year before the election. So 
we want to really look at that. And I want to stress that very  

well, because I think we’ll see an election coming up in June. 
So we aren’t going to be fooling the people. The people 
understand that this is an election promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  There’s no commitment to help boost 
economics of . . . the economy of rural Saskatchewan. And I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only rural Saskatchewan, it’s 
all of Canada. When it comes to rail line abandonment, they’ve 
not only taken it out on the Saskatchewan farmers but also all 
through the West. You bet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal oppositions say that it is our 
responsibilities — our responsibilities to look after health, 
education, and social programs. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Somebody has to. The Liberals aren’t. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Right. 
 
I want to ask you something, Mr. Speaker. I asked the Liberals 
why, with their GST (goods and services tax), why have they 
. . . they have that in the “red book.” Why haven’t they did 
away with their GST? Broken promises, you bet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition talks about transportation system. 
Well the opposition must have found the word, transportation. I 
haven’t heard the Liberal opposition talk about transportation, 
the cost to the farmers, the cost to the rural municipalities — I 
haven’t heard them say anything. Why? Because the federal 
Liberals are downloading onto the RMs and to the province. 
 
Health care, Mr. Speaker. We have . . . I have in my 
constituency a couple of health centres. And I want to tell you, 
these health centres are there. They are looking after the needs 
in that community. 
 
An Hon. Member:  By elected members. 
 
Mr. Langford:  By elected members, that’s right. 
 
I want to say there is maybe some problems from time to time, 
but it’s not that the people in that community and the elected 
health boards, that they can’t work out. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I want to say that I will be 
supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly an honour 
to speak in support of the throne speech, a throne speech which 
is one of optimism and hope for our province, investing in 
people, preparing for the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also honoured and pleased to be back in the 
legislature with my many colleagues from both sides of the 
House. And I wish to extend a special word of congratulations 
to my colleagues on this side of the House for all of their 
excellent speeches. 
  



170  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

The members from Swift Current and Saskatoon east set high 
standards in moving and seconding the throne speech and that 
quality has been maintained by my other colleagues. 
 
I also want to welcome the new member from North Battleford. 
Even though I would have preferred a New Democrat being 
elected, I truly do welcome you to the legislature. 
 
What I do note that is truly important is that there was a 
by-election and it was timely, and that’s in the best interest of 
the people of Saskatchewan. This was not always the practice in 
the province. There was a previous administration in which 
by-elections were avoided and people of Saskatchewan were 
not always represented. So I welcome the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the democratic system is a system that must never 
be taken for granted. It’s a privilege that should never be 
abused. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, your role is very important in 
preserving our legislature’s parliamentary democracy for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I know how strongly you 
believe in bringing honour and respect to the institution of 
government. And I applaud you in your ongoing efforts to 
maintain order and decorum in the legislature. And my position 
as caucus Chair certainly gives me a little insight into the 
daunting task it can sometimes be in keeping order. 
 
But I’d also like to express, Mr. Speaker, my appreciation for 
your travels around the province, visiting schools and 
community groups and explaining our parliamentary system of 
democracy. All too often, we take our democratic system for 
granted. And I believe each of us as elected members have a 
responsibility to rebuild the confidence of the people in our 
system, in our democratic system. 
 
And even though our system does not always seem efficient and 
our debates may sometimes seem to be too confrontational, at 
the end of the day our decisions are made after a war of words, 
and not weapons, for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, you have an important role, as do all 
members of this legislature, in our commitment to democratic 
principles and the British parliamentary system, a system that 
serves the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech is about hope and optimism for 
the people of Saskatchewan, investing in people, investing in 
jobs, health care, education, redesigning our social programs, 
reducing child poverty, improving our highways and 
transportation systems, and still maintaining fiscal 
responsibility. Mr. Speaker, the priorities of this throne speech 
are the priorities of the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent people who are hard-working, creative, 
adaptive, and resilient; people who believe in strong families 
and strong communities built on cooperation and compassion. 
And there is a tremendous spirit of pride and volunteerism in 

my constituency, in my communities. The constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy has a rich heritage, politically and 
historically, and it is truly an honour to be an elected 
representative of this area. 
 
I am also honoured very often in my constituency, as the 
elected MLA, to attend many events. I’m always impressed 
with the hospitality, the caring and the pride my constituents 
have in their communities. The amount of volunteerism, the 
generosity, and the commitment to make their communities 
better places to live is truly commendable. 
 
As the mayor of Weyburn always reminds me, Weyburn is the 
hospitality capital of Saskatchewan, and of course I concur. Mr. 
Speaker, in Weyburn annually the agriculture society sponsors a 
rural-urban night in which the farm community expresses their 
appreciation of the business sector in Weyburn, while the 
chamber of commerce reciprocates with a farmers’ appreciation 
night in which the business community honours farmers, 
expressing their appreciation for the farm community. The 
constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy understand the importance 
of cooperation of rural and urban, working together for a 
stronger community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next week I will have the pleasure of honouring 
one of my constituents, Judy Buzowetsky, who is being 
presented with a Saskatchewan volunteerism award. Judy is 
very deserving of this award, and I look forward to the 
opportunity of congratulating her formally in the legislature 
next Wednesday so I will not list all her achievements today. I 
simply want to note that Judy exemplifies the type of people 
who make it an honour for me to represent my constituency — 
the type of people who make Saskatchewan the best place in the 
world in which to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can tell I am very proud and I’m very 
honoured to represent the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
and I’m committed to working hard for all of the constituents in 
my riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also believe strongly in strengthening the 
communication between the people of Saskatchewan and the 
government, and bringing government closer to the people. And 
I’m very pleased to announce that, for the first time, the 
legislative channel is being made available through Cablenet 
services in Weyburn on channel 50. This is good news for our 
area, and I certainly look forward to the comments from my 
constituents as they have the opportunity to watch our 
government at work in the legislature. 
 
This fall and winter I held nine public accountability meetings 
in my constituency and I wish to thank the constituents who 
took part in this process. The meetings are one way in which I 
have the opportunity to hear their views and opinions, and those 
views then, I can better represent to the government. 
 
It also gives me the opportunity to explain the role of 
government to my constituency. These meetings, and meetings 
with local governments, education boards, health board, 
community organizations, business groups, and the labour 
council group give me a better understanding of the issues and  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

the concerns in our area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what did I hear from the people of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy through this consultation process? Well I 
heard that jobs and the economy are a priority. I heard that 
health, education, and social programs must be protected. I 
heard that highways and transportation issues were important 
— especially as they pertain to the agriculture community. 
 
(1645) 
 
I heard that my constituents are supportive of our Crown 
corporations. I heard from the communities of Gladmar, 
Minton, Ceylon, Ogema, and Bengough, that they hope to have 
cellular service expanded to include their areas. 
 
I heard my constituents tell me that they want to have continued 
balanced budgets, debt reduction, and they want no new taxes. 
They want our government to be effective, efficient, and 
accountable. And they want a government that consults and 
listens to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the throne speech addresses the priority 
of my constituents. Our throne speech is about hope and 
optimism. Today, through cooperation, community, and shared 
effort, Saskatchewan is back on its feet. Five years of hard work 
and sacrifice by the people of Saskatchewan has paid off. We 
are rebuilding a stronger Saskatchewan together by investing in 
our province, our people, our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s top priority is jobs. That means 
a partnership with working people, business, and the 
cooperative sector, building to create a growing, prosperous, 
fully employed economy. This means jobs for today and jobs 
for tomorrow. 
 
The government’s strategy is spelled out in the Partnership for 
Growth platform. This proposal was developed in partnership 
with business, cooperatives, and communities. Twenty-one 
REDA’s (regional economic development authorities) have 
been established throughout the province. In my area, the South 
East REDA, SEREDA (South East Regional Economic 
Development Authority), has been working with the community 
of Weyburn and area to develop projects and job opportunities 
for our area. 
 
And our economic strategy is working. Saskatchewan’s 
economy is doing well. The 1996 economic review shows that 
our economic performance is among the best in Canada last 
year. The areas of strongest growth were agriculture, 
manufacturing, retail, and the resource sector. These are all 
important areas for my area of the province. 
 
Retail sales in Saskatchewan increased by 8 per cent last year. 
This is the largest increase in the country. National retail sales 
averaged just 2.5 per cent in 1996. The jump in retail sales in 
Saskatchewan indicates that families and businesses are 
regaining confidence in our economy. 
 
Other areas of increase last year: housing starts are up; oil sales 
were up; manufacturing shipments were up. And, Mr. Speaker,  

we have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. And what is 
even more important, or as important, is that more people are 
moving into the province, into Saskatchewan, than are moving 
away. 
 
These positive economic signs all show that Saskatchewan is on 
the right track, and we will continue to do well in the years 
ahead. 
 
And we are seeing this economic optimism in Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. Just recently I attended the annual chamber of 
commerce banquet and there was a feeling of optimism. It was 
evident. They commended the government on including the 
chamber in its consultation process. There was talk of the recent 
expansion announcements of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 
Weyburn Inland Terminal, the Weyburn Co-op, Alcatel. The 
gas and oil industry has also been booming in the Weyburn area 
and is expected to continue. 
 
As a matter of fact, in February there was more good news for 
Weyburn area and the province as the Energy and Mines 
released their report. The February sale of Crown petroleum and 
natural gas rights realized $31 million in revenue for the 
province, and 78 per cent of that activity was in the 
Weyburn-Estevan area, of $24.3 million. 
 
Another record was set with the purchase of a parcel of land of 
about 65 hectares by Maverick Land Consultants for 
$1,826,144 in the Weyburn Pool, south-east of Weyburn. This 
exceeded the previous record by about $25,000. This is exciting 
news for Weyburn and for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is good to wake up and hear CFSL Radio, the 
Weyburn radio station, announcing the recent rise in real estate 
sales in Weyburn. And the recent headlines in the local papers 
read: One hundred per cent sales increase in real estate for 
January; Promising outlook for construction this spring; Many 
opportunities for 1997. This is good news for Saskatchewan and 
good news for Weyburn. 
 
But we must continue to do more. And that is why I’m so glad 
to see in our throne speech address, the areas in which we are 
working on to improve — for our top priority for jobs; areas in 
which we want to improve expansion of trade; promoting 
expansion and diversification of our rural economy. 
 
Some of the areas that have been touched on by other speakers 
is our new crop insurance program, a new hog marketing 
strategy, investment of $100 million through the agri-food 
development and equity fund, defending a responsive Canadian 
Wheat Board. These are all important initiatives for agriculture 
and for our economy. We also are going to participate in an 
extended national infrastructure plan — very, very important 
initiatives for our economy. 
 
Yes, we have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, but that 
is not enough. We want full, meaningful employment for all the 
citizens of our province. Job creation and the economy is our 
top priority — investing in people. 
 
The second priority of the throne speech is education and  
  



172  Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1997 

training — bridges to employment. This is also a priority of the 
constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy, and of course a personal 
priority to me as a parent and as an educator. In 1996 we had 
the most extensive public consultation that our government has 
undertaken. We did a K to 12 review called structuring of 
education . . . in our K to 12 structuring of education. 
 
I attended the public meetings that were held throughout my 
area. There was one in Weyburn which included a number of 
school divisions around Weyburn. There was one in Radville 
that included the Radville School Division and St. Olivier. And 
one in Milestone which included the Prairie View School 
Division and the Wilcox School. 
 
These consultations included teachers, trustees, parents, 
students, and other citizens. The meetings were well attended 
and people did really voice their concerns. And what we learned 
from these meetings is that education is a top priority with 
Saskatchewan people and with the people in my area; that 
public education is held in high regard; that teachers were 
respected and valued members of their communities; that 
students are the priority of our education system; and that 
decision making is a balance between local participation and 
Sask Ed. 
 
We learned that parents in rural communities were especially 
concerned by the length of bus rides for their children, and 
about rural school closures. We learned that parents want the 
very best quality of education for their children, and that 
restructuring school divisions should be locally driven and that 
any administrative savings that result from restructuring should 
be directed to the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They listened to the public consultation. And I 
want to commend the Minister of Education for her listening. 
She read all the briefs, she met with boards and teachers and 
parents, and she took a tremendous commitment in this review 
process. And at the end of the review we made our decisions 
and we did listen to what we heard from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government will take leadership in school division 
restructuring only as needs are locally determined. We’ve 
established again a partnership. We made a commitment that 
any administrative savings from restructuring will be directed to 
the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier in my speech, I believe 
government must be more open to the people. And I want to 
commend my colleagues as we have moved government out of 
Regina to the communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last November the Minister of Education, the Minister of 
Health, the Minister of Highways and Transportation, along 
with MLAs from Swift Current, Estevan, and Regina visited 
several communities in Weyburn-Big Muddy. We had an 
excellent day, meeting with the people of my constituency in 
Bengough, in Ogema, in Pangman, in Minton, in Radville, and 
in Weyburn. 
 

The Minister of Education and my colleague from Swift 
Current and I visited schools in Ogema and Gladmar, and had 
the opportunity to meet with Radville and St. Olivier School 
Divisions. In Ogema we had an excellent tour of education in 
progress, from K to 12. 
 
Our informative and gracious tour guides were Chad Hudson, 
the president of the SRC (student representative council), and 
Curtis Viergutz, the vice-president of the SRC. And it was 
exciting to see the enthusiasm of the teachers and of the 
students. We saw computer labs in operation. We saw the 
wellness program, part of the new curriculum being used. The 
students talked in such ways in which they weren’t afraid of 
change and were looking forward to the opportunities that were 
for them in the future. 
 
When we visited the division 1 and 2 we had two young tour 
guides, Karen Webb and Caylin Hill. And again we saw such an 
excitement in learning. We saw special education programs. We 
saw students becoming acquainted with computer stations. We 
saw wonderful literary displays of Saskatchewan authors. We 
saw such a pride and such an enthusiasm for learning. 
 
In Gladmar we also saw a school of tremendous activity — 
excellent science projects, and long-distance education 
delivering a psychology class to the students in Gladmar from 
Campbell Collegiate, here in Regina. Long-distance education 
— some of our technologies can help provide the best of 
education to all our students right throughout this province. 
 
In Weyburn, the Minister of Education and I visited a group at 
the junior high at St. Mike’s. We sat in on a class in which there 
was group learning and an awareness session, and we just again 
marvelled at the responsibility and the participation of the 
students. 
 
I also had the opportunity to visit the Weyburn Comprehensive 
School with you, Mr. Speaker, as you presented the importance 
of our parliamentary and democratic system to the students. 
 
In all of these outreaches, I was impressed with the quality of 
programs, the enthusiasm of the teachers and students. We do 
have much to be proud of of our youth and our education 
system here in Saskatchewan. It’s an excellent system. 
 
Does it continue to need to evolve, to get better? Yes, it does. 
And we need to provide education beyond the K to 12 system, 
because education is a challenge in which we all have to 
become lifelong learners. Education does not end with grade 12. 
We all know that we must have a post-secondary system which 
is responsive to the challenges we face in an ever-changing 
technological world. 
 
And I believe our post-secondary system is one also to be very, 
very proud of. We have regional colleges, we have SIAST, we 
have our universities, all providing a major role in training and 
education of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am also impressed with the number of programs that the 
Southeast Regional College delivers to the south-east part of 
Saskatchewan. The Southeast Regional College must be  
  



March 13, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

commended for how responsive they are to the needs of the 
community and the people in our area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is a top priority of the throne speech; 
it’s a top priority for Saskatchewan. 
 
I can see that the time is coming close, that I should be 
adjourning then the debate at this time. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 141 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 141 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 141 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 142 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 142 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 142 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Women in Agriculture 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 142 
 Computers in Agriculture 
  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 142 
 Mr. Paul Bodnarchuk’s 105th Birthday 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 143 
 Oil and Gas Exploration and Development 
  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 143 
 Rafferty-Alameda Dams 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 143 
 Sled Dog Championship 
  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 143 
 Local Songbird 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 143 
 Support for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 144 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Property Tax Reassessment 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 144 
  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 144 
 Rail Line Closures 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 144 
  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 
 Crop Insurance Deadline 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 
  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 
 Contaminated Groundwater 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 
  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 
 Rules for Lobbyists 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 
 Regina Murder Case 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 146 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 
 Provincial Sales Tax 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 146 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 146 
 Education Funding 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 147 
  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 147 
 Utility Rate Review Process 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 148 
  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 148 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 9  The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 
  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 
 



 

 Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 1997 
  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 149 
 Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 149 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 149 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 153 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 
  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 163 
  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 165 
  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 168 
  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 169 
 




