




















































Hansard: March 17, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 205 

 March 17, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to present petitions pertaining to the regional telephone 

exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitioners are from such places as Glenbain, Wapella, 

Saltcoats, Yorkton, Stockholm and other communities, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 

from citizens in the Speers, Hafford, Blaine Lake, and Krydor 

communities concerning rural telephone exchanges. 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I too present petitions of concerned 

citizens pertaining to the development of regional telephone 

exchange. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitioners are mostly from the Saltcoats and Yorkton area. 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens interested in the 

creation of a regional telephone exchange. And the prayer reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And those who have signed these petitions are from south-east  

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today to bring forward petitions regarding the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this . . . or these petitions, Mr. 

Speaker, are from the Glenbain, Aneroid, and Minton areas of 

the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to rise to present a petition on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan regarding rural telephone exchanges. 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people from some 

communities in my constituency, namely that of Loreburn, 

Hawarden, Strongfield, and I guess Outlook, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about regional telephone 

exchanges. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The people that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Fertile, Carlyle, Manor, Gainsborough, Storthoaks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

present petitions from people who are interested in seeing 

regional telephone exchanges started: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petitioners that have signed this petition are from 

Saltcoats. 

 



206  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my hon. 

colleagues to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan with respect to regional telephone exchanges: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitioners are from Saltcoats, Leross, Springside, and 

Kelliher. I so present. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today, 

Mr. Speaker, to present petitions on behalf of 647 people from 

around the province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately amend The 

Non-profit Corporations Act and other legislation in order 

to protect volunteers from frivolous legal action by 

prohibiting any legal action against any volunteer unless a 

court of competent jurisdiction first grants permission. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from all around the 

province: from Eastend, Saskatchewan; Dollard, Gull Lake, 

Regina, Swift Current, Kindersley, Big River, Broadview, 

Limerick, Caronport, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Meyronne, 

Golden Prairie, Lancer, Burstall — well, there’s just too many 

to mention them all, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to present 

them today. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the 

following petition and I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from Swift Current, Saskatoon, Pennant, Kronau, 

Regina, generally all over Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure as well 

to read into the record petitions that have come from across the 

province, and I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals  

from . . . a majority from the Saskatoon area; also Martensville, 

Vonda, and the Swift Current areas. I so present. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Regina area, from Craven and 

Regina, and from my own constituency, towns of Oxbow and 

Alameda. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased as well to 

present petitions on behalf of people across Saskatchewan with 

respect to the provincial sales tax. Mr. Speaker, these petitions 

come from the Saskatoon and Regina areas of the province, and 

I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by two points; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime; 

and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce to you and to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly some very distinguished 

guests — I think they’re very distinguished — who have joined 

us for the launch of Education Week in Saskatchewan this 

week. 

 

They’re in your gallery. Some of them are waving 

Saskatchewan flags. Anyone who was in the rotunda a few 

moments ago will know that I’m talking about the St. Mary’s 

Oskiyak Song and Dance Troupe, which troupe gave us a 

wonderful demonstration of their culture and their skills and 

their art. 

 

I want to especially welcome, in addition to the students who 

are really the performers and the workers, the dance teacher, 

Delvin Kennedy; St. Mary’s staff members, Kevin McLean, 

Genie Aurmenko, Gail Weenie, Vera Gallagher, and Anna Lee 

King; and as I say, most of all, the members of the troupe, all of 

whom are tremendously talented dancers and drummers. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

Mr. Speaker, Oskiyak shares the language of its culture through 

its performances in Saskatchewan schools, festivals, and 

cultural centres. It’s also performed as far away as Toronto and 

Montreal. Now the troupe is planning to attend the international 

powwow of indigenous peoples in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 

 

I’d like to repeat, on behalf I’m sure of all the members, our 

very best wishes to them in their fund-raising efforts toward 

their trip. And I’d like to ask all members of this Assembly to 

join me in welcoming our distinguished guests and thanking 

them for their performance here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  M. le president, je voudrais 

introduire à vous et par vous á tous les députés de cette 

Assemblée, certaines personnes distinguées de la communauté 

culturelle francophone. 

 

C’est la semaine d’éducation de cette province, même c’est 

aussi la semaine nationale de la francophone. Aujour’dui 

marque le dêbut de cette semaine. Comme mon colleague, 

l’député de la Regina Sherwood, parlera pendant les 

declarations de députés plus de ça, ces personnes nous 

honneurent par leur presence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably as much for the benefit of the 

French-speaking people, who struggle with my butchering of 

the language, as the English, I will repeat this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  If this is French, I can understand it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There may have been a modest 

English accent there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to the members of 

the Assembly certain distinguished persons from the 

francophone cultural community. It is Education Week and 

perhaps appropriately enough, it’s also the National — across 

Canada — Francophone Week. 

 

These persons have honoured us by being here today. I assume 

— I’m not entirely able to see past the clock — but I believe 

they’re all here: M. Roland Pinsonneault, très estimé pionnier 

de la fransaskoisie. Stand please — oh, he’s not here. 

 

Denis Magnan, président, Association canadienne-français de 

Regina; Leon Marchildon et Roland Lebreque, délégué de 

l’ACFC de Saskatchewan. Merci. 

 

Suzanne Stradecki, présidente, Association des juristes 

d’expression française de la Saskatchewan; Mme. Michèle 

Routier-Leib, déléguéé de l’Association des parents fransaskois; 

M. Jean Liboiron, directeur général de la Commission culturelle 

fransaskoise; M. Robert Therrien, Conseil de la coopération de 

la Saskatchewan; M. Florent Bilodeau et Marie Patterson — M. 

Florent Bilodeau est le directeur général et Marie Patterson et 

l’agent des communications de la Conseil général des écoles 

fransaskoises. 

 

M. Roger Lepage, Conseil scolaire fransaskois de  

Saskatchewan; and Mr. Ron Holgerson, director of arts, cultural 

industries and multiculturalism in the cultural branch; and M. 

Etienne Alary, représentant de l’Association jeunesse 

fransaskoise. 

 

Ces personnes contribuent énormément à la communauté 

culturelle fransaskoise. J’invite tous les députés me joindre à 

dire bienvenue a cette Assemblée. 

 

(Translation: These people make an enormous contribution to 

the fransaskois cultural community. I invite all members to join 

me in saying welcome to this Assembly.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with my colleague across the floor on behalf of our caucus in 

welcoming the delegates from the Saskatchewan Fransaskois 

community. I’m not going to speak any French. My accent, 

while a little bit better than the minister’s, is not great. But we 

would like to welcome everyone here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add 

the voice of the official opposition to welcome the group that 

the Premier has welcomed and asked us to join in welcoming, 

and wish them sincere good wishes on their journeys and their 

endeavours, and welcome to the delegates from Fransaskois. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well as being 

extremely pleased and also wishing to say hello to the 

distinguished visitors in the Speaker’s gallery, I would like to 

introduce some visitors of my own. 

 

In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 20 students — 

unfortunately two of them were not able to make the journey — 

but 20 students from the grade 7 class of St. Luke’s School in 

Saskatoon, in the constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

I had the great pleasure to meet with them earlier and to field 

some of their very challenging and probing questions. And I 

will be meeting with them again after question period and 

hopefully the questions will be a lot easier then. But judging 

from the quality and the nature of their questions, I would say 

that it’s a comment on the excellence of the teacher, Michelle 

Bussière, and their parents. I think they probably are some of 

the best and brightest in my constituency. 

 

So I welcome them all here to the Legislative Assembly, and I 

would ask everyone to join with me in making them feel very 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great 

deal of pleasure that I have the opportunity today to introduce 

some people from my constituency. Even though it’s a long  



208  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

ways away and the roads were a bit icy, we have a delegation 

with us from Eastend, Saskatchewan. And so I would like, 

through you and to you and the rest of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, to introduce from Eastend, Saskatchewan, Julie 

Johnston and Rick Girard who are hoping to meet with the 

Minister of Justice later this day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s my pleasure today to introduce to the 

Assembly through you and to all of us, students from Regina 

Lakeview constituency who are home-schooling students. And 

as part of their education they are coming here to the legislature 

to observe the activities, and then spend some time asking me 

some questions later. And with them are their teachers, Karen 

Herriot, Tara Semple, and Sylvie Roy. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Education Week 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today marks the 

beginning of Education Week in Saskatchewan. Education 

Week, as is education, is a partnership between the Government 

of Saskatchewan and the many education partners: the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and teachers, Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan Association of 

School Councils, and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations. 

 

The theme this year, Mr. Speaker, is, Saskatchewan: 

World-Class Education. Our education system in indeed 

world-class. It is used repeatedly as a blueprint for other 

education systems throughout the world. 

 

The education system in this province, Mr. Speaker, has 

undergone many changes. Those changes will enhance quality 

and promote excellence that will benefit every child. But 

excellence is only one goal of our education system; the other, 

Mr. Speaker, is accessibility. The Government of Saskatchewan 

is committed to an education system where every child has the 

opportunity to obtain the knowledge and the skills required to 

lead a successful and productive life. Everyone must have that 

opportunity regardless of where they live in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of this Assembly will 

join me in recognizing the importance of our education system 

to the future of this province and the leadership that our 

educators provide in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and worldwide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in honour 

of Education Week we recognize the accomplishments of all the 

people in the education field, from teachers and support staff to 

parents and the students themselves, all of whom are committed 

to providing world-class education in this province. People in 

the education field have been under tremendous pressure the 

last several years as they struggle with cut-backs.  

But in spite of this they have risen to the occasion and have 

continued to provide Saskatchewan young people with a fine 

education system. 

 

This dedication is admirable and critical as we strive to make 

quality education a continuing priority — a priority that is 

essential if we are to prepare our young people for the 

challenges that they’ll face in their futures. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

rise in recognition of Education Week in Saskatchewan. The 

theme of this year’s Education Week is, Saskatchewan: 

World-Class Education. Indeed, as an educator myself, I can 

attest to that — this is always an appropriate theme for the 

process of education. With the growing importance of the 

Internet’s distance learning in our education system, our 

students have an opportunity like never before to share and 

grow from information from all over the globe. 

 

However, not all students and teachers are fortunate enough to 

have the most of modern benefits. Teachers in some areas of 

our province are struggling with fewer resources, a shortage of 

staff, at times deteriorating facilities — all told, a crumbling 

infrastructure. 

 

It is important also to recognize the talents of our teachers, the 

resilience of our educational institutions and the eagerness of 

our students. With all this talk about modern technology it 

would be easy to overlook, this year is also the 10th anniversary 

of the core curriculum. An education system is ultimately no 

better than the material it presents, and we should all take a 

moment to reflect on the hard work that has been done. 

 

On behalf of the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus, I would 

like to acknowledge Education Week and offer our profound 

thanks to all the hard-working people and groups in our 

education system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Francophone Week 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to inform you that the Premier has officially designated the 

week of March 16 to 22 as National Francophone Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

M. le president, je voudrais announcer que le premier ministre a 

officiellement désigné la semaine du 16 mars au 22 mars, 

Semaine Nationale de la Francophonie au Saskatchewan. Voilà 

cinq ans que l’Association d’éducation candienne de langue 

français organise cette semaine, et je suis heureux de signaler à 

l’assemblée cette célébration des francophones de la 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Chaque année, la Semaine Nationale de la Francophone évoque 

un nouveau thème relié à sa langue et à sa culture. Cette année, 

le thème choisi est “La chanson d’expression française.” Ce  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

thème, qui met en valeur la musique francophone, nous donne à 

penser qu’une communauté se définit beaucoup plus que par sa 

langue. Ses chansons, ses poèmes, ses contes populaires, ses 

traditions, s’avèrent tous aussi essentiels à la formation de 

l’identité d’une communauté. 

 

Cette année, c’est sur la chanson que l’on met l’accent. Durant 

cette Semain de la Francophone, les élèves exploreront la 

chanson française au Canada et à travers le monde. 

 

Au nom de tous mes jeunes . . . tous mes collègues de 

l’Assemblée, nous souhaitons une bonne semaine aux tous les 

fransaskois et fransaskaises. 

 

(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce that the 

Premier has officially designated the week of March 16 to 

March 22, National Francophone Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is now five years that the national association on francophone 

education has organized this week and I am happy to point out 

to the Assembly this celebration of francophone communities in 

Saskatchewan. Each year National Francophone Week chooses 

a new theme related to its language and culture. This year the 

chosen theme is The Song of French Expression. 

 

This theme, which places value on francophone music, causes 

us to think of a community that defines itself by much more 

than just its language. Its songs, its poems, its popular tales, its 

traditions, are all essential contributions to the formation of a 

community’s identity. 

 

This year it is on song that the accent is placed. During this 

francophone week students will explore French song in Canada 

and across the world. 

 

On behalf of all my colleagues in the Assembly, we wish a 

good week to francophone men and women.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to address the House on this special occasion, the 

National Francophone Week that began yesterday, Sunday, 

March 16, and will close this Saturday, March 22. 

 

Je félicite l’Association canadienne d’éducation de langue 

français qui a créé cette semaine nationale il y a quatre ans. Je 

voudrais reconnaitre aussi la contribution de l’Association 

culturelle franco-canadienne pour l’organisation des 

événements qui nous permettent de nous concentrer sur les 

contributions avancées par les francophones et en particulier, 

notre communauté fransaskois. 

 

Ceci nous permet aussi de reconnaitre l’impact international 

que nous donnent les communautés françaises. Une quarantaine 

pays, comme le Canada, ont le français soit comme une des 

langues officielles, soit comme une des langues importantes. 

Alors, il est évident que les personnes qui parlent français et 

l’anglais peuvent communiquer à beaucoup de personnes dans 

plusieurs pays. Quelle occasion pur less personnes bilingues! 

 

(Translation: I congratulate the Canadian Association on 

Francophone Education which has created this national week 

four years ago. I would like to recognize also the contribution 

of the French Canadian cultural association for the organization 

of the events which permit us to focus on the contributions 

made by francophones and in particular, our fransaskois 

community. 

 

This also permits us to recognize the international impact of our 

French communities. A quarantine country like Canada has 

French both as an official language and as an important 

language. So it is evident that people who speak French and 

English can communicate with many people in several 

countries. What an advantage for bilingual people!) 

 

By early April, I will have had the opportunity to participate 

within my constituency at two official openings of new 

fransaskois school facilities. One at St. Isidore-de-Bellevue and 

the other at Vonda. These communities now . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Irish poet 

James Stephens once wrote: 

 

Let us sing and dance until 

We shall know the final art, 

How to banish good and ill 

With the laughter of the heart. 

 

Today as we begin such an auspicious week, the whole world 

knows it’s also St. Patrick’s Day, the day when people 

everywhere wish they had my legitimate claim to Irish roots; 

the day when we celebrate the Irish, their accomplishments, and 

of course their idiosyncracies. 

 

Their accomplishments are many and timeless. Most notable is 

the Irish love of language, as the above selection suggests. And 

their ability to use language is also able to tug at our hearts, 

enliven our imagination, and move us to tears and laughter, 

often at the same time. It was once said that all their wars were 

happy and all their songs sad. And that is not far from the truth. 

 

The idiosyncracies of the Irish, Mr. Speaker, we will ignore, 

except to say they are undoubtedly overblown as the result of 

some irresponsible press. 

 

And this is a day in North America when we celebrate the many 

contributions to our society by people of Irish descent; a day 

when we remember that these accomplishments began in 

poverty and discrimination, and were overcome by 

determination and fortitude. They did it with the laughter of the 

heart Stephens talks about. 

 

I invite all of us to do the rounds and “wet the Shamrock.” Erin 

go bragh! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



210  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

Rider Pride Alive and Well in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday last I spoke 

here about how communities come together. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s now a matter of record. We found out over the weekend, 

Mr. Speaker, that Rider pride is very much alive and well in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On Saturday the Roughriders held a telethon as a last-ditch 

effort to raise funds to save the team. Although we all knew the 

team was in a do-or-die situation, the people came through. 

Thanks to the outpouring of support from the communities, the 

team scored a major victory and surpassed its goal by selling 

215,000 tickets. The people of the province deserve a big round 

of applause, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing the team’s 

importance to this province and for not letting an 87-year 

tradition die. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

30th Annual Oilmen’s Banquet 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 

the Minister of Energy and Mines and myself had the pleasure 

of attending the 30th annual oilmen’s banquet which is part of 

the oilmen’s bonspiel held at Lloydminster. 

 

Ninety-six rinks entered in the bonspiel and approximately a 

thousand oilmen and women attended the banquet. 

 

The highlight of the evening, Mr. Speaker, was the nomination 

of Howie Cayford as oilman of the year. Mr. Cayford richly 

deserves this honour, having given years of service and 

dedication for the oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The oil and gas industry is an integral part of the economy of 

the Lloydminster constituency. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the area received the second highest 

bonus-bid activity in the province at 3.5 million. However, it is 

a service industry and the oilmen who work in the rigs that are 

the backbone of the employment in my area. 

 

I am proud to say that employment in the Lloydminster heavy 

oil area increased by 12 per cent in 1996 and a whopping land 

sale revenue increase by 96 per cent. 

 

The oil and gas industry is tremendously important to the 

economy of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Revenues for ‘96-97 will exceed 600 million and create or 

maintain 18,000 jobs. This activity is an example of partnership 

between government and private business which is creating 

employment and re-energizing our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Industrial Vacancy Rate 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Canada Safeway Ltd. 

recently announced that it would be closing its MacDonald’s 

Consolidated warehouse in Regina, affecting 142 employees. 

This is in addition to some 500 jobs which have been lost in the 

industry in the past five years. 

 

As a result, Regina now has the dubious distinction of having 

the highest industrial vacancy rate of eight major cities included 

in a recent survey, and a vacancy rate which is more than 

double that of Calgary. 

 

Will the Minister of Economic Development explain his theory 

on why businesses continue to consolidate outside of 

Saskatchewan in favour of Alberta or Manitoba when 

Saskatchewan’s geological location makes it the obvious place 

to centralize? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 

question from the member opposite, given the fact that their 

Prime Minister, Mr. Chrétien, was . . . recently chose Saskatoon 

to come to on part of his western tour to look at jobs being 

created at one of Saskatchewan’s important new businesses — 

Shuttle Craft. 

 

Now obviously he takes great pride in Saskatchewan 

businesses, something the member opposite has not done once 

since she was elected to this House. And I say that that is too 

bad. 

 

The fact of the matter is I have here a list of the new businesses 

in the province of Saskatchewan, those incorporated in 1996, a 

number of new businesses — 3,619 — which is a record high 

since 1981. That’s the highest it’s ever been, new 

incorporations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, look at Regina where we have 

IPSCO, which is expanding, doing new and exciting things in 

heavy-wall pipe. Look at the upgrader and the new things that 

are happening there in terms of heavy oil, creating jobs. Look at 

the Wheat Pool with their new expansion into hog production. 

 

I say to the member opposite, if you’d look at the bright side of 

life . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I obviously didn’t get an answer 

to the question but that doesn’t surprise me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of creating low-paying, part-time jobs, 

which presently makes up 29 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

workforce, one must question why this government is not 

paying more attention to the creation of well-paying jobs that 

families can survive on. 

 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

The official opposition is not alone in questioning how many 

more warehouses will have to close and how many jobs will be 

lost before this government begins to address the fact it must 

improve the business climate in this province. Which one of the 

obstacles facing Saskatchewan business does the minister 

believe is causing this terrible atmosphere? Could it be the 

government’s labour legislation, or workmen’s compensation 

rates, or maybe the high utility rates, or really do you believe 

it’s a combination of all of them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, if the member 

opposite knew the facts about retail sales being the highest in 

Canada in Saskatchewan — higher than Alberta or Manitoba — 

she would know that the changes to warehousing have nothing 

to do with retail sales or in fact the number of jobs. 

 

And the members opposite may, if they were in government — 

ever happened to be in government — legislate to keep the 

economy exactly the same as it was back in the 1960s, but the 

fact of the matter is that warehousing in Canada is changing 

dramatically. Companies like Canadian Tire, Superstore — 

which are expanding in Regina — do not need warehouses. 

Now you may say that you would step in and stop that from 

happening and keep everything as it was in the 1960s or ‘70s. 

Can’t be done. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, look at the new jobs being 

created in information technology — $20 million in movie 

industry announced last week. You might even want to read the 

Leader-Post on the front page — all of the jobs that are being 

created there. Don’t be so negative about jobs that you believe 

you could do something to save, when we all know that the 

economy is changing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when a 

new crop insurance program was announced several weeks ago, 

the official opposition suggested that this government would 

have its work cut out for itself in trying to attract farmers. 

Because of this government’s history in cancelling GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) contracts and taking $188 million 

from the GRIP surplus and directing these funds into general 

revenue, Saskatchewan farmers are suspicious about virtually 

every government initiative. 

 

Given the fact that today is the final day to register for the crop 

insurance program, can the Minister of Agriculture tell this 

House how many producers have actually signed up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, for that question. We do not have that figure yet. 

In fact people can still sign up today. Over the weekend, the 

Crop Insurance offices were open on Saturday and we’re also 

taking applications today. Next year, it’s the intention of Crop 

Insurance to end the contract deadline as of March 1 because 

we want a program, Mr. Speaker, that’s good for all the farmers 

in the province of Saskatchewan, not just the ones south of No. 

1 or north of No. 1. But we need this to be a program that’s for 

all farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has a great 

deal of work ahead of it to overcome the lack of trust that the 

farmers have in this administration. Out of the 16,000 farmers 

who dropped out of crop insurance between 1991 and 1996, 

only about 500 had signed new contracts with Crop Insurance 

as of last Thursday — considerably less than the 5,000 that the 

Crop Insurance Corporation had planned on; underlines this 

particular fact. 

 

Given the poor sign-up rate and the need for this government to 

establish new initiatives to attract more producers to the 

program, will the minister announce an extension of the crop 

insurance deadline in this House today? 

 

There’s no concern about what happens south of No. 1 

Highway. All you have to do is look out the window and see all 

the snow and the inability for people to even consider going out 

into the fields. Will the minister announce an extension of the 

deadline? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member 

opposite. And I know that the member should know this, but he 

may not realize it and I’m going to tell him again. This 

government wrote off $150 million in crop insurance debt this 

past year, Mr. Speaker, to try and show the federal government 

— the federal Liberals — what they should be doing, finally 

convincing them of at least a portion of the write-off. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we are continuing 

to take applications today. Next year of course, that deadline 

will be March 1. But the amount of 39,000 farmers that were in 

the program last year we believe will be part of the program 

again this year. We have had good reports on the changes to 

crop insurance. 

 

We have had a premium reduction, Mr. Speaker, of 23 per cent. 

And the member opposite sits there and argues about a 23 per 

cent discount in premiums. I can’t understand that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the other hand, we have a federal government that’s 

allowing the railways to charge more for freight rates, but he 

doesn’t say nothing about that. I wish he would get in tune with 

the agricultural concerns out there in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Liability Protection for Volunteers 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my  



212  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

question today is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, as you 

are aware, the seven volunteer directors of the Eastend curling 

— or skating, rather — complex are being personally sued for 

$37,000 after a 50/50 draw in their community failed to raise as 

much money as they originally expected. 

 

Now this could result in a major financial hardship for the men 

and women involved, none of whom could have ever 

anticipated this outcome when they put their names forward to 

serve their community as volunteer directors. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know you can’t comment on this specific case 

while it is before the courts. However, resolutions in support of 

changes to the legislation have passed both at the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 

and at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) convention. And so in general terms, do you think 

that volunteer directors of non-profit corporations should be 

held personally liable if they acted in good faith? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, right after question period I will introduce a 

private members’ Bill that protects volunteers from this kind of 

action. My question, Minister, is this: will you support the 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not in a position to 

comment on this particular case, but I know that the legislation 

in Saskatchewan as it relates to serving in non-profit 

corporations as directors includes many provisions that relate to 

this particular issue. And I’d be very happy to receive more 

information about this particular matter as we try to correct the 

problem, if there is one. 

 

But I think practically, with insurance for directors, there are 

remedies to solve the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, of course the insurance is 

always an answer. But premiums go up as you collect more and 

more, and the reality is that these are volunteers who shouldn’t 

have to be buying insurance, nor should their non-profit 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is the kind of case that threatens the very 

future of volunteerism in Saskatchewan. Already it’s impossible 

to find anyone in Eastend, Saskatchewan, who wants to serve 

on the rink boards any more. And I’m sure that the same 

problem will spread to other communities once they start to 

hear about this particular case. 

 

Mr. Minister, ministers are protected from personal liability. 

For instance, you can’t be held personally responsible for the 

things that keep going and being screwed up in the Justice 

department. Why not provide the same protection for 

volunteers? 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of Eastend would like to meet with you 

after question period to discuss the issue of personal 

liability. And they have some very good arguments why 

insurance is not the answer. They have promised not to discuss 

the specifics of their own case. So will you meet with them 

today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, thank you for the further question. I 

would be happy to meet with these people. I know that this is a 

concern with a number of people in Saskatchewan. We have 

some legislation that covers most situations, but there are 

clearly some times when people don’t totally understand all of 

the ways that people can be protected and so I’d be very 

interested in meeting with these people. 

 

First Nations Taxation 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for whichever minister wants to grab the hot potato 

of native taxation. Mr. Speaker, a number of reserves have not 

been submitting provincial taxes for some time now. The 

Cowessess Reserve has admitted it has been withholding PST 

(provincial sales tax) for over a year. There’s also a report that 

the Bear Claw Casino on White Bear Reserve is not paying the 

liquor consumption tax. The government is sending out mixed 

messages on this issue. The Finance minister says everyone has 

to pay their taxes, but the liquor minister says the matter is 

under negotiation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of too many people who get a 

chance to negotiate paying their taxes. Mr. Minister, why the 

double standard, and why are some Indian bands given 

preferential treatment in being allowed to withhold provincial 

taxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member opposite for the question. First of all, as you 

will understand, I can’t comment on specific tax cases because 

tax information is amongst the most confidential information 

that a government has. What I will say is that this government’s 

policy is clear. We collect taxes all across the province 

wherever the taxes are due. 

 

Now as far as sitting down and talking to somebody about their 

taxes, that also is government policy. We have no desire to 

drive people out of business. So to have meetings and to sit 

down and say, do you have a financial problem, can we work 

out a schedule whereby these taxes are paid, is absolutely 

standard procedure in collecting taxes. 

 

The bottom line is simple: this government collects its taxes all 

across the province in a fair and equitable manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are follow-up questions for the Minister of Finance.  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

Madam Minister, for the second week in a row Saskatchewan is 

facing a big deadline. On Saturday night the Riders and their 

fans came through in the final hour and reached their goal. Now 

Saskatchewan people are waiting to see whether you will come 

through on Thursday with a cut to the PST that everyone is 

looking for. Business is demanding it, despite your efforts to 

say that they weren’t last week; thousands of people who signed 

our petitions are demanding it. 

 

Madam Minister, is this going to happen on Thursday? Are you 

going to cut the PST, or are taxpayers and businesses going to 

have to suffer through another losing season thanks to your 9 

per cent PST. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. As the member opposite would know, I’m going to 

make no comments about the budget — he’s going to have to 

wait until Thursday. But what I would like to comment on in 

the House, because I think the House and the people of 

Saskatchewan have to be reminded of this, is how ludicrous it is 

for the Tories to be here talking about tax cuts. 

 

When they were government they raised the sales tax two 

points; they introduced and increased the flat tax; they increased 

the high income surtax; they increased the gas tax. Those are 

some of the taxes they succeeded in increasing. They tried to 

have a hospitals tax which failed. They tried a used-car tax. 

They tried to harmonize. And with all of these taxes going up, 

at the same time they managed to add about a billion dollars a 

year to the debt of the province. 

 

I’ll say one thing to the member opposite. In all matters we will 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan across the province, but 

one thing they don’t want us to do on matters of finance is listen 

to the Tories. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I almost 

forgot to thank the minister. I understand on Friday she 

compared our party to the Mike Harris Tories in Ontario, and 

we thank you for that tremendous compliment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will recall, in his first election as leader, 

Mike Harris ran third. By his second election he campaigned on 

a platform of tax cuts and his party rose up and crushed the 

NDP (New Democratic Party). 

 

Madam Minister, is this the only way the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to see a cut in the PST? Do you have 

any plan to lower the PST in the next couple of years, or will it 

only happen after the NDP is defeated in 1999? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. He’s going to have to wait for the budget to have all 

of those issues talked about. And I will say this, what they 

always forget as well is the record of this government. Besides 

targeting tax cuts to business, we have provided income tax cuts 

to everybody across the province who pays income tax. So as I 

say, wait for the budget. 

 

But again, I’ll tell the members opposite what we won’t do. We 

won’t do what the Tories did when they said in 1982, let’s have 

a great, big, fat, wonderful tax cut. It feels great. We love it. 

And then a few years later — a billion dollars a year onto the 

debt later — they bring that same tax back, but at an even 

higher rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are only three more sleeps for the members 

opposite. We will listen to everybody in the province but we 

won’t listen to the Tories. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regional Telephone Exchanges 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 

well over a year the official opposition has been impressing on 

this government how unfair the present telephone exchanges 

are. As such, I would like to serve notice of the introduction of 

a private members’ Bill entitled the regional telephone districts 

Act. 

 

The purpose to this Bill would be to expand the size of local 

calling areas throughout rural Saskatchewan. Instead of 

postage-stamp-sized local calling regions as we presently have, 

we would propose larger calling areas which correspond with 

larger neighbouring communities or regional economic 

development authorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present boundaries are as antiquated as the 

days of the regional telephone co-ops. Will the minister in 

charge of SaskTel indicate whether she and her government feel 

that the present system is outdated and unfair? And will she 

support this initiative? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member opposite for that question. And I’m so glad to notice 

that some members of the opposition were present last week 

when I addressed the SARM convention and shared with 

SARM that we had some very advanced work on this exact 

proposition, at which time I received a standing ovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I was at SARM convention. 

Mr. Speaker, I was at SARM . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now the hon. member of 

Saltcoats doesn’t need help from either side of the House. And 

I’ll ask all the members to allow the hon. member for Saltcoats 

to be heard. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I happened to be at SARM for 

a couple of days last week and if they had a standing ovation, it 

was definitely the only one they got. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has been said in the past few months about 

the competition that SaskTel is experiencing from new players 

in the long-distance market. Expanding our local calling areas  



214  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

as the regional telephone exchange Act proposes would result in 

more local calls, which would translate into more revenue for 

SaskTel and less revenue for long-distance competitors. 

 

Madam Minister, in this new age of competition in the 

telephone industry, would this not be one of SaskTel’s best 

tools to compete with competition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I didn’t happen to 

notice whether any of the members opposite who were 

attending the convention also stood with the rest of the crowd. 

 

But I do want to say that we are aware that the demographics of 

Saskatchewan are changing. We know that this is a very 

important issue, communications in rural Saskatchewan. And 

that’s why we have some fairly advanced work on it, and we 

hope to be making that announcement not too much later this 

year. 

 

But this is out of our concern for the needs of communication in 

rural Saskatchewan. And I recall, a little under a year ago, when 

the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, advocated privatizing 

SaskTel during the labour dispute. And in private hands I would 

say that it would be . . . in private hands it would be highly 

unlikely that the owner of the company would be concerned for 

the communications needs of people in rural and remote 

Saskatchewan where we have made significant investment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest 

that the minister be careful which way she’s aiming her gun; 

she’s got it a bit in the wrong direction here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this government does not 

need to be told the cost of doing business outside a major centre 

is higher, and telephone rates play a significant role. Expanding 

telephone rate districts would help business to remain and grow 

more competitive. If this government is truly committed to 

creating business and employment in rural Saskatchewan, this is 

one step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people I have spoken to about this issue 

have suggested they are prepared to accept a minor increase in 

their basic telephone rates to expand local calling areas because 

this will reduce their long-distance charges. I have collected 

several hundred names on petitions from people who support 

this initiative. 

 

Does the minister not agree that this initiative would help to 

reduce the gap between the cost of doing business in rural and 

urban Saskatchewan, and will she support rural businesses who 

are calling for this change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’ll be reviewing 

Hansard tomorrow with great interest since the member 

opposite has suggested that we should increase local telephone 

rates. 

 

I also want to remind the members opposite that last year during 

the task force, the review of the Crown corporations, that the 

official opposition did make representation to that body 

recommending privatization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

911 Service Charges 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just before the last 

provincial election, the government promised that 10 per cent of 

VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues would go to municipal 

governments. Just after the last provincial election, this promise 

was scuttled. 

 

And at that time, Madam Minister advised that it was because 

the revenues from VLTs would be required to institute a 911 

service throughout the province. Now we hear that individual 

telephone subscribers are to be charged 75 cents a month for 

911 service, and municipalities are to be charged $1.50 per 

capita per year. 

 

My question of the minister is, will she now advise, if these 

charges are going to be levied to cover the cost of 911, does this 

mean that the 10 per cent of VLT revenues will be returned to 

our communities as initially promised by this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the question that the 

member opposite asks is about a year tardy. This issue was 

dealt with a year ago. 

 

And communities accepted and agreed when this . . . SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and the 

SARM and SUMA deliberations, the only point that they could 

agree on was the need for an emergency telephone system in the 

911. So part of the money was used for the mapping and for the 

development of that system. 

 

The charges that the member opposite is speaking of now are of 

supposition only because there is still two advisory committees, 

a technical committee, and another advisory committee, 

working on developing the 911 system which will cover 

Saskatchewan in a very efficient, cost-effective way. And any 

individual charges at this point are simply speculation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At approximately 100 

million a year for VLT revenues, then the 10 per cent would of 

course be $10 million. Now if that is going into the 

development of a 911 service as the minister claims, then can 

she confirm that the 911 service will be free from additional 

charges to subscribers and to municipalities because she’s  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

already got this $10 million fund with which to pay for it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate 

the member opposite on his acumen in mathematics, that 10 per 

cent of 100 million is 10 million. 

 

But I say again that the development of the 911 system, the 

recommendations are now in the hands of two committees on 

which municipalities are represented both on the technical side 

and the other, advisory side. At this point no charges or lack 

thereof have been confirmed because it’s still in development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 201  The Regional Telephone Districts Act 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move, seconded by the member from Melfort, first reading of a 

Bill, The Regional Telephone Districts Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 205 — The Non-profit Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les sociétés 

sans but lucratif 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of an Act to 

amend The Non-profit Corporations Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker:  When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  By leave, later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, The 

Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 

Dental Disciplines Act, be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The 

Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians 

Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of Bill No. 19, 

The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

 

The Speaker:  Hon. members, before orders of the day I 

wish to table a note to the revised summary report by the Chief 

Electoral Officer. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the House Leader 

for the government, I hereby table the answer to question 1, and 

with leave of the Assembly, in order to save time, I am prepared 

to table the answers to items 2 through to 10. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question no. 1 is tabled — 

order, order — and the Government Whip has requested leave 

to simultaneously table the answers to items 2 through 10. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise today to continue debate on the throne speech, which has 

been called by some a mighty fine throne speech. 

 

Now you may remember that on Friday before we adjourned, I 

included a small story about chickens and that story inspired  



216  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

one constituent to ask me, why did the Tory and Liberal 

chicken cross the road, Mr. Speaker? To get to the same side 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well chicken jokes are like that, 

Mr. Speaker. But I digress. 

 

I want to concentrate today on my remarks on the many 

strengths of Saskatchewan people and our need to make sure 

that every person in the province has an opportunity to 

participate and to benefit. In my remarks Friday, I talked about 

the importance of community-based solutions and the terrific 

work being done by community organizations under the 

umbrella of the child action plan. These joint community and 

government innovations are being honoured nationally by the 

Champions for Children award, and these innovations can 

become the model for a national approach. 

 

In the last couple of years, I’ve come to believe that there’s 

nothing we can do that’s more important than making sure that 

all pregnant mothers, babies, young families, and children get 

the nutrition and support they need. 

 

Probably many people in this House have acquaintance with 

people who have been the victims of abuse or victims of 

neglect. And if there is one thing that strikes you after many 

years of talking to people who have that kind of situation, is that 

the damage does not repair itself easily and that it’s perpetuated 

for a lifetime if the cycle goes unbroken. And part of solving 

these problems is the proper kind of community supports, but 

the other part is the proper kind of income support. 

 

So in addition to the child action plan and in keeping with our 

commitment to children, our Premier aggressively put forward a 

proposal for a national child benefit program. It’s a program to 

complement the community-based programs by providing 

families and children with adequate financial resources. 

 

The work that our Premier and other ministers have done at the 

national level and with the support of other premiers has 

resulted in the federal government agreeing to support this 

initiative in their last budget. And I think once again it affirms 

Saskatchewan people in a leadership position nationwide. 

 

When fully implemented, it’ll be the first national social 

program in 30 years. And I say, well done Saskatchewan, 

because this mirrors Saskatchewan achievements in medicare. 

 

In their recent budget, the federal budget would have had to put 

1.5 billion back into health care to meet what our government 

has done in Saskatchewan. Their own health commission 

recommended that their target of 11 billion for Canada is not 

enough, and that it should be 12.5 billion. So perhaps the 

members opposite should concentrate less on privatizing health 

care and creating a two-tier system, and more on ensuring the 

federal Liberals maintain their commitment to a strong public 

system. 

 

And only because it was such a good quote, I’ll quote again my 

colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow who commented recently 

during question period that the Liberals never did understand 

medicare. And certainly the comments we hear here in the  

House every day would cause us to agree with that. 

 

So in keeping with the spirit of medicare we need to build a 

society where everyone is fairly included in the benefits of 

economic growth. I thought perhaps when the Liberal 

opposition is finished playing $4-a-day games they’ll turn their 

attention to the big picture where federal Liberal policies have 

hurt millions of people in Canada. 

 

I think if we look even at issues like the CPP (Canada Pension 

Plan), unfortunately we’re going to have to take some 

leadership from Saskatchewan on this one. Because our Finance 

minister, over and over again, put forward solutions to the 

federal Minister of Finance, supported by B.C. (British 

Columbia), and supported by work done by our Women’s 

Secretariat. And what do we find out when we look at this 

proposed Liberal plan for CPP reform? 

 

It hits disabled people the most, poor people the most, and frail, 

elderly women. And I feel bad because the federal Liberal 

position on CPP was supported by the opposition Liberal 

member from Humboldt who certainly, as a woman, should 

understand the need to make sure that elderly women are not 

the poorest people in our society. 

 

So the federal Liberals, with the support of the Saskatchewan 

Liberals, are attacking directly the people who are most in need 

of a safety net in our society. And I think we need to hold them 

responsible for their support of those kinds of actions. 

 

On a more humorous note though, as we tackle these problems, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need both diligence and a bit of a 

sense of humour. Recently there was a comment by the Chair of 

the Regina Catholic School Teachers Association to a meeting 

of Regina teachers. And I quote a bit loosely because I don’t 

remember the exact figures he used, but he said that we’re 

living in a society with a hundred problems and only 37 

solutions. 

 

But in this regard I want to speak a little bit about part of our 

community who continues to be creative in their pursuit of 

solutions, and that’s the writers, the visual and performing 

artists, and the filmmakers that were referenced in the throne 

speech. 

 

As well as being married to an artist, I have a lifelong interest in 

the arts that goes back to trips to the art gallery, music festivals, 

and ballet with my mother. Maybe not quite as enthusiastically 

when I was younger as now. But experience has taught me that 

choosing a creative path in life often means choosing poverty 

for the individuals who decide that this is their life’s work. The 

average yearly wage for an artist is $8,000. 

 

But in our priority setting, I am proud that our government has 

not forgotten the arts and is continuing to support the ongoing 

development of a vital artistic community. Every town in 

Saskatchewan . . . I think we’d be hard pressed to find a town 

that doesn’t participate in cultural and heritage events, because 

expressing ourselves and thinking about ourselves has always 

been popular in Saskatchewan. 

 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Recently the MacKenzie Art Gallery opened a show of works 

by Saskatchewan artist Art McKay, who was part of the famous 

Regina Five, including Ronald Bloore, Kenneth Lochhead, Ted 

Godwin, and Doug Morton. In fact there’s a quote from the 

Leader-Post of February 8 that asks, when did this start in 

Saskatchewan that this became such a priority for us. And he 

says: 

 

Perhaps 1947, when the newfangled socialist CCF 

government here formed North America’s first arts board. 

 

And I congratulate that previous government for having the 

wisdom to do that. 

 

More recently, in a conversation with a friend, I was discussing 

The Englishman’s Boy which is a book by Guy Vanderhague 

that recently won the Governor General’s Award, and she said 

to me — and I thought it was a particularly thoughtful remark 

— if we don’t tell our story, who will? 

 

And two of the people that I want to recognize today who are 

telling Saskatchewan’s story are Gail Bowen and Steven Onda. 

The news release mentions a six film deal for Regina producer, 

a $20 million project. Local author Gail Bowen, author of the 

Joanne Kilbourne mystery series, is having five of her novels 

made into feature TV films. And Steven Onda of Heartland 

Motion Pictures, along with Shaftesbury Films of Toronto and 

BBS (Baton Broadcasting System), are behind support for the 

film with a sixth film based on a novel by Saskatoon writer Rob 

Forsyth being included. 

 

And people don’t understand the employment impact of the 

film industry, but we’ll be able to employ a full crew here of 

about 170 people that will have ongoing work as a result of the 

successful contract for these films. So this is again a very 

exciting industry, to not only be able to tell our story through 

authors like Gail Bowen but to have it translated into film. 

 

The last book I want to mention under the book awards is the 

Liberal “red book” which got an award in the best fiction 

category. And I think many people appreciated that that was a 

just reward at those book awards. 

 

But to return to our theme, I want to talk about telling our story 

to the world. Because recently we’ve seen an upsurge in activity 

by aboriginal artists that’s bringing a new dimension to public 

arts in Saskatchewan. And as well, we have the diversity 

expressed in multicultural activities. 

 

Every time I participate in these events, whether it’s the power 

and beauty of the powwow, the enjoyment of the jig, the 

traditional beauty of the highly stylized Indo-Canada dancers, I 

am just overwhelmed by the richness of the Saskatchewan 

culture and our continuing willingness to support these 

activities in all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Today I attended the opening ceremonies for National 

Francophone Week, pleased to add my support to the vitality 

and the work being done by francophone institutions and 

organizations in Saskatchewan. This work can’t help but enrich 

our children’s education and our connectedness to the  

continuing unity of Canada. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about how each of us in Saskatchewan, 

in our own way, have to look to the future and become part of 

making the changes that’ll strengthen us in the 21st century. 

 

Because it’s precisely these qualities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

have enabled us to buckle down and eliminate our deficit. As 

we move towards our fourth balanced budget, we need to 

remind ourselves that it was our common sense of purpose and 

our sharing of the difficulty and sacrifices that enabled us to 

achieve this goal. 

 

This was no small thing. I think everyone here experienced the 

pain and the difficulty of these changes. And now we’ll begin to 

experience the social dividends as we’re able to increase our 

investment in people. But investing in people means we have to 

take a hard look at Saskatchewan — who lives here and what 

the needs are. 

 

Our Premier has said, and I quote: 

 

Inequality is no longer just a problem between those who 

live in developed nations and those who don’t. More and 

more, globalization and the information revolution are 

marginalizing many working families within developed 

nations like Canada and the United States. And even as our 

economy grows, we’re in danger of building third world 

prospects for families in first world nations. 

 

It can’t be ignored that we’re approaching the same patterns of 

wealth distributions as in the 1920s in Canada. And my 

preference would be to read about it in the history books. 

 

The Women's Secretariat has been an exceptional voice in the 

development of policies affecting 52 per cent of our population 

who are women. And we try to stay close to the community, 

co-sponsoring events, educationals, learning workshops. 

 

But recently we published new research on the wage gap so that 

government policy can be more sensitive to the varying impacts 

on aboriginal women, disabled women, immigrant women, 

retired women, rural women, women of varying educational 

achievements, women in non-traditional occupations and 

business. Because these policies won’t be meaningful unless 

they actually meet the needs of the individuals who are affected 

in different ways. 

 

But as we get this more specific information we’ll be able to be 

more sensitive to how these programs should be targeted. And 

as job creation increases, it’s important that everybody be 

included in those benefits as well. 

 

So I just briefly want to touch on the topic of unequal relations 

and unequal opportunity. I think it’s timely because this is the 

week set aside for Education Week and March 21 is the kick-off 

for International Week for the Elimination of Racism. 

 

Coping with the diversity in our society is no longer an option 

nor a luxury. As we’ve seen, whether it’s in the national debates 

including Quebec or even in some of the internal problems that  



218  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

provinces have had, issues of race and ethnicity can have a 

powerful effect on the Canadian society, in the economy. 

 

(1445) 

 

A society is not viable unless everyone is participating because 

you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people who are left out 

become dependent, and this is not a successful way to go. I 

want to mention Dr. Fraser Mustard who has talked about the 

need for a civil society to be one in which everyone participates 

and that those societies are the ones who have the most 

successful economies. So democracy and participation are 

important, not just because they’re good things to do but they’re 

important because they create successful economies. 

 

Among the Indian and Metis people of Saskatchewan, we’re 

dealing with about hundred years of benign and sometimes 

wilful neglect that has resulted in damaged and dependent 

communities. And I think to change this we’re going to have to 

develop a passionate dislike for inequality — an embarrassment 

that it exists in our midst — and a sense of personal shame that 

we’re not acting individually and collectively to change this 

circumstance as quickly as possible. 

 

I don’t believe the solution is just money. I think it’s creating 

more opportunities to participate in education, employment, 

business developments, service deliveries, civic affairs and 

community activities. 

 

There’s been many ways that this government has undertaken to 

do this. We have several agreements with health districts in the 

province who have signed partnership agreements to address 

the issues of aboriginal representation in the workplace, and 

they see it as an important part of community wellness. 

 

We have partnership agreements with unions to improve 

representation in the workforce and business partnerships that 

create jobs and economic development opportunities, as well as 

multi-party training agreements that increase access to jobs. 

 

On another level, we have agreements to work out the elements 

of practical self-government and enhanced self-determination 

for first nation and Metis communities, on the premiss that 

they’ll be effective agents of change. It’s certain that in the last 

hundred years we’ve proven that federal and provincial 

governments have no magic answers. 

 

So I believe at every level, it’s through these stronger 

relationships and these protocols, enhanced understanding and 

friendships that will create the change. 

 

I want to mention some things that are being done under the 

Partnership for Renewal. There was an aboriginal tourism 

strategy completed in spring 1996 and is being implemented in 

partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations. The creation of a first nations call centre, the first of its 

kind in Canada, announced in September 1996. The Department 

of Economic Development has compiled an aboriginal business 

directory for use in federal and provincial government 

procurement and Crown procurement activities. Consultations 

have been conducted with the Metis Nation,  

aboriginal training institutions, and other groups as part of the 

development of a Saskatchewan training strategy which is 

expected to be announced in the spring. 

 

The Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat has 

been coordinating Saskatchewan’s participation in the 12-year 

treaty land entitlement process. Twenty-eight claims have been 

settled as of December 31, ’96, involving the transfer of 52,000 

— approximately — acres of land to reserve status. 

 

When all of the transfers are done . . . I think it’s important for 

people to understand that prior to going into this process, first 

nations people had approximately 1 per cent of the land mass of 

Saskatchewan and after this is completed they will have 

approximately 2 per cent. And in terms of population they are at 

about 9 per cent of the population of the province. So this is still 

a small amount of land in comparison to their representation 

within the population of Saskatchewan. 

 

The government’s framework agreement, also with the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) — which I’m 

going to brag a little bit about — with the casino development, 

has created in the province around 1,200 new jobs in this year; 

at least 700 of which are filled by first nations and Metis 

people. And this is very important because employment and a 

job is the first step to being able to move out into fuller 

participation in the economy. So I was very pleased that we 

were able to sign that very progressive agreement, supported by 

the members opposite. 

 

I want to, for a minute, talk about all the positives we have as 

far as our quality of life goes in Saskatchewan. An article 

January 18 from the Leader-Post, a doctor moves back from the 

U.S. (United States). He says that other pressures south of the 

border are actually worse than the problems in Canada that he 

thought he was trying to escape when he left. He said in the 

United States people didn’t come in until they were very ill and 

that was partly the problem of having to pay each time they 

made a visit to the doctor. So they came in with problems that 

were very advanced and very complicated. 

 

He also was concerned about the racist attitudes in the area 

where he was living. He found out that U.S. doctors had to have 

about three and a half more staff to handle all the bills from a 

private billing system, with all the various insurance companies 

that participate in the health system there. And he also found 

out that U.S. doctors aren’t guaranteed that they’ll be paid — 

they’re on their own. 

 

So he says that Saskatchewan is where he now intends to stay. 

The NDP government has risen a lot in his estimation, and 

they’ve handled a difficult situation really well. So this is, I 

guess, a comment from a doctor who knows and a doctor who’s 

been there — been there and back. 

 

The other article is about a young person. It’s from the Free 

Press on January 1 — a young man who wants to come back 

home. He and his young family moved out of Saskatchewan for 

what they thought would be an opportunity in another place, but 

now he believes that Regina has more to offer a young family in 

terms of safety, outdoor activities, and simplicity. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

And Bob Reed, who’s a labour market information analyst with 

the Human Resource Centre of Canada, agrees with his theory. 

He said he has an increase in calls for employment from former 

Saskatchewan residents. In his opinion, most of the queries are 

from individuals ranging ages 25 to 44; and correspondingly 

there’s fewer calls from people seeking employment outside the 

province. 

 

So Selby is certain that these are an indication of things to 

come. And as the economy improves there’s many young 

people who are quite prepared to move back at the first 

opportunity because they think this is a great place to live and 

they’re just waiting for their chance to do that. 

 

In closing I want to agree with our Premier in his solution to 

many of the problems in Saskatchewan. And I quote again: 

 

If we are to prevent a two-tiered society from becoming 

entrenched in Canada, we need to encourage change at 

three levels — in our families, in business, (and) in our 

governments. (And) in all three we need a new ethic of 

citizenship. 

 

As well we need to embrace the skills and contributions — here 

I divert from the Premier’s comments to my own — of the 

immigrant and refugee community who have so much energy 

and talent and goodwill to offer and who face such incredible 

barriers. I think we really need to work to make sure that all 

people are welcome and included. Again, especially with all the 

federal cuts and changes to this particular area, it’s having a 

very negative effect on people’s ability to acquire English 

language skills and also their ability to participate in the 

workplace independently. 

 

So I just want to say in closing that I believe the throne speech 

reaffirms our commitment to our children and to each other, and 

that it recognizes the enormous strength of Saskatchewan 

people. It’s a speech that supports investing in people and it’s a 

speech that’s in tune with the times. So for that reason, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I speak against the amendment and 

enthusiastically in support of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to also enter into the debate here today surrounding the 

throne speech. I want to just start by thanking the people of 

Kindersley, the constituency of Kindersley that I’m privileged 

to represent. And also to thank the legislative staff and the new 

pages here and welcome them to the Assembly, and begin by 

thanking all of the legislative staff throughout the building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’m pleased to enter the debate here 

today. However, I believe that we as taxpayers and the people 

of Saskatchewan as taxpayers could be saving a lot of money by 

getting right down to the serious business of government rather 

than concerning themselves with a throne speech such as we’ve 

had. 

 

The concerns that plague Saskatchewan families, like soaring 

youth crime, high taxes, health care problems, education, and  

creating jobs in the province of Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 

people, are the issues we should be debating. These are the 

types of things that we are not debating in the throne speech. 

We’re debating the fluffy statements made by the government’s 

throne speech. 

 

Instead of spending several days listening to government MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) pat themselves on the 

back, we could save taxpayers over a quarter of a million 

dollars by following the lead of Alberta once again. 

 

In Alberta, the Premier gives a speech outlining the goals of the 

provincial government and then the MLAs go straight into 

debating the issues. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make very 

few remarks today about the throne speech, but I’m anxious to 

get on with debating the real issues. 

 

Besides saving money for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, we should be 

limiting our comments because this throne speech is almost the 

same as last year’s and the year before that. Not much has really 

changed. 

 

The NDP are still trying to figure out just what it takes to create 

jobs here in the province. After comparing the latest job 

statistics, it should be clear to members opposite the road to job 

prosperity has more to do with lower taxes than with any other 

single measure. 

 

Well the job numbers are up slightly. They certainly are 

nowhere near the 60,000 jobs that the NDP promised in each 

and every government throne speech since they formed 

government in 1991. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while Saskatchewan numbers were up a 

little bit, Alberta and Manitoba continue to create thousands 

more jobs each month than the NDP do here. Now most of the 

reason is because both provinces, I think, are run by 

Conservative governments which recognize the benefits of 

smaller government, less regulation for businesses, and 

importantly, lower taxes. That’s their philosophy, Mr. Speaker, 

and I share that philosophy. 

 

What is the NDP’s philosophy here in Saskatchewan? Well the 

NDP may say they believe in less government, but government 

has got bigger; it’s got more intrusive since the NDP were 

elected. They may say they believe in less regulation, but 

government regulations haven’t been reduced at all in our 

province. They may say they believe in lower taxes to spur the 

economy and create jobs, but the NDP have done nothing but 

raise taxes for years. This government is collecting over 1.5 

billion more dollars in taxes, while our neighbours have done 

their best to keep taxes down in Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

The NDP say they want to create jobs, but instead they pass 

pro-labour legislation that impedes job creation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP say a lot of things but their 

actions speak louder than words, and this government’s record 

speaks for itself. 

 

We desperately need jobs in Saskatchewan and the throne  



220  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

speech has once again promised that. 

 

We desperately need funds for our education system. Our 

universities are cutting hundreds of positions, increasing tuition 

by double digits, dropping colleges — all because of a lack of 

support from the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder where it’ll all stop. When the 

Premier today was in the Leader of the Opposition’s position a 

number of years ago, he said, don’t let any government tell you 

there isn’t money for education; the money is there. 

 

Well you have to ask the Premier today, where’s the money? 

Where’s the promised support? K to 12 is in no different 

position than our universities and regional colleges. After all, 

this government has taken $20 million directly out of operating 

grants to our K to 12 system, and they still expect the educators 

to provide . . . and to be able to provide a quality of education 

for our children. They still expect our children to be equipped to 

compete against the children from all across Canada and all 

across the world. 

 

Not only have the NDP cut operating grants to schools, they’ve 

cut capital repairs, they’ve increased costs through labour 

legislation, and they shifted the majority of funding education 

to the property tax base. 

 

But according to the throne speech this year, the NDP say, and I 

quote, they want to, “Provide better tools to support classroom 

learning.” Well I don’t know about you, but most people can’t 

buy tools without the necessary funds. 

 

The same is true with health care. Our communities, especially 

rural ones, have had health care services hacked and slashed to 

the point of no return, and health care was the NDP’s number 

one priority, according to their statements when they were in 

opposition. That was their number one priority. 

 

Now after members opposite have marched into the rural 

communities, closed hospitals, taken contingency funds raised 

by local people, forced amalgamations and changes from the 

top down, now the throne speech pamphlet states the 

government wants to: 

 

Collaborate with communities to ensure that the health 

system operates in a balanced, locally responsive manner. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that the promise of that comes 

a little too late for most communities. The NDP have already 

skipped the consultation process. They have already skipped to 

allowing school . . . or local boards the power to make 

decisions. Mr. Speaker, they have skipped listening to 

communities for the past several years, and as I said, actions 

speak louder than words. 

 

(1500) 

 

Another priority in this throne speech is renewing our highways 

and transportation system. Well, Mr. Speaker, we could start by 

using more revenue generated through the fuel tax fund toward 

actually fixing roads in this province. Right now Saskatchewan  

has the highest provincial fuel tax of any of our neighbouring 

provinces. The NDP have increased it by 5 cents per litre — 

that tax — and that adds up to a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. For 

every litre of gasoline purchased at the pump, the NDP collect 

15 cents. So while the provincial government collects hundreds 

of millions of dollars, estimated at about $340 million in 1996, 

not much of that money goes towards actually building or 

maintaining highways in this province. 

 

While our government spends little on our highways, Alberta 

spends one and a half times what it collects in fuel taxes; 

Manitoba spends over 90 per cent of what it receives in fuel 

taxes; and Saskatchewan spends . . . spending isn’t even at 50 

per cent of what it raises in fuel taxes. 

 

It’s true that a province can’t be competitive without a 

competitive infrastructure and the lack of commitment to our 

province’s highways has cost each and every one of us. 

 

We also need to be lobbying the federal Liberals, Mr. Speaker, 

to implement a national highways program similar to the 

programs in the United States and Germany and several 

countries. In the U.S., the federal government picks up over 30 

per cent of highway costs. You have to wonder why the same 

isn’t being done here in Canada. 

 

I would like to know how much business in Saskatchewan and 

Canada, in general, is lost because of the well . . . to the 

well-maintained interstate highway system across the United 

States. It’s probably a significant amount; something we’ll 

never really know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP across the way should be lobbying the 

federal Liberals for our federal program, but they should be 

doing a better job of taking care of our highways themselves 

right here, now. Mr. Speaker, when the NDP again talk about 

strengthening our highways and transportation systems, I have 

to wonder just how new and improved they are going to be. 

 

The long and the short of it is, Mr. Speaker, is that this throne 

speech doesn’t offer the people of Saskatchewan very much at 

all. A Star-Phoenix editorial put it well by stating: 

 

(The province is doing well) . . . but not well enough to 

expect any major expenditures in needed areas such as 

improving the deplorable highway system. We are doing 

well, but not (well) enough to expect any major changes to 

the way health care operates in this province. 

 

Ditto for almost every other area of public concern, except 

that the Romanow New Democrats will improve their 

abysmal job-creation record . . . 

 

This is a time for hope and optimism, according to the 

throne speech, but don’t hope for any reductions in the 

sky-high sales tax or hold out any optimism about the 

government taking seriously the auditor’s 

recommendations to make Crown corporations more 

accountable to the people who own them. 

 

That was an editorial from March 8 of 1997, Mr. Speaker. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

Now there are a great deal of other good comments in this same 

editorial, and I would urge members to read that editorial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, contrary to the steps the NDP members across the 

way are willing to take, the PC caucus will once again hold this 

government accountable. We will once again prove that we are 

the only official opposition here in Saskatchewan. We’ll bring 

forward proactive initiatives to deal with higher taxation, 

problems within the Workers’ Compensation Board, the 

non-profit organizations Act, and issues to hold cabinet 

ministers accountable for their worldwide travels, and much, 

much more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll bring forward a health charter of rights that will ensure 

Saskatchewan families the medical services they deserve, 

guidelines for a staff cooling-off period after leaving positions 

in government, new measures regarding utility rate increases, 

and further reforms to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we won’t be just bringing forward alternatives to 

the government’s way of doing things. We’ll also make sure we 

hold this government accountable. That’s another part of our 

job. We’ll continue to criticize the NDP where it is deserved, 

but we’ll also congratulate them when they make a good 

decision or policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Saskatchewan people can expect 

from the PC caucus — the same kind of responsible opposition 

and representation that I believe they received in the past. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I believe this throne speech has 

been a failure for the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t think it 

addresses the important concerns that the people of 

Saskatchewan have brought to our attention — specifically, tax 

reductions here in the province, and job creation. And that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, we will not be supporting the throne speech. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s an honour to take part in this throne speech debate in the 

second session of this legislature. I am tempted after listening to 

the Leader of the Third Party make his remarks, to comment at 

length on what he had to say. But I am not going to do that 

today other than to say that I was somewhat disappointed in 

light of the fact of the encouraging things I said about the third 

party when I spoke in the budget speech debate in the last 

session; that he fell into that same old trap in his remarks as was 

the case in the 1980s where the Tories, under the Devine 

administration, talked consistently, leading up to 1982, about 

cutting taxes in a big, dramatic way and increasing expenditures 

in even a bigger dramatic way. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan know very well what that led 

to. It led to a situation where we are faced and our children will 

be faced with a debt which started at $14 billion and interest 

charges which are in excess of $800 million each and every 

year. 

 

No one in this province, Mr. Speaker, will fall for that kind of 

an argument, which was the argument that the Liberals made 

last year and are making again this year. And I was really 

hoping that the Tories now would get away from that same  

argument, but apparently they decided to go back to it. They’re 

fighting for the same ground. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s all I want to say about that. I just want 

to begin my substantive remarks by saying how proud I am to 

speak in this debate on behalf of the constituents of Regina 

Dewdney. It is a constituency with people who provide me with 

much advice and much counsel about the issues which I have to 

raise in my caucus and which I have to raise in this House when 

the opportunity presents itself. I appreciate that very much. I try 

to stay very closely in touch with my constituents who make a 

very important input in the development of government policies 

and legislation. 

 

And prior to this session I made a point of asking my 

constituents with a brochure and a questionnaire about the 

government’s agenda leading up to this . . . to the next century. 

And I’m pleased to report to you and this legislature that there 

was overwhelming support for the direction that our 

government is taking and has taken. 

 

Now the Speech from the Throne represents very well what my 

constituents, and I believe the people of Saskatchewan, are 

saying about what their priorities are. So as I begin my 

intervention today, I can say that I will not hesitate in 

supporting the statement . . . this statement of our government’s 

priorities for the future because I am confident that these are the 

right priorities which reflect the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my 

congratulations to the mover and the seconder of His Honour’s 

speech. The members for Swift Current and Saskatoon 

Southeast presented their remarks well and clearly display an 

important knowledge of the issues that they spoke about. They 

are effective and thoughtful members who represent their 

constituencies well, while never losing sight of the bigger 

provincial picture and the common good of our whole 

community and our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will be your second session in the chair. You 

have shown that the choice made by members when they 

elected you as Speaker was a wise one. You have carried out 

your responsibilities with dignity and good judgement. 

 

And when I spoke in the budget debate in the last session, I said 

that there was a need for this legislature to correct the discredit 

that it had inflicted upon itself in the 1980s, and to restore 

public confidence in this important institution of our 

democracy. And I must say, quite gladly and happily, Mr. 

Speaker, that progress has been made on this, and the 

effectiveness in which you have provided leadership in your 

position has contributed to this achievement. And I want to 

acknowledge that here today. 

 

Also, as a teacher, I want to comment on some other things 

which you are doing, Mr. Speaker, which I think are significant 

and important. And I want to commend you for the considerable 

time which you have dedicated to visiting with and speaking 

with students in our classrooms throughout Saskatchewan. It is 

my view — it’s a personal opinion that I  



222  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

hold — that our school curriculums, as great as they are, do not 

provide enough time to learning about our parliamentary system 

of government and the responsibilities of citizenship. And I 

thank you for helping to fill, at least in some small way, that 

shortcoming with the things that you are doing. 

 

Now in the period between the last session of the legislature and 

the one which has just begun, there’s been a by-election in the 

constituency of North Battleford. And I’d like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate the member for North Battleford on 

his election, and extend to him my best wishes for a rewarding 

experience as a member of this Assembly. And whether his 

term is long or whether it is short, a judgement which only, we 

all know, our constituents can make and should make, he has 

been given a privilege that only a very few persons in our 

society experience, and I want to take this opportunity to wish 

him well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne states that this 

is, and I quote, “one of the most hopeful times in our province 

in many years.” And this legislative session is about real hope 

and optimism in our province. It’s about setting priorities which 

are important for families and for students, to our children, the 

public services such as health care and education, and the 

creation of jobs. And all of this has not happened by chance or 

accident. It has been made possible through the determination, 

the cooperation, the community effort, and the caring of 

Saskatchewan people acting through their government. 

 

Saskatchewan people have always believed in the important 

role of government. That belief has not lessened in spite of the 

attacks made on our democratic institutions by some powerful 

interests and, sadly, very sadly, even some politicians who 

would rather pursue their interests without regard for the 

interests and the well-being of people as a whole. 

 

Through government people are able to achieve together 

objectives which alone they could not accomplish. And good 

government is a government that always considers the common 

good in the decisions made and the priorities that it sets. 

 

Since 1991 Saskatchewan has had such a government. And that 

is why the throne speech is able to speak of a progressive 

agenda built on the solid rock of our commitment to fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

Five years of hard work and sacrifice by the people of this 

province are now being rewarded, while other provinces and the 

federal government struggle with serious debt and deficits 

because of their lack of political will to take action when action 

was required and because of their control by certain powerful 

and wealthy interests who fund them and therefore they seem to 

owe them something in return. And regretfully, the actions that 

they have taken have resulted in a tax on important services like 

health care, education, and social services, hurting those people 

who already were suffering, and hurting them even more. 

 

The Liberal government in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, has been 

particularly bad in this respect. That government has made no 

effort to cut expenditures on itself and close many of the huge 

loopholes which . . . and to correct the unfairness of our tax  

system which lets some people who are wealthy and more 

powerful than the majority, get away with millions of dollars in 

taxes. But since 1995-96 this federal Liberal government has 

cut health and social service transfers by almost $7 billion — 

almost $7 billion in Liberal cuts from health, education 

assistance, and assistance for the poor. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, our approach has been different. 

We have provided a model which has been recognized and 

praised across Canada. In his Globe and Mail article of August 

30, 1996, Andrew Cohen wrote the following, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan Premier Roy Romanow has found a kinder, 

gentler way to bring unruly deficits to heel. Now if only his 

slash-and-burn peers would take notice. 

 

And he goes on to write that this government, and I quote again: 

 

. . . has rescued Saskatchewan from bankruptcy, eliminated 

its deficit and lowered its debt, redesigned its social 

system, reduced the size of government, and restored 

public trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is being said by a writer in a national 

newspaper that I’m sure everyone in the House will agree are 

not partisan New Democrats; anything but. They are said in an 

objective analysis and comparison of approaches in 

Saskatchewan with approaches of governments in Ottawa and 

Ontario and Alberta and other Liberal provinces. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now I know that in the nature of the partisan debate, which I 

have taken part in for some time, speakers feel compelled, 

opposition speakers feel compelled to speak cynically of gloom 

and doom. It is regretful that they have not yet learned — some 

of us have — but it is regretful that they have not yet learned 

that acknowledging positive developments does not make them 

less effective as opposition members. 

 

But they cannot honestly — and I emphasize the word honestly, 

Mr. Speaker — they cannot honestly deny that for the first time 

in almost a decade, more people are moving into Saskatchewan 

than are moving out. Saskatchewan has for the first time in 

nearly a decade, net in-migration. 

 

They cannot deny honestly this year will be the fourth 

consecutive year in which Saskatchewan will have a balanced 

budget. 

 

They cannot honestly deny that there are almost 7,000 more 

people working in Saskatchewan today than at this time last 

year — the largest year-over-year increase since May 1995. 

And in February — and I want to make a contrast here, Mr. 

Speaker — in February, 18,000 jobs were lost across Canada 

under a federal Liberal government and other jurisdictions, but 

in Saskatchewan they increased by 7,000. And this is yet 

another example of the dismal failure of our Liberal 

government in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, which talks a good line but 

does nothing to try to put it into practice. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

And I say through you, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, that 

they cannot deny that Saskatchewan has the lowest rate of 

unemployment month after month, and this while our 

population is increasing. 

 

They cannot deny that our agricultural industry is diversifying 

at a pace never before experienced in our history; and that our 

value added industries like equipment manufacturing and food 

processing and ag biotech have never been stronger. They may 

try, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan people know the success 

that their province has experienced. And in the end, that’s all 

that matters. 

 

Now everyone knows that this province will acknowledge the 

importance of agriculture to our economy. The modernization 

and the diversification taking place in agriculture will continue 

to make this important industry a very paramount contributor to 

our economy. 

 

And this government’s announcement of a new crop insurance 

system, a major new hog-marketing strategy, an investment in 

the rural economy through the agri-food development and 

equity funds, reflect the importance we put on this industry. 

 

But even in this sector, Mr. Speaker, there are those who would 

destroy those institutions which have allowed our agricultural 

industry to be one of the most efficient in the world. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board is under attack by some who think 

that they can take on the multinational grain companies and the 

European Economic Community and the American government 

subsidies single-handedly. 

 

And it’s not insignificant that a lot of this criticism and battle is 

being waged by certain interests in the United States, even some 

of whom are in the United States Senate and the United States 

Congress. Let there be no doubt of the position of this New 

Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker. As the throne 

speech has said, we will continue an unyielding defence of a 

modern, responsive Canadian Wheat Board. Without a doubt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now, Mr. Speaker, it is nothing short of 

tragic that the federal Liberal government has only given 

half-hearted support for Canadian Wheat Board in this debate 

that’s taking place. 

 

At least the Conservatives made their position clear — wrong 

as it might be, but they make it clear. They support changes 

which would lead to the demise of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

The federal Liberal government’s commitment to the Canadian 

Wheat Board is about as firm as the Liberal Party’s 

commitment was to eliminate the GST (goods and services tax) 

and to protect the Crow benefit, which the Prime Minister 

promised solemnly, in Saskatoon during the last campaign, to 

do. Canadians know what happened to those commitments. The 

GST is still there and the Crow benefit is gone. So much for 

those commitments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now some people will argue — as I know some members in the 

opposition do on the doorstep and in the coffee shop — that that 

was never said by the Prime Minister. So I want to put on the 

record of this House here today clearly what was said, and I 

quote — 1990, the then prospective prime minister said, quote: 

 

I am opposed to the GST. I have always been opposed to it 

and I will always be opposed to it. It is a tax that is both 

regressive and discriminatory. 

 

The Globe and Mail, October 29, 1990. And he repeated it 

again during the election campaign. 

 

Then in 1994, what did his Finance minister, Mr. Martin, say? I 

quote very clearly for the record so it cannot be questioned: 

 

It is almost impossible to design a tax that is more costly 

and more inefficient than the GST. 

 

June 21, 1994. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that, what is the result? The 

result is a drive to harmonize so that even more of that tax load 

can be pushed from the corporations and the business 

community onto families and consumers and working people. 

Their commitment was clear. Their lack of action on it was, in 

my view, nothing short of a betrayal of a trust. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this whole thing is really a question of trust, 

and our presence in this legislature is really a matter of trust. 

Can Saskatchewan people trust a federal Liberal government to 

look after their interest, is the question that is now before us and 

will soon be. Well I think that the record speaks for itself. They 

have broken every promise made on issues of importance to 

Saskatchewan — issues which are addressed in this throne 

speech — and they have betrayed the trust that voters put in 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will soon be a national election in this 

country, and I think it’s time. And the only government to 

strongly speak out in support of things like the orderly 

marketing system — and that’s why it’s in the throne speech — 

provided by the Canadian Wheat Board, has been the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Mention of it in the throne 

speech, as I have said, emphasizes that. 

 

And the only political party speaking out strongly in support of 

a modern Canadian Wheat Board is the New Democratic Party. 

And the only way to keep the Liberal government from doing to 

the Wheat Board what they did to the Crow benefit and a 

dependable rail transportation system to haul our grain to the 

ports, will be to elect New Democratic Party MPs (Member of 

Parliament) to Parliament in the next election, from 

Saskatchewan, in large numbers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, on the Friday after the 

opening of this session there was an important debate in this 

legislature about grain transportation backlog, and I think it was 

necessary. And I commend the members of the third party for  



224  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

raising that issue, which was supported by members of this 

House. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in light of that debate, and in light of what is 

happening out there in Saskatchewan, it is unacceptable and 

unforgivable that the railways and the federal government have 

allowed this situation to develop. 

 

And having had a hand in creating this backlog with its 

deregulation of grains transportation, it’s even more 

unacceptable for the federal government not to take any action 

to correct the situation created by them. And it’s scandalous 

that, while their backlog costs farmers $65 million and growing, 

the federal Liberal government allows railways to charge an 

extra $15 million for hauling grain. 

 

In the face of this the Prime Minister’s assurances in Saskatoon 

recently, that the federal government is putting pressure on the 

railways, is about as reliable as his assurances that the Crow 

benefit would not be eliminated. And Saskatchewan people 

know that. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as is shown by our commitment in 

the throne speech, that giving the railways a raise of $50 million 

for hauling grain after they have cost farmers $65 million and 

more is a new definition of pressure which I find very hard to 

understand. I don’t think there is any doubt that if grain 

handlers were on slow-down at our ports the federal 

government would not hesitate one single minute to act quickly, 

but when their friends in the railways cost farmers $65 million, 

they do nothing. In fact they do something; they give them $50 

million as a potential increase in the rates. 

 

And I say to them, Mr. Speaker, your assurances are no longer 

good enough. Only concrete action will be believed. We have 

had too many promises and assurances that have been broken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne spoke of the 

importance of education to a growing and vibrant economy and 

today we’re beginning the process of Education Week, which I 

think is important. And we appreciated an entertainment by 

young students from one of our schools in Saskatoon which 

once again should remind us about the importance of education 

and who it is really important for. 

 

And Saskatchewan has been a leader in Canada in developing a 

quality education system for our students. Our approach has 

been one of partnership between educator, school boards, and 

government. And as a result, our curriculum has been updated 

and modernized on an ongoing basis and not fallen victim to the 

ad hoc, uncoordinated approach that has taken place in other 

provinces. We must never stop putting the education of our 

children high among the priorities of government. The 

commitment in the Speech from the Throne to provide 

educators in our schools with better tools to support learning in 

the classroom is an important commitment to keep with the 

Saskatchewan tradition of putting an important emphasis on the 

importance of education. 

 

And I want to take this opportunity also, Mr. Speaker, to 

commend school divisions for the leadership that has been 

shown in school division amalgamation. Locally driven and 

locally determined restructuring in Saskatchewan is a sharp 

contrast to the heavy-handed, arbitrary approach taken by 

governments in provinces like New Brunswick and in Ontario 

and some other governments in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said in the past five years about 

health care in Canada and Saskatchewan. And that’s the way it 

should be, because health care is one of the most important 

services that any people in any society should be able to expect 

to receive without anything standing in their way. It should be 

universal. It should be accessible, and it should be affordable. 

And much of the health care system in Canada — and we 

should be proud of that — has been modelled on the 

innovations pioneered and introduced in Saskatchewan. It has 

been so historically, and it continues to be so today. 

Saskatchewan is years ahead of other jurisdictions in renewal, 

as has been said in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

And while others are cutting and slashing, in this province we 

are focusing on stabilizing and securing our health care system. 

And I’m proud to be a member of a government that even 

during Saskatchewan’s darkest hours financially, when the 

bond rating agencies and the bond dealers hovered like vultures 

over this province on the verge of bankruptcy . . . the 

commitment to the provision of a quality health care system 

never wavered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Instead, health care renewal was 

introduced and implemented to fit the needs and the realities of 

new medical technologies and changing demographics. And 

new emphasis had been put on keeping people healthy, as well 

as providing care when they become ill. 

 

And when the federal Liberal government slashed almost $7 

billion out of the Canada Health and Social Transfer, this 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party government back-filled 

that Liberal cut in health care every single cent, Mr. Speaker. 

The priorities in Saskatchewan are right when it comes to health 

care. 

 

Now we have other political parties who have their views on 

health care, and I respect that very much. But I think it’s 

important to remind ourselves and to remind Saskatchewan 

people what those views are. Because when the new Liberal 

leader was asked about his position on health care with respect 

to how he would cut funding in government — because he’s 

also talking about huge tax decreases and huge increase in 

expenditures, and once again I want to quote so that there is no 

mistake here — here’s what was said. 

 

An interviewer from the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) asked this question. I quote: “What efficiencies 

would you find to make up that $1.3 billion?” And he talked 

about $1.3 billion in deficiencies and inefficiencies in 

government. I was almost flabbergasted when I found that the 

Leader of the Liberal Party’s response, and I quote, was, “Well, 

health care.” Health care. 

 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

(1530) 

 

Now that should send signals to the people of Saskatchewan 

about where priorities of a Liberal government in Saskatchewan 

would be. They would be the same as the priorities of a Liberal 

government in Ottawa, which took $7 billion out of all of those 

funds which fund education and health care and social services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Liberals in Ottawa cut almost $4 billion from 

health care alone. But they can find $2 billion in subsidies for 

corporations like Bombardier and others. Provincial Liberals 

would harmonize the GST, shifting $400 million to the 

consumer and the worker, but they have their cousins in Ottawa 

able to provide this kind of money to those same people who 

would benefit from a shift in that GST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these priorities are all wrong. And even some 

people in the corporate world are beginning to worry about the 

collapse of vital services to people which have been engineered 

by the federal government and provincial governments like 

Ontario and Alberta. 

 

These people are beginning to realize that a damaged social 

safety net is a threat to the market economy. Charles Handy in 

his book Reinventing the Future has written that the process 

employed in recent years, attacking important social services, is 

creating a society that is not at ease with itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of society where one in five 

children live in poverty while the average salary of chief 

executive officers in banks and some of our major corporations 

are over $900,000, and in some cases as high as $3 million. 

 

That’s the kind of society where the national government has 

abandoned any effort to find jobs for 1.5 million unemployed 

Canadians. Mr. Speaker, in the really effective market 

economy, business people need social harmony as much as 

workers and consumers need it. Business people are beginning 

to recognize that, to their credit, and it’s time our federal 

government showed that same understanding. 

 

And the Speech from the Throne outlines this government’s 

commitment and this government’s strategy to address child 

poverty. It is a comprehensive approach ranging from job 

creation to providing adequate income for the poor and to 

training and to education. 

 

This government is doing its part in creating a Saskatchewan 

and a Canada with a society at ease with itself, where people 

care about each other and work together to provide a better life 

for everyone, and not just a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many issues which I’d like to speak 

about, but I know that others want to take part in this debate. 

And there will be other opportunities which I shall avail myself 

of. 

 

But I want to close by saying that this throne speech . . . 

because this throne speech is about building Saskatchewan 

together, it’s about investing in people, it’s about hope, and it’s 

about optimism, and because of that I will be proud to support  

the motion presented by the members for Swift Current and 

Saskatoon Southeast, and I will be supporting the Speech from 

the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure today to join in the debate on this throne speech as 

well. 

 

But before I do that, I would just like to welcome our new 

viewers that are watching us today, in particular those from the 

communities of Davidson and Outlook in my constituency. And 

I know there are many out there. 

 

I also would like to thank the constituents and the voters in Arm 

River for the opportunity of allowing me to be here today. And 

as we go over the course of this session, certainly the views that 

I express will be that of my constituents and make known their 

concerns and their ideas as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last week or so I’ve listened in the House 

attentively here to many speakers from both sides of the floor, 

and one thing that I will not be doing today will be trying to run 

a federal campaign for the federal Liberals. As we have seen, 

Mr. Speaker, on both sides of the House we have seen the 

government, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the NDP propping up the 

NDP Party, and we’ve seen the Conservatives doing likewise. 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll not be doing that. I will be addressing the 

issues that pertain to the province and to the provincial parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his government have directed 

many of the remarks over the last number of months to the 

Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. And don’t think that 

he doesn’t appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. But while he 

understands that he poses a serious threat to that NDP caucus, 

he, along with myself and my colleagues, are concerned over 

the fearmongering and the misinformation which is being 

spread. 

 

As Health critic, Mr. Speaker, I want to set the record straight. 

After all, we don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to think 

that this government might mislead them. Our leader is a strong 

proponent of one-tier health system — universal coverage for 

all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. We do not believe in 

cash register medicine. 

 

It’s obvious that the NDP brand of one-tier means every 

Saskatchewan resident has equal opportunity to pain, suffering, 

and long waiting-lists, Mr. Speaker. We believe that a one-tier 

delivery system is only possible with adequate, sustainable 

funding. Otherwise you end up with a one-tier, no-choice 

system with rationed services and equal opportunity to the long 

waiting-lists that I mentioned earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadian medicare means public and private 

administration of service provision and universal coverage. 

We’re all aware that private clinics or private facilities have 

always existed and continue to exist in Saskatchewan. Every 

doctor’s office is a private facility providing insured services. 

Private care homes is another example, Mr. Speaker. 



226  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

There are the many X-ray labs throughout the province which 

provide X-ray, ultrasound, barium studies, and fluoroscopy, 

delivered by private facilities. All of these facilities give 

residents quality, cost-effective, insured services. 

 

Our leader has said he would repeal The Health Districts Act, 

Mr. Speaker, and I ask, why not? This is a flawed piece of 

legislation that has divided the province into 30 fiefdoms with 

boundaries like lines drawn in the sand — boundaries which are 

becoming between our communities and our service providers, 

Mr. Speaker, and all controlled by the Health department 

watchdogs. 

 

The New Democratic Party has always touted, and was created 

on, the cooperative model. But now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP has 

set their design on dividing and creating competition for the 

funds from the one and only source available, the Health 

department — the very same department which continues to 

underfund the service providers, and promote more 

bureaucracy. It is pretty obvious that it is just not possible to 

build an integrated, coordinated, and cost-effective health care 

delivery system when the very foundation, The Health Districts 

Act, is cracked and crumbling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier says reform to health care is over. Now that’s a 

scary thought for the people of Saskatchewan because now 

they’re left with a rapidly deteriorating system that no amount 

of band-aid cash injections will fix. An admission of guilt last 

summer, Mr. Speaker, when the Health minister injected $40 

million into the heath system — admission of guilt, that there is 

a problem. Mr. Speaker, the foundation must be replaced, and 

quickly. Then and only then will the needed reforms take place. 

 

The New Democrats criticize our leader for his common-sense 

approach to health care delivery. He wants the district directors 

to be knowledgeable so they can keep their hired managers 

accountable for major funding decisions. This can only happen 

if the district board members are kept informed and understand 

the process. But, Mr. Speaker, with this government it’s not 

happening. 

 

Our leader recognizes the governing structures must be in place 

to make our health care system function efficiently. And he 

points out that successful systems throughout the world exist 

because of good management based on knowledge and 

understanding. 

 

These models of health care efficiency include regional 

corporations with appointed members, local facility boards with 

appointed members, centralized commissions with appointed 

members, and several examples of boards where membership is 

represented by various community groups. These boards are 

appointed by the people, not necessarily by government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many examples of boards where 

membership is represented by various community groups, all of 

whom have either elected, nominated, or appointed their 

representatives. 

 

What did the NDP do? They appointed all the original health 

members, using the need for expertise as an excuse, as New  

Democratic political expertise. They then run elections with 

many board positions going uncontested. And in most cases 

voter turnout is very low — somewhere between 10 and 20 per 

cent. That, Mr. Speaker, is what the members opposite call a 

successful model. 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan don’t agree. The Liberal 

leader has criticized the NDP district board model because it 

does not address the reality of health care delivery. The whole 

idea ignores the founding principle of medicare, and that is, any 

system must be acceptable to those providing the services and 

those receiving the services. 

 

Our leader has simply stated, Mr. Speaker, that the provision of 

health care in Saskatchewan is a provincial obligation, meaning 

the provincial government is responsible for ensuring that 

whatever board structure for overseeing service delivery is 

created, it has to be accountable to the people, representative of 

the community, has to be cost-effective, and they must provide 

the necessary tools to adequately govern the workings of the 

respective service providers. This is a principle that would be 

applied to a Liberal government’s health care delivery system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in moving the motion to adopt the throne speech, 

the government member from Swift Current indicated that our 

leader had said he would re-create 500 local health boards. I 

want to make it perfectly clear that his perception is incorrect. I 

ask the members opposite to tell us where and when this 

supposed comment was made by the Leader of the Liberal 

Party. 

 

The facts are simple. Our leader has stated that between 4 and 

500 local boards, comprised of active community leaders, 

approximately 4 to 5,000 committed volunteers were replaced 

by a large number of New Democratic appointees. These are 

paid board members who in some instances have become far 

too removed from community decision making — these 

individuals who have created a bureaucratic nightmare. 

 

What we have, Mr. Speaker, is layer upon layer of expensive 

managers — CEOs (chief executive officer) to presidents to 

vice-presidents to directors to managers. So much bureaucracy 

in fact, that they had to close beds to open offices. In other 

jurisdictions, the population base and service delivery system 

options are so limited that it cannot possibly justify an 

expensive paid board, paid management structure. 

 

Simply said, it means the former government structure was 

more cost-effective, more decentralized, and more locally 

accountable. It’s funny only because it’s exactly what the 

Premier and his government promised the new structure would 

do. Now we find ourselves in a situation where we can’t return 

to the previous structure, mainly because it is not desirable in a 

rapidly changing health care environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Liberal government would respect the principle 

of community accountability and create a sustainable, 

cost-effective health care system — a system which would 

carefully develop an appropriate number of health care boards. 

 

I also want to tell the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, that at no  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

time did our leader say that he would cut 1.3 billion from the 

Saskatchewan health care budget. In fact in the 1995 election he 

made it very clear that 1.6 billion was enough to create an 

exemplary health care scheme for the residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government clearly misrepresented the facts. 

In a CBC interview last November, when the Liberal leader had 

stated the New Democratic government had increased taxes, 

tariffs, and utility rates of $1.3 billion since taking office, 

nowhere did our leader say he would chop 1.3 billion from the 

provincial health care system. But he indicated that the current 

efficiencies in our administration would address part of this 

goal. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that a Liberal government 

will fund a first-rate and cost-effective medical system. 

 

Another thing which is misleading in a claim on the Internet in 

a December 1996 NDP caucus report, which said our leader 

was in favour of American style medicine scheme. It is a 

well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that the wellness approach to the 

U.S. style of medicare grew out of California in the 1970s. And 

it appears that it is the NDP who have Americanized our health 

system. 

 

(1545) 

 

The New Democratic government went for the whole package. 

Not to maximize profits for corporations, but to ration health 

care services and to maximize the government’s bottom line. 

The NDP Health department has become the Kaiser 

permanente, U.S. style managed care. It’s the capital of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Getting back to the member from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, 

he stated in Hansard that our leader is opposed to 

province-wide computerized health data. I challenge that 

member opposite to state where and when the statement was 

made. He can’t because he knows it is not true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me say that the Leader of the Liberal Party believes that 

accurate, timely information transfer is essential to any modern 

health care system. What we want answered, Mr. Speaker, is 

will the NDP proposal for Saskatchewan health information 

network, address this concern, and at what cost? 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in closing, as you can see all is not well 

in the health care system in Saskatchewan. The merchants of 

misery across the floor would have us believe that it is, but it is 

not. There is only one part of Saskatchewan where we have 

problems, Mr. Speaker, and I would move that the members 

across the floor would support the amendment and not the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would first of all like to thank the members opposite for giving 

me this opportunity in the rotation ahead of time in recognition 

to the cold that I’ve developed over the last few days. And 

unlike the members opposite though, I will not blame the 

federal government for this cold. And although I am tempted, I  

will also not blame the provincial government for this cold. It’s 

just one of those things that happens from time to time, Mr. 

Speaker, and try as we may we can’t always just get rid of 

them. I know there’s going to be an opportunity to comment 

and say, well it’s probably a result of the cut-backs in the health 

care delivery system that I am blessed with this cold, but I can’t 

even do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by making a few short 

remarks on behalf of my constituency and welcome them to the 

network that now sees this proceedings of the House live and in 

colour. I also want to tell them, as my first opportunity to 

address them directly, not to believe everything that they hear in 

the House, and that their member will always be very much 

consistent with the principles that they know to be true, that I 

will not steer them wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and also in acknowledging some changes I’ve 

made over the course of the last year, I would like to thank you 

and your participation at the Rotary occasion in Melfort where 

there were people from all over the world really who gathered 

in Melfort for the Rotary students. And Mr. Speaker and the 

minister from Carrot River Valley and myself participated in 

giving these students from around the world a bit of a feel of 

what Saskatchewan parliamentary democracy is all about. And I 

think it was a very great occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also especially like at this time again to 

make mention to my very best friend, my wife Carole. And in 

doing so, I would like to acknowledge not only my wife and the 

role she has played in our family, but also all spouses in the 

House. And I would like to think that, Mr. Speaker, they suffer 

a special suffering these days. 

 

Not very long ago, I heard the Premier comment on the current 

rash of charges against the Tory Party in this province. And he 

commented in saying that, I believe I roughly paraphrase it, that 

he takes no pleasure or joy in this. That it doesn’t do any of us 

any good to have this happen, and that all members end up 

being shadowed by a cloud that this Tory administration has put 

over all of us. And I think that that is true. And as an elected 

member, I have to live with that reality. 

 

But the thing that I don’t think anybody recognizes or realizes is 

how much spouses bear in a special way the hurt of having 

accusations and aspersions made against hon. members who are 

trying to conduct their affairs in a very honourable way. And so 

the scandal that has hurt this province and hurt all members of 

this legislature has in a special way I believe, Mr. Speaker, hurt 

our spouses and our families. And I want to thank them for 

being there for us through these times, and I thank Carole 

particularly in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to take the 

opportunity, for the public record, to say that while politics 

changes one’s life in large measure, I have to say that on 

December 1, becoming a grandfather changed my life much 

more than politics I think ever will or ever can. 

 



228  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

And so I welcome into our family Hayley Dawn McKerracher, 

the newest edition who brings light to our life. And I’m sure for 

all grandparents in this Assembly, and I know there are many, 

they would share my joy when I say that my life will be for ever 

changed because of Hayley Dawn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, it is a great honour to be an 

MLA, in spite of the cynical times. It dawns on you slowly I 

think, Mr. Speaker. And as we move into our second year of 

being new MLAs, many of us, it gradually creeps up on you 

what a singular honour it is to be an MLA. 

 

When I think of the many people that have gone before in my 

constituency, I know that they have done their very, very best 

on either side of this House and all political stripes to represent 

the people of Melfort-Tisdale. And I certainly want to do the 

very same thing. And the people are what makes it all important 

and makes it all worthwhile, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, when you have time when the House isn’t sitting, to 

be back in your community, it is the very best time for an MLA 

that there possibly can be, in my opinion. Because when I look 

back on the summer and the fall and the early wintertime, where 

you’re able to be back with your people, where you’re able to 

reconnect with the vibrancy and the excitement and the energy 

and the dynamism of what a constituency is all about, you 

realize that the people is what makes it all worthwhile for you. 

 

And when you get tired and cynical and you worry about the 

fact that Murray Mandryk will never get anything right in the 

press and you worry that you will never get a break, you know 

that the people understand that Murray Mandryk isn’t the issue, 

the people are the issue. And so we have to keep connecting to 

the realities that face us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look back on the summer where you attend 

sports days and ball tournaments and 4-H shows, and you go 

and you visit in the glorious days of summer, people in their 

yards and in their field. It’s a great time to be an MLA. 

 

And I want to also acknowledge that while every MLA in this 

Assembly feel that their constituency is the very best in this 

province, in the very best province of this very best country in 

the world, I have to say that I honestly and truly believe that I 

could debate at great length that the Melfort-Tisdale 

constituency is indeed the very best constituency in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I would like to . . . and it’s 

seconded by the member from Lloydminster, I hear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I would like to acknowledge some special 

events that happened over the course of the year that lead me to 

believe that this constituency is indeed the very best 

constituency in the province. I bragged at great length, and I 

know that all members were very excited to watch and 

participate in the Royal Bank Cup that was held last spring in 

Melfort, and that Melfort almost went all the way. 

And it is a great disappointment to me that we’re not doing 

quite so well this year, but I know that the ground was laid for a 

tremendous event, a national event that we had the great 

privilege of hosting. 

 

We followed it in the spring by the Canadian junior ladies golf 

championships that were done very well as well, in the 

community of Melfort. And shortly after that, the Premier and I 

participated in the Melfort & Unit Composite Collegiate in a 

youth leadership conference that was a provincial event. And 

that was very well done. 

 

Those of you who are into country music will have to 

acknowledge that our local radio station, radio CJVR, won the 

1996 Canadian Country Music Station of the Year Award for 

Canada and was also named as Melfort’s business of the year. 

Northern Steel in Tisdale was nominated for the ABEX 

(Awards of Business Excellence) provincial award and named 

the business of the year by the Tisdale Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Dr. John Shewchuk of Tisdale was named the 1996 family 

physician of the year. Naber Seeds is undergoing a major 

expansion in the lentil and that whole area in Melfort as well, 

and it’s becoming a very hot centre for the whole lentil industry 

in my constituency. 

 

The town of Star City hosted the 75th anniversary of their 

incorporation in July. There’s a $6 billion expansion to the 

Wheat Pool in Melfort, and Farm World in Kinistino is 

expanding with a 12,000 square foot shop expansion. 

 

And the thing is, is that in all of these things, including the 

success that Bourgault Industries has been having over the 

years, it’s not because of this government; it’s in spite of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, lest people think that 

everything is sunshine and light in the Melfort-Tisdale 

constituency, there certainly are some areas of concern, not the 

least of which was the weather last year. We had a very cold 

and late spring. We had a promising summer and a very wet 

fall, to the extent that just north of my constituency and in some 

areas of the constituency as much as a third of the crop is still in 

the field as we speak, Mr. Speaker. And with the very heavy 

snowfall and the fear of a late spring, a lot of our people are 

very concerned about getting the crop in, getting the land 

prepared for seeding, and to have a decent crop in for this new 

year. 

 

Despite what the government says about how rosy the 

economics are, many of our farmers are very, very concerned 

about the fact that their profits and their livelihood are still out 

in the field, and the very high costs of inputs are not going 

down. And so, Mr. Speaker, we all are very sensitive about 

what is happening in the weather. 

 

Mr. Speaker, weather is not the only thing that people in my 

constituency are concerned about, and I could go through a 

whole litany of what they are. And I know that members  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

opposite will be so delighted that I will forfeit at this stage from 

going through all of the things that they’re concerned about — 

the concern about jobs, about the high taxes, about the health 

care delivery, about our highways, about the education system. 

But I do have the opportunity and the great privilege to be able 

to rise this week later, in reply to the budget speech, and to talk 

about a great many of those issues, Mr. Speaker. And so I will 

forgo that at this time. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the 

opportunity of indulging me, with my cold, to give my 

presentation, and to thank members opposite and suggest to 

them that they can look forward to the reply to the budget, and 

at which time that we’ll talk more about the realities of this 

government’s imposition on the province of Saskatchewan and 

what’s going wrong. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure as well to rise in this debate on the throne speech. 

And first of all, like the other hon. members, I’d first of all like 

to send out some acknowledgements. First of all, to the new 

member for North Battleford, it’s nice to have you here. It’s 

nice to have had some exchanges with you already, and I wish 

you the best as the session goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also wish to thank you for your visit to my 

constituency in . . . I think the end of January it was, your visit 

to St. Mary’s School. That was a day very well spent and very 

interesting for the students. I must commend you for the work 

that you are doing in that regard. Although you were in my 

school, the school that you were at that day was right on the 

border with two other constituencies — my colleagues from 

Regina Elphinstone and Regina Coronation Park. And I must 

tell you that on behalf of all of us, we enjoyed your visit and the 

wisdom you passed on to the students that day. 

 

(1600) 

 

I also wish to say hello again to the Clerk, Deputy Clerk, and 

Clerk Assistant and to the new pages and to our 

Sergeant-at-Arms. I also, Mr. Speaker, cannot forget the people 

of Hansard. I promise this session, Mr. Speaker . . . I think last 

year I did members’ statements in French, German, and Polish, 

and earlier today I did one in French. And I promise that this 

year I will provide transcripts of these so that the people in 

Hansard don’t have to chase me down afterwards, should that 

occasion arise again. 

 

I also wish, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate my bench mate, my 

colleague from Swift Current constituency, for his moving of 

the throne speech debate, and to my colleague, the hon. member 

for Saskatchewan Southeast, on the seconding of this very 

optimistic, very promising, very informative throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Last of all, and certainly by no means least, 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to acknowledge my constituents of Regina 

Sherwood. As a result of the last redistribution the constituency  

of Regina Sherwood was created from three former areas . . . 

three former constituencies — Regina Rosemont, Regina Albert 

North, and Regina Northwest. 

 

Right now, my constituency, I’m surrounded by three other 

constituencies — Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, Regina 

Coronation Park, and Regina Elphinstone. And I wish at this 

time to publicly thank the members of those constituencies, 

who are veteran members of this legislature, for their help, 

guidance and assistance for me in the work that I’ve done in my 

first year as the member for Regina Sherwood. 

 

It’s nice, Mr. Speaker, to have neighbours like that that are 

members of the party. I should add that I could also have called 

upon people from all the city of Regina, as it is nice to have 

members from this side of the House who represent all the 

constituencies in the city of Regina. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to be here again. Regina 

Sherwood, as I started to explain, is an entirely residential 

constituency. Our only shopping area is the Normanview 

Shopping Centre and a small strip mall, so basically I represent 

a residential neighbourhood. I represent a constituency which is 

a microcosm of an urban constituency here in the city of . . . 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The constituents of Regina Sherwood embody the traits of 

cooperation, community and volunteerism that are so typical 

amongst all our citizens here in this province. Traditionally, 

Regina Sherwood has been a predominantly working-class area, 

a working-class and middle-class area, but today boasts a 

significant number of small-business people. 

 

Regina Sherwood, Mr. Speaker, takes in a number wonderful 

neighbourhoods, and these neighbourhoods have taken pride in 

working hard to achieve a better quality of life for all our 

residents. 

 

For many years I served these residents as a community 

recreation volunteer and a sports volunteer, and I’m now most 

honoured, as I indicated a year ago, to be their political 

representative. 

 

The areas that I talk about, Mr. Speaker, include Walsh Acres, 

Sherwood, McCarthy Park, Prairie View community, 

Normanview, Normanview West, Mount Royal, and Dieppe 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents of Regina Sherwood have also 

demonstrated astute political judgement over the years. 

 

Except for the period 1982 to 1986 my constituency, or the 

areas involved, have always been represented by CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, I also at this time, in speaking 

of our community, wish to acknowledge a situation which just 

took place, actually the end of last week. The immediate 

neighbourhood that I live in, which is Normanview, where my  



230  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

wife and family, we’ve resided for over 22 years, we lost our 

local school on that day — Al Pickard School. And I would be 

remiss today if I did not this afternoon . . . I acknowledge the 

very hard work of the local parents’ community association for 

all the work that they did in presenting their arguments on the 

reasons for keeping Al Pickard School open. They fought a 

good, hard fight, presented a very good case. It’s unfortunate 

that the demographics and the changing patterns of our 

neighbourhood did not allow the Regina Board of Education to 

feel that they could keep this school open any longer. 

 

My sympathies and best wishes go out to all my friends, 

neighbours, and associates that have been affected by this 

school closing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at my nomination convention, or nomination 

meeting in May 1995, I said in my address at the meeting at that 

time, and I’d like to quote from that address: 

 

I am excited because Saskatchewan is again on the 

threshold of substantial improvement of its economic and 

fiscal situation. We stood on this same threshold in the 

early 1980s. Unfortunately, adverse economic conditions, 

coupled with nine years of Conservative government fiscal 

mismanagement brought us to the edge of economic and 

financial ruin. Yet in three and a half short years since the 

re-election of our party in 1991, Saskatchewan has 

experienced a drastic and substantial turnaround. 

 

Our government, with the support and sacrifice of the 

people of Saskatchewan. all of the people of 

Saskatchewan, has once again achieved for our province a 

degree of financial independence which should allow us to 

rebuild our province in a way that was inconceivable just 

four short years ago. The challenge to New Democrats at 

this stage is the establishment of priorities for the future 

development of Saskatchewan, priorities which reflect our 

fundamental philosophy as opposed to that of our political 

opponents, and priorities which reflect, (Mr. Speaker), the 

priorities of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That was part of my address when I was nominated in May of 

1995, and I perhaps might have been a little premature on some 

of my optimism at the time. But I certainly think, Mr. Speaker, 

that this throne speech debate marking the second session, the 

opening session of the second session of the twenty-third 

legislature, is not premature. I think that optimism which I had 

is certainly in this speech, and I think the speech and what is 

happening in our province speaks for itself. 

 

We should note that, as has been pointed out by other speakers, 

retail sales have increased by about 8 per cent during the first 

10 months of 1996 to $5.7 billion — a rate higher than 

Manitoba’s and higher than Alberta’s — this according to our 

friends at the Winnipeg Free Press. 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing starts were up by 56 per cent in the first 

nine months of last year. Oil sales have increased by almost 25 

per cent in the first nine months of 1996. And as a further sign 

of the buoyancy of our economy in this particular sector, the 

February sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas rights  

brought a total for the fiscal year to $140.8 million, the second 

highest total ever in the history of our province. 

 

There’s more, Mr. Speaker. Our farmers harvested nearly 29 

million tonnes of major grains; sales of recreational and motor 

vehicles increased by 21 per cent; uranium sales were up 64 per 

cent; and manufacturing shipments rose by 8 per cent. This 

growth, Mr. Speaker, has been achieved by Saskatchewan 

people working in Saskatchewan jobs. 

 

And because people are working to make the economy grow, 

the number of Saskatchewan people is growing as well. As has 

been pointed out by my colleague, the hon. member for Swift 

Current, our population now is over one million and it’s staying 

that way. It’s just over the one million and twenty thousand 

mark. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is one of hope and 

optimism for the people of Saskatchewan. The speech outlines 

the priorities of our government, priorities that have been 

worked out in consultation with all Saskatchewan residents, 

priorities which we have used the theme, Investing in People, to 

describe. 

 

The priorities of our government in the years ahead under the 

slogan, Investing for People are six priorities which have been 

worked out in consultation with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The first priority under our program — first and foremost — is 

jobs, Mr. Speaker. We are blessed with great natural resources 

— agriculture, oil, natural gas, forestry, potash, and uranium. 

And the greatest blessing of all is that we have the 

hardest-working and most innovative people in the world, Mr. 

Speaker. These gifts must be protected and preserved. We have 

made a lot of progress. 

 

As I said earlier, our population is well over 1 million and is 

hitting the 1.022 million figure — 6,000 higher than it was a 

year ago. Job numbers are up since our job strategy was 

announced in 1992. Unemployment in Saskatchewan, as we 

point out regularly, remains the lowest in the country. We are 

well on the way to achieving our 30,000 job target by the year 

2000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the area of jobs, in the area of jobs, our government also 

plans to encourage the expansion of the trade sector; promote 

the expansion and diversification of our rural economy; renew 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations; work to improve access to 

capital; pursue key strategic projects, economic projects; 

promote tourism and the hospitality industry, which is one of 

our fastest growing areas; foster northern economic 

development and growth; and participate in an extended 

national infrastructure plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Investing in People. Our second area in this is investing in 

education and training. Our goal here is to preserve and 

improve the quality of public education to make sure our 

education system fits with the new 21st century economy, Mr. 

Speaker, capable of training and retraining our workforce and to 

keep up with new information and technology. 

 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

Over the past few months we have been hard at work gathering 

ideas on how to best qualify the education for our children and 

to make sure our teachers are the best that they can be in terms 

of training in this new technology. Our goal is to support and 

build a strong public education system, something which is 

capable of taking us into the new jobs of the 21st century. 

 

The government also plans to provide better tools to support 

classroom learning; encourage school division restructuring on 

a needs basis, to be determined locally; to implement a 

made-in-Saskatchewan training system; and to work with 

universities in the implementation of some of the 

recommendations of the MacKay report. 

 

Our third major plank in the Investing for People strategy is 

investing in social reform. This is a very important area, Mr. 

Speaker, as has been pointed out by many of my colleagues on 

this side of the House. We want to get people off welfare by 

providing them with incentives to work, incentives that are fair 

and compassionate and balanced with a good, well-reasoned, 

and a proper skills training program. We plan to continue to 

work on a child benefit plan to help poor families feed, clothe, 

house, educate and care for their children. Our goal is to respect 

all people, to tackle poverty, and to provide hope, and practice 

compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this area we will work energetically to 

implement a national child benefit — the first new national 

program in Canada in over 30 years, as has been pointed out. 

We work to strengthen our . . . we will work to strengthen our 

action plan for children by enhancing support and prevention 

services. We will work on a Saskatchewan employment 

supplement and begin to implement a Youth Futures program 

and a provincial training allowance. Mr. Speaker, these are 

important, important programs which have been worked out in 

conjunction and consultation with Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The fourth area of our investing in Saskatchewan people is 

health care. We are continuing to provide Saskatchewan people 

with the best quality health care that the government can 

possibly afford, within the principles of medicare outlined by 

the founders — Douglas, Lloyd and Blakeney — and the men 

and women of this province who worked so hard to get a 

national medicare program established. 

 

Our first step is to remove money as a major obstacle to the 

provision of good medicare. Secondly, we hope to . . . Pardon 

me. Secondly, we are still . . . We are wanting to . . . The 

second step which we are still waiting to be addressed, which 

we wanted to address in 1991, was to reorganize and revamp 

the delivery system and to introduce the notion of wellness and 

prevention in our health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, investing in health care also 

means to work to improve services and health care security 

services for our seniors. We also want to work to partner with 

health professionals and to work with people to provide better 

models of health care. 

 

We also plan to collaborate with communities to ensure that our 

health care system operates in a balanced and locally responsive 

manner. These, Mr. Speaker, I think are areas that we have 

shown great improvement on and will continue to do so in the 

years ahead. 

 

(1615) 

 

Our fifth major strategy area in the Investing in People strategy 

is our transportation sector. Mr. Speaker, our government is 

working extremely hard on the development of a 

comprehensive transportation policy. And this is certainly very 

timely given the ravages that have taken place with the rail line 

abandonment in our province, with the abandonment of the 

Crow rate, and with the great burden that has been put on our 

Saskatchewan highways. This area, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 

having a comprehensive program announced later this spring. 

 

Our sixth area in the investing for people strategy is financial 

integrity. Mr. Speaker, my constituents in Regina Sherwood, 

and I think all the people of Saskatchewan, are with us when 

they say, no more deficits. It is important that we manage these 

programs and this strategy and at the same time keep the fiscal 

integrity that this government has worked so hard — with the 

sweat and blood of Saskatchewan people — to attain in these 

last few years. This is something we can’t lose sight of and we 

must work diligently within a balanced budget and financial . . . 

and good government scenario with balanced budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to this path and I am 

very proud to stand here this afternoon and to support the throne 

speech, the motion on the throne speech debate. I will not be 

supporting the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 

pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to participate in the debate on the 

throne speech and very pleased to be one of the members that 

will be supporting such a good throne speech today. 

 

I want to comment our movers and seconders, the mover from 

. . . the member from Swift Current and the seconder, the 

member from Saskatoon north-east or Southeast, I should say, 

by setting the tone for this throne speech debate and setting out, 

in terms of this Chamber, the kind of a subject that we deal with 

within the Chamber. 

 

I also want to say to you, welcome in terms of back again for 

yourself to preside over this group of people — the members of 

the House. I also want to say also that I’ve been thinking about 

what I should talk about in terms of the throne speech, and the 

many things that are going on around us with . . . around the 

world and such at the same time. And I had the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to hear yourself and I think the Speaker from Ontario 

and a former Speaker of the House of Commons being 

interviewed one day on CBC radio talking about your role in 

terms of what you do within this House. 

 

And you talked about yourself in terms of what we do here in 

relation, I guess to other countries in terms of how they deal 

with government. 

 



232  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

And you call this Chamber a war of words. Far better than we 

look today in modern times where decisions are being made by 

a gun. And that this war of words was a place where this could 

take place in a civilized manner — maybe not a perfect manner 

in the eyes of the public, but a civilized manner. 

 

And I look back, Mr. Speaker, when we had the opening of the 

throne speech and the Lieutenant Governor come in and speak 

and read the speech, and the ceremony that went along with that 

and the tradition that fits in with what we’re doing in terms of 

this institution. 

 

And that’s why I digress a bit today, not talking about the 

subject matter of the throne speech per se, but more for saying 

in terms of the question of democracy itself within this 

Chamber and how it applies to other places in the world. I think 

we’re very lucky in terms of where we are, in terms of what I 

said and what you had said, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the war of 

words. 

 

Last year I was selected to attend a Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association meeting in Hong Kong. When we 

look at where we have gone in terms of democracy, and we are 

able to talk about such things as the throne speech, I see there a 

colony that was just struggling to become a democracy. The 

first fledge elections took place in 1995. It was the first time in 

the colony’s history they had the opportunity to vote, that all 

members could vote for those people in their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And when I was there I had the opportunity to talk to these 

members, and the pride that they had in terms of what they were 

doing. And they were grasping for new things to do in terms of 

trying to understand how other systems work, like our own 

Chamber, and how they could make things for the better. 

 

But at the same time as I looked at that community, and a 

community, Mr. Speaker, that would maybe be half the size of 

Regina in terms of geographic area, and six and a half million 

people live, and the concentration itself is mind-boggling, is 

that they were struggling for democracy but at the same time in 

sadness with this too, is that on July 1, 1997 they will lose that 

struggle for democracy. That struggle for democracy will 

disappear with the colony being reverted back to mainland 

China. 

 

And as much as people didn’t talk about fear of what would 

happen, there was certainly a resident belief that they would be 

unable to talk as we do, as we do freely in this Chamber and as 

they are doing right now in their Chamber; they would lose that 

opportunity to talk and have that discussion. That kind of 

discussion would take place outside a Chamber, and somewhat 

I think in fear by which they would have those kind of 

conversations. 

 

And that’s why I say we need to be very proud of just the 

concept alone in terms of having the discussion on a throne 

speech, Mr. Speaker. The opportunity to talk about those things 

in a partisan way, but not in fear – not in fear of a discussion. 

And these are things we have to remember, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms in what we have in this institution. That’s why I also pay 

credit to you, Mr. Speaker, in your role of going around the 

province and talking about this Chamber, because a great deal 

of society do not know what goes on in this Chamber. And they 

have to understand that this system is far better in what I’d seen 

in terms of Hong Kong, what we see in Bosnia, what we see 

right now in Albania. 

 

Even where the democracies . . . you know where democracy is 

very difficult. A gentleman I met from Ghana talked about 

democracy. He says we are on a time line. We have three years 

to make democracy work in our African country, or else it will 

disappear and there will be another dictatorship; the military 

will take over. It’s a very strange time line to be under, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But as I say, that’s why I take a great deal pride today to have 

that opportunity to speak but also to represent the people of 

Saskatoon Northwest. And it’s a pride that I think every 

member, no matter what political stripe, takes a great honour in 

participating in. And these are things that all members have to 

remember in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we talk about the throne speech and the direction the 

government is taking, and I’m always as a member that stands, 

always wants to engage in partisan discussion at the same time, 

and this is an opportunity to do that in the throne speech, Mr. 

Speaker. So now I do digress from the talk of worldly ideas of 

democracy, and talk about what’s going on in this province, and 

what forces outside this province are creating some great deal of 

difficulty out there particularly in the area of grain 

transportation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity to go to my home town on the weekend 

and talked to some farmers, talking about the difficulty of 

moving grain – the inability to move grain. And they want to 

know, whose fault is it? Whose fault is it? And I asked the other 

members of the Chamber, whose fault is it that we can’t move 

this grain? But members say they know the answer. 

 

I think we can clearly point at the federal government and their 

policy of deregulation of the grain transportation system. They 

promised, with deregulation and the removal of the Crow 

benefit by which then is paid producers, we would have a better 

system. Mr. Speaker, the system has got worse. The system is 

not moving grain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that . . . And I will say under the 

former Tory government under Brian Mulroney, but I will pay 

credit here, that we had an agency in Winnipeg that dealt 

specifically with grain transportation — the Western Grain 

Transportation Authority, Mr. Speaker. And it dealt directly 

with the concept of moving grain for prairie farmers. It is gone, 

Mr. Speaker, with deregulation. 

 

What they did is centralized it in Ottawa and took it out of 

Winnipeg. And we lost that control, Mr. Speaker. There was not 

a connection to the grain industry in terms of the Canadian 

Wheat Board and other people in this country in terms of 

moving grain. And, Mr. Speaker, this is really sad in terms of 

what’s going on out there, in terms of what’s moving in terms 

of grain. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

And the members opposite laugh. I can’t believe it, Mr. 

Speaker. They laugh about the question of farmers’ livelihood 

on moving grain. I know the difficulty in terms of southern 

Saskatchewan. I know that the problem that exists in terms of 

where the member’s from and the member of Wood River and 

the difficulty to move grain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they laugh. And they say nothing about . . . in terms of 

what the federal government has now offered the railways. 

More money, Mr. Speaker. More money for a job they have not 

performed. 

 

So now it becomes a question, Mr. Speaker, and Ottawa will 

have to make the decision. Does grain transportation become 

more deregulated as the Liberal government is calling for? Or 

does it become more regulated that we have some kind of 

control? 

 

We had a member opposite, Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago talk 

about branch lines, that the provincial government should take 

over the abandoned branch lines that are coming forward. Mr. 

Speaker, the responsibility of branch lines in this province and 

across western Canada have that of the federal government. 

We’ve had guarantees that ensured branch lines in this 

province, Mr. Speaker — that ensured branch lines to the year 

2000. Which government lifted the freeze on the branch lines, 

Mr. Speaker? The federal Liberals. They took away the 

protection. 

 

Now we have a grain handling system that will be unable to 

handle all the grain in the system as we get rid of the branch 

lines, Mr. Speaker. I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker; it must be 

the same question as when the Minister of Agriculture was 

talking about the issue the other day. He said, the question is 

when you use the right stick, the dog barks. And truly, Mr. 

Speaker, the dogs are barking across the way, Mr. Speaker, 

because they know exactly what the truth is. All they have to do 

is go talk to their farmer friends and talk to them about the 

question of grain handling. Talk about them the difficulty in 

terms of receiving a livelihood right now because of that. 

 

But they fail to recognize . . . And I give them credit the other 

day when the Prime Minister was in Saskatchewan, that the 

official opposition did stand with the other parties in this 

province to speak up against the federal government’s 

transportation policy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting when one speaks a certain 

subject, all of a sudden you hear this chirping across the way, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker. I guess the truth 

hurts, Mr. Speaker, the truth hurts. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now all hon. members 

. . . Order. All hon. members will know that there is opportunity 

to put their remarks on the record and it is not necessary to get 

their remarks informally by shouting them across the floor. And 

hon. members will know that on both sides of the House. And 

I’ll ask the hon. member for Saskatoon Northwest to continue. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, the enthusiasm even on this side in 

terms of helping me with the subject matter that I need to speak 

about when it comes to grain transportation. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that we have progressed in the area 

of agriculture that I am very proud of is in the area of a new 

crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, a new crop insurance 

program. A program that is 25 per cent lower in cost to 

producers, that provides very good coverage to producers, and 

I’m very proud to be a government . . . that we’ve been able to 

institute that. 

 

And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, this government has taken 

the process to underwrite the debt of crop insurance, a debt that 

was incurred under the Devine Tories, Mr. Speaker. We’re now 

making crop insurance a workable program for producers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about my community of 

Saskatoon and what’s going on there in terms of that city, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a city where, in terms of the economy in 

Canada . . . is booming. We have a housing market that is 

extremely strong. They use the term “hot” in terms of the way 

houses move. 

 

I had a friend of mine sell a house in early summer, Mr. 

Speaker, in my own riding. He advertised this house in the 

Friday morning on a colour brochure called “The Home 

Showcase.” By 9:30 — this publication came out at 9 o’clock 

— by 9:30 he had someone outside the door waiting to look at 

the house. By noon he had showed the house six times, and by 

2:30 in the afternoon the house was sold. This was typical in 

terms of the economy within my riding of Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, and generally the housing market in Saskatoon. 

 

We’ve seen a very strong commitment in terms of the business 

community in Saskatoon, in terms of how they’re revitalizing 

the economy in Saskatoon. I’m very proud to say I have 

Flexi-coil in my riding, an example of a very good agricultural 

manufacturer in Canada . . . and not just in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity to talk to a gentleman from Australia, 

who’s acquainted with two Canadian products: Versatile 

tractors — or Ford now, Ford New Holland— but Versatile 

tractors and Flexi-coil air seeders. We are leaders in the area in 

terms of air seeding equipment in North America, if not the 

world. Not just Flexi-coil, but Bourgault Industries as well is 

doing very well in this industry. We have a number of other 

industries throughout Saskatchewan, in terms of short-line 

manufacturers, that are doing very well in terms of the 

technology they are providing to the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re seeing expansion, as many members have talked about, 

in terms of ag bio-tech. Not just ag bio-tech, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’re seeing a number of farm chemical companies relocating 

either head offices or certain portions in the research facilities in 

Saskatoon. They see the viability of what’s going on there and 

how important it is and how Saskatoon is a centre of excellence 

in the area of ag-biotech, Mr. Speaker. These are very important 

things that are going on. They are exciting 



234  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

things that are going on in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker 

— exciting things. 

 

We see in terms of the growth of the retail industry in 

Saskatoon and how we have a very vibrant small business 

community in terms of retail sales. And the expansion that takes 

place, almost on a daily business, of new businesses in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m very proud of these people that are taking the commitment 

to go out and be the push for economic development in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we need to be very proud, and 

I think the government could take a great deal of credit with 

that, by making the climate that is very encouraging for 

business, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister of Economic 

Development could take a great deal of pride in terms of the 

program that he’s put out in Partnership for Renewal, in terms 

of what we’re doing in terms of the economy of Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, a great deal of pride. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what it is, Mr. Speaker, when I stand 

up . . . I can stand up and be silent, and I will hear comments 

across the way, and I don’t understand why. I just don’t 

understand why, when I stand up, suddenly the voices rise in 

the other side . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s important 

for an MLA to have a broad base in terms of interest in what’s 

going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An issue that’s also very important in terms of the performance 

of this government — it’s important to the people of my riding 

— is fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the opportunity 

to talk to many people in my riding, and the one thing they talk 

about with a great deal of pride is the question of the fiscal 

responsibility of this government: our ability to deliver 

balanced budgets, our ability to deliver a balanced approach in 

terms of fiscal responsibility. They do not want to see a system 

that is taking place in the province of Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People in my riding and people across Saskatchewan have said 

that they do not want the Harris approach in terms of 

government; it doesn’t work. They don’t want the Klein 

approach because they’re afraid, in terms of what services 

would disappear. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, as our 

people know, it has been difficult to deliver that fiscal 

responsibility. They are very glad that we are there now. 

 

They know what it’s like to meet the question of trying to pay 

your mortgage, trying to put your kids through school, trying to 

do those basic things and knowing that you cannot do it if the 

dollar isn’t there. And that kind of realization, Mr. Speaker, 

makes me proud to be a New Democratic MLA, and I was very 

pleased that they did return me to the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other area that I want to talk about, in terms of 

the community of Saskatoon, is health care, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

very pleased and proud of the health care community in 

Saskatoon and the Saskatoon Health Board and how it’s worked 

with difficult times. But it’s coming together to deliver services, 

not just for the City of Saskatoon, but for many people in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There was concern raised earlier that maybe they would have to 

look at closing a hospital. But they were looking at all the 

options in terms of how to best spend the dollar. They went to 

the employees, talked to them about that. They went to the 

community and worked very hard. And they came up with a 

plan, Mr. Speaker, by which they feel confident they can 

operate all the hospitals in Saskatoon and provide the services 

for the people of Saskatoon and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Very proud too of the Royal University Hospital which is one 

of the best teaching hospitals in all of Canada and very proud to 

have that within the structure. But the health board is doing new 

and exciting things in terms of community work, in terms of 

bringing programs out into the people that we need to see. And 

these kinds of things are very important too. 

 

It changes the structure in terms of health care, Mr. Speaker, 

which is the cornerstone of the health reform process. It’s the 

question of wellness. And to get the concept that health doesn’t 

revolve just around the institutions but it revolves around the 

wellness of the people outside the institutions and how best to 

get the people outside to deal with them in the area of home 

care, Mr. Speaker . . . those kinds of things are very forward 

thinking ideas. 

 

I think about what was said by a gentleman connected with the 

health board in Lloydminster who had the opportunity to see the 

difference between the Alberta side and the Saskatchewan side. 

And he put it very simply, Mr. Speaker. He said Saskatchewan 

has a plan to health reform; Alberta does not have a plan for 

health reform. And I think that clearly sends the message of 

where we’re going in terms of health reform in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve covered several areas to date in terms of 

what’s going on in terms of the economy of Saskatoon — 

what’s going on there and how it relates to the question of jobs 

— within the throne speech on that theme . . . the question of 

health care, the question of grain transportation, which I say 

certainly woke up the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the one area that requires more action, Mr. Speaker, one 

area that we have not dealt with as a government to an adequate 

degree . . . and we are trying to develop a new system by which 

we can take children off Paul’s poverty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  We desperately need a national child 

welfare program or child benefit program by which we can get 

kids off the welfare rolls, by which we can break the mould. 

 

I give some credit to the federal Minister of Finance, Mr. Paul 

Martin, by recognizing the problem, and as our Premier has 

said, has made a down payment on that issue. The problem is 

the down payment comes next year and not this year. We’re 

willing to participate now in such a program. We are committed 

to this program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if people don’t know across this nation, it 

was this government that initiated the idea. It was our Premier  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

who took it to the first ministers’ conference and said this is a 

priority. This is a priority. No other premier did that. Our 

Premier did. He started the initiative which set the wheels in 

motion for a national child benefit program. 

 

These are things which, once it comes to fruition, we shall be 

very proud of in Saskatchewan. As this was the birth of 

medicare, Mr. Speaker, we will be the birth of this new social 

program, the first new social program in 30 years . . . which is 

shameful to say, Mr. Speaker, that it takes 30 years to do it, as 

medicare took from 1944 to 1962, until the rest of the country 

finally accepted it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, he’s very proud to be part of a government 

and a province that’s very progressive and leaders . . . That we 

are strengthening at the same time our action plan for children, 

Mr. Speaker, developing as we can slowly, not with enough 

progress, but trying to do it as quickly as we can. Dealing as 

best we can with those that are less protected in society and that 

being the children, Mr. Speaker. So again I’m very pleased to 

be part of that program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again, I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t even tell a 

joke today. I’m not very good at telling jokes. And again the 

official opposition is laughing, and I’m trying to determine 

why. Are they laughing on the subject that I talked about: 

democracy? Are they laughing on the subject where I talked 

about grain transportation? Are they laughing on the question of 

jobs and a good economy? Are they laughing on the question of 

child poverty? 

 

What are they laughing about, Mr. Speaker? These are very 

serious issues that I talk about. And they make jokes. They 

think it’s funny. I can’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. And this is the 

official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would be very 

interested to know how the official opposition are reacting to 

these subjects because I can’t remember . . . Do the members 

here remember me telling a joke at all that was funny? Did I 

talk about anything that was funny? I don’t understand. 

 

I hear somebody say about the question, the government that 

cares. Mr. Speaker, I can assure the members opposite, I can 

assure the people of Saskatchewan, I can assure the people of 

Canada, that this forward-looking government does care. This 

forward-looking government does care about its people; does 

care about its less fortunate in this province and hopes to do that 

across Canada; does care where this province is going into the 

21st century — not the 20th century. This province will, with a 

caring government, go with strength to enter the 21st century; 

go with the power and the imagination of its people to do even 

more than it has done since its inception in 1905, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1645) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  The Minister of Economic Development 

makes mention of on Friday when the Prime Minister came to  

Saskatchewan to see economic development in progress in 

terms of the company of Shuttle Craft, Mr. Speaker, a 

forward-going company that . . . it just continues to move and 

move and find new facilities because it is expanding to an 

ever-growing market, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only thing I find sad about that day is that I know that the 

Saskatchewan River is not froze. I wish they would’ve taken the 

opportunity to take the Prime Minister on a ride in the South 

Saskatchewan in a shuttle craft, so he could experience the 

modern technology that’s taking place within Saskatoon and the 

entrepreneurs that are pushing that technology, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, my time is I think . . . came to 

an end. I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to participate in the 

throne speech today. I’m very pleased that the subjects that I 

talk about were of interest to our members, and were 

particularly of an interest to our members opposite. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the mover, the member 

from Swift Current, and the seconder, the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast, on their moving and seconding this 

wonderful motion and I will be voting in favour of it, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Having gone through a lot of planning prior to this address from 

the throne, Mr. Speaker, and having listened to a lot of my 

colleagues and their remarks in response to His Honour’s 

speech, and having listened to my constituents over the 

weekend and hearing their reactions, I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am more enthused about the direction of our 

government, about the future of the province, and about politics 

in general than I ever have been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my internal excitement comes from the 

knowledge that we are embarking on a new journey. It’s a new 

journey for this government and a new journey for this 

province. And this new journey upon which we are embarking, 

Mr. Speaker, this new path, is characterized by the theme that 

was mentioned in the Speech from the Throne: we will be 

investing in people. 

 

Since 1991 the people of Saskatchewan, in partnership with this 

New Democratic government, have worked hard and we’ve 

looked for savings and we’ve looked for ways to increase 

production and ways to make up for gaps that had arrived, so 

that we could have something to invest in people, invest in the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are embarking on a journey to a future that has 

not borrowed and it is not haphazard. And there is no ready 

prescription or instruction booklet for our new direction. We 

must forge our own way, Mr. Speaker. We must develop our 

own plan. But that plan must be suitable for our province as we 

prepare to enter the 21st century. Mr. Speaker, we must build  



236  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

our own path, and really that’s what makes this journey 

exciting, makes it challenging, and makes it worthwhile. In the 

words of the futurist John Schaar, and taken directly from the 

speech to the throne, and I quote: 

 

The future is not some place (where) we are going to, but 

one we are creating. The paths are not to be found, but 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must make our own path; and ours is not the 

path of Alberta, nor is it the path of Ontario, nor the path of 

U.S. of A (United States of America), nor the path of British 

Columbia. We can see what these other provinces are doing and 

we should adapt the ideas which they have used which may be 

of value to us, but we should be equally adamant, Mr. Speaker, 

about rejecting some of the most controversial of their programs 

because they are not investing in people; they are favouring the 

elite. 

 

Ours is not the path of Alberta or Manitoba when it comes to 

health and education. Mr. Klein, the Premier of Alberta, 

followed the polls rather than principle, and he cut educators’ 

salaries by more than 5 per cent. Mr. Filmon of Manitoba 

forced educators to take two days less pay per year. No 

principle there, Mr. Speaker, just opinion polls and politics. 

 

In oil-rich Alberta, the Conservative government aims for a 15 

per cent reduction in their health budget. As a result there was a 

daily barrage of horror stories in the Alberta press. Not better 

health care, not even a better principle, just better for the polls 

and politics. And then just before the election, Mr. Klein 

reversed his rhetoric. That is not our path, Mr. Speaker. That is 

not the direction that we are creating. 

 

When we were elected, Mr. Speaker, the first thing we did was 

to tell the people exactly as it was. We acknowledged to the 

people of Saskatchewan that their province had been driven to 

the verge of bankruptcy and we asked everybody to help us set 

our priorities. And most people said this: they said, get the 

financial picture in order and minimize — when you’re doing it 

— minimize the program disruption, especially in health and 

education. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of our people had totally 

embraced the medicare system and our education system. They 

said, do what you must do but preserve medicare for our future 

generations, and make sure our population has a future through 

education, is what they told us. 

 

So despite what Alberta was doing, what Mike Harris of 

Ontario was doing to his health budget, and despite the massive 

reductions in federal revenue sharing from the Liberal 

government — supported by the Liberals opposite — we kept 

our health budget content at about $1.5 billion, the same as it 

was in 1991. To keep it at that level, we had to fill the hole left 

by the federal government. 

 

The provincial taxpayer had to put in an extra $40 million last 

year, and approximately $50 million this year, to fill the amount 

cut by the federal government. But we kept our commitment to 

the public, Mr. Speaker. And today I am proud to say that our  

health system is more stable than it ever was. Certainly more 

stable than it was in 1991. And more importantly than that, Mr. 

Speaker, it is sustainable into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  This is what I call investing in people. In 

this year’s throne speech health care is named as one of six 

priorities. I want to congratulate the Minister of Health and his 

predecessors and the Premier for the path they are building in 

health care. Mr. Speaker, nowhere in Saskatchewan is the new 

path for health care more visible, or more advanced, or more 

appreciated than in my own constituency in Prince Albert. 

Good things in politics don’t come easily, Mr. Speaker. They 

must be fought for. But when implemented and when endorsed 

by the public they will last, as does our medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going through a major restructuring and 

reorganizing and redeploying of resources in health care. And 

as mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, home care nursing 

services in Prince Albert have tripled since 1991, and other 

home care services have doubled. And that’s because it’s 

appreciated and because the people of Prince Albert trust the 

home care workers who provide an excellent service. 

 

Those are record-breaking stats, Mr. Speaker, but nothing 

makes a greater impression than direct experience with the 

system. Mr. Speaker, a long-time friend of mine suffered a 

stroke some five or six years ago. And after being treated in our 

hospital he was taken home, and he received regular bi-monthly 

visits at home from the home care nurse and other home care 

providers as needed. 

 

And when he started to lose the functioning of his feet, the 

home care unit was called in. They reassessed and his services 

were enhanced. And they helped, first of all, by providing him a 

walker when it was needed, and then a wheelchair. Then they 

provided sturdy floor-to-ceiling supports so that he was able to 

walk from room to room. 

 

And then lately when he lost his ability to walk, home care 

supplied his home with a hospital bed and a portable sling. 

Home care services were increased to four visits daily, Mr. 

Speaker. And they were there to help with exercise and to help 

with personal hygiene. Mr. Speaker, it was my friend’s wish not 

to be institutionalized, not to be hospitalized — only in the case 

of emergency — and through that home care system provided 

in Prince Albert, the services they provided efficiently and I 

must say lovingly, my friend was able to be cared for by his 

wife in his very own home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  He passed away in dignity at the age of 92 

and was laid to rest this morning, Mr. Speaker. I am thankful 

that the tremendous program of medicare, brought to us first by 

the Douglas government, has been enhanced and developed to 

make lives of people like my friend comfortable and dignified 

in times of failing health. This investment in people’s health 

care pays dividend, Mr. Speaker, far beyond fiscal 

accountability; it can only be measured by the heart. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

It’s not only home care that has helped people’s health in Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker; we are living longer for other reasons as 

well. Credit must go to our physicians who saw a long time ago 

that we needed to consolidate to one acute facility in Prince 

Albert. This is nearly complete. This winter several acute 

care-givers moved into new quarters, a most modern and 

well-equipped facility. The unit is built so that nurses and 

doctors can maintain visual, in addition to electronic, contact of 

the patients under their care directly from the nursing station. 

And for purposes of privacy, curtains can be drawn in front of 

the glass windows. It is spacious; it is efficient. This is the type 

of modern facility that attracts specialists to a city the size of 

ours. And we are proud of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, kidney dialysis is also being administered through 

the Victoria Union Hospital in Prince Albert, thus saving many 

hours of driving as well as the expense of making regular trips 

to Prince Albert . . . from Prince Albert to Saskatoon. Many 

people are grateful for that investment in people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we are very interested in the investment government is 

making for a new CT scanner in our city of Prince Albert. I 

expect this new unit to be in service this fall, Mr. Speaker. This 

diagnostic tool will help to save lives, especially in cases of 

trauma, and will also ease the demand on the Saskatoon CT 

scan services. 

 

Another investment in people that we appreciate in Prince 

Albert is the construction of the Mount St. Joseph’s 120-bed 

long-term care facility. Investment into this facility was both 

federal and provincial, with the local share of two and a half 

million being raised locally. And it is . . . the fund-raising is 

near completion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when people work together, great things are 

accomplished. And I know that families of head injured and 

families of people who cannot any longer stay in their own 

homes are very grateful to see this modern new structure being 

built close to Carlton and Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is getting close to 5 o’clock. I have several more 

comments I wish to make, but at this time I would like to move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being near the hour of 5 o’clock, the 

House will stand recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 205 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 205 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 205 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 205 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 205 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 206 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 206 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 206 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 207 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 207 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 207 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 207 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 207 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 208 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Education Week 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 208 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 208 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 208 

 National Francophone Week 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 208 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 208 

 St. Patrick’s Day 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 209 

 Rider Pride Alive and Well in Saskatchewan 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

 30th Annual Oilmen’s Banquet 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Industrial Vacancy Rate 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 210 

 Crop Insurance 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 

 Liability Protection for Volunteers 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 211 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 212 

 First Nations Taxation 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 212 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 212 

 Provincial Sales Tax 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 212 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 213 

 Regional Telephone Exchanges 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 213 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 213 

 911 Service Charges 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 214 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 214 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 201  The Regional Telephone Districts Act 



 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 215 

 Bill No. 205 — The Non-profit Corporations Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les sociétés sans but 

lucratif 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

 Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

 Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

 Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 215 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 215 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 219 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 221 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 225 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 227 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 229 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

 




