



















































Hansard: December 15, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1943 

 December 15, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a petition to present on behalf of a number of residents in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided for on a fee-for-services 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from White City, Pilot Butte, 

Lumsden, Regina, and a number of other communities in 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition as well 

to present to the Assembly and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that films be given away 

schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the Fort Qu’Appelle area 

of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition, 

reading: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather the films be given away to 

schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these signatures are all from Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 

petition to present. 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

That residents of the province of Saskatchewan are 

opposed to the practice of night hunting by any citizen of 

the province and that night hunting at any time of the year 

is extremely dangerous to those who are hunting and others 

in the vicinity; and that night hunting is an extremely 

unfair and unsportsmanlike form of game hunting and that 

the majority of citizens are not allowed to practise night 

hunting. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the Kamsack area. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to present a 

petition to the Assembly addressing night hunting. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners that signed this come from 

Kamsack and Togo, Gravelbourg, Bateman, Mr. Speaker, a 

number of names on this. I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to do 

with night hunting. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 

Kamsack, Togo, and Runnymede. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

to present. Now I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the 

destructive and dangerous practice of night hunting in the 

province for everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1944  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

And these come basically from the area of Kamsack. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions in regard to the issue of night hunting. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

work with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the 

destructive and dangerous practice of night hunting in the 

province for everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

Kamsack and Togo area. 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan concerned with night 

hunting. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The signatures on the petition are mostly from the Moosomin 

constituency around the Redvers area. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

from citizens of the Saltcoats constituency, mostly in the village 

of Kamsack. And the prayer for relief reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As in bound in duty, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so file. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions that I would like to bring forward today. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition all seem 

to be from the Invermay and surrounding area; that would be in 

the riding of Canora. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. . . . Order. Order, 

order. All hon. members will be aware that — order — all hon. 

members will be aware that debate is not permitted in 

presenting petitions. 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have some 

petitions to present on behalf of people concerned about the 

practice of night hunting. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

communities of Buchanan and Kamsack. I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

to present today on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This petition is signed by the people in the constituency of 

Saltcoats and the people are basically, on this petition, are from 

the community of Kamsack. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

cause the government to amend The Workers’ 

Compensation Act to allow injured workers to bring legal 

actions against health care professionals in the event of 

alleged negligence or other misconduct. 

 

And the following petitions as addenda to previously received 

petitions respecting: 

 

The reversal of a decision to force hunters to pay the entire 

cost of big game damage. 

 

The reversal of the municipal revenue-sharing reduction. 

 

Making an exemption under the labour standards 

respecting agreements between Saskatchewan families and 

their care-givers. 

 

Establishment of a task force to aid the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

Changes to the Saskatchewan big game damage 

compensation program. 

 

The review of the social impact of gambling. 

 

The rebuilding of Highway No. 155. 



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

Rising farm input costs. 

 

And the banning of stripping in establishments where 

alcohol is served. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on day 54 move first reading of a Bill entitled the 

wildlife amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day 54 move the first reading of a Bill entitled the 

Crown corporations rate review Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day 54 move first reading of a Bill entitled 

the recall of members Act, 1997. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I notice in 

your gallery a gentleman who has come, I think with some 

friends, from the Melfort area, Mr. Bill Sellness, who I had the 

privilege of meeting at a Christmas party last year and I 

certainly want to welcome Mr. Sellness to the Assembly today 

and those who have accompanied him down here. 

 

And I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are some 

members and some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, that I’d 

like the Assembly to welcome here today. 

 

First of all we have a lady from Watson, Mrs. Elsie Kotyk, 

whose husband of 51 years is continuing a courageous fight 

with hepatitis C. Mrs. Kotyk, please welcome her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Also, Mr. Speaker, we have Fran Mamer and 

her son, Scott, who is also a hepatitis C victim. Would you 

please stand and be recognized? 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Also with them is Mr. Bill Sellness, who is 

representing the hepatitis C victims throughout this province 

who are seeking compensation. I’d ask Bill to stand and be 

recognized, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Also sitting with those people is Dr. Jim 

Melenchuk, Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. Jim, 

please stand and be recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

November Employment Statistics 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, and welcome back, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m sure I share the views of all members on this side of the 

House in saying what a pleasure it is to be here for this special 

session of unity at this holiday season. 

 

This is also a great opportunity to come together and to discuss 

the issues that Saskatchewan people are concerned with, and to 

celebrate some of the remarkable achievements and gains our 

province has seen during the past year, particularly in the area 

of job creation. 

 

Recently Statistics Canada released its November job numbers, 

and once again, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada at 5.5 per cent, which of course is 

well below the national average of 8.6 per cent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, percentages can be misleading and while we 

recognize that there are still some people who want jobs and 

cannot find them, we can celebrate the fact that in November of 

this year there were 474,500 people working in Saskatchewan. 

That’s an increase of 22,000 jobs over the same time last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson: — And of course, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

note that Regina had the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country at 5.2 per cent, and also that our sister city of Saskatoon 

was third lowest at 5.9. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that this season many parents will 

understand that their children may be a little late getting home 

for Christmas because many more of them have a job this year 

than last year. In fact there are 80,100 young people working in 

Saskatchewan at last count — up 8,600 from the year before. 

That’s a very good number and very welcome at this time of 

year. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debut of Saskatchewan Party 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as all 

members know, 1997 has been a stellar year for sports fans in 

Saskatchewan. This year we saw Sandra Schmirler and crew 

win yet another world curling championship before qualifying 

to represent Canada at the 1998 Winter Olympics. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we saw the Saskatchewan Roughriders defy 

all expectations and make it to the Grey Cup. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in what’s been called Saskatchewan’s 

favourite blood sport — politics — 1997 has been equally 

memorable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a move knowledgeable fans have been waiting 

for for years, members of two teams in our political league 

which played essentially the same style of game, came together 

in an all-out effort to dethrone the current league champions. 



1946  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, the current champs remind me of the 1997 Dallas 

Cowboys — old, past their prime, and not able to score the 

points like they used to. Contrast that with the young upstarts in 

the Saskatchewan Party, who are sure-footed and are driving 

hard for the end zone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course there’s still a third team in our league 

which may or may not play in the finals, depending upon 

whether Coach Ralph can get them to stop fighting over who 

sits where on the final bus. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party is poised to knock off the perennial 

champs. But before the 1999 final, we’re looking to expand our 

team. We consider this week . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Performance Plant Inc. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to talk 

about Ag-West Biotech, who is investing up to $280,000 over 

three years in Performance Plant Inc., a new plant 

biotechnology company from Kingston, Ontario. 

 

Performance Plant Inc. has established a research and 

development laboratory at Innovation Place in Saskatoon, 

where initially seven scientists and support staff will work on a 

number of projects aimed at improving crops such as canola, 

mustard, as well as lettuce, and other horticultural crops. 

 

The work of Performance Plant Inc. involves modifying 

metabolism of plants to give them improved agronomic 

characteristics which are of value to the farmer and to the 

grower. In many cases the modified plants will be better able to 

withstand environmental stresses such as drought, cold, and 

salinity. 

 

Saskatchewan’s sustainable economic growth is proving 

long-term jobs and a bait for high quality health, education, and 

training services. These in turn help create the kind of 

environment that attract innovation and growth-orientated 

businesses like Performance Plant Inc. 

 

Investments in the ag-biotech sectors bring us many benefits: 

new jobs in research and development, new products from 

expanded markets, and advancement in plant and animal 

technologies that increase productivity for Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

Each innovation leads to further diversification and economic 

growth. Innovative companies such as Performance Plant Inc. is 

the key to economic success in Saskatchewan in the new 

century. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Humans Rights Anniversaries 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise on 

behalf of the loyal opposition. Mr. Speaker, two important  

anniversaries were celebrated in the field of human rights in 

Saskatchewan last week. 

 

Firstly, it was 50 years ago, in 1947 to be exact, when the first 

human rights legislation was enacted in this province. The 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights guaranteed fundamental freedoms: 

the freedom of religion, the freedom of speech, the freedom of 

the press, freedom of assembly and association, freedom from 

arbitrary arrest or detention, and the right to vote. 

 

Secondly, it was 25 years ago that the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission was created. This agency was given the 

power to investigate complaints of human rights abuses and to 

resolve them. 

 

As Liberals, we celebrate both anniversaries and we salute the 

work of the Human Rights Commission. I can assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, that no member of our party would ever move a 

resolution at a convention proposing to abolish the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission; and if by chance 

someone attended one of our conventions and somehow moved 

such an outrageous resolution, that it would be voted down 

overwhelmingly. It wouldn’t be tabled, as occurred at the new 

Tory convention last month. At a Liberal convention, this type 

of resolution would be defeated. There would be no doubt about 

where Liberals stand on human rights. We are in favour of 

human rights. The work of the commission is important. The 

commission stands up for the rights of the disabled, the rights of 

the religious minorities, the rights of cultural and racial 

minorities, the rights of women and men. We support the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yellowhead Twinning 

 

Mr. Jess: — As we all know, in Saskatchewan we have 26,100 

kilometres of roads and highways, and 158,900 kilometres of 

municipal roads — enough to circle the globe several times. 

 

We also know that just 6 per cent of that network carries 75 per 

cent of the traffic. A major part of that 6 per cent is the 

Yellowhead highway, and a very busy section of that 

Yellowhead goes through my constituency between Saskatoon 

and North Battleford. 

 

I am happy to announce, Mr. Speaker, that as of last Monday, 

the complete Yellowhead highway between Saskatoon and the 

Battlefords is twinned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: — Not only is this four lanes, there’s a new Borden 

bridge over the Saskatchewan river to go along with the other 

new bridge built in 1985, both of which replaced the very 

attractive arches of the original Borden bridge built in 1937. 

 

This project, Mr. Speaker, is part of a five-year, $70 million 

example of something that should be happening far more often - 

the federal-provincial cost-shared program to upgrade, repave 

parts of Highways 1, 7, 11, 16, and 39. The Yellowhead section  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

was the largest portion of the agreement, with some 40 million 

being spent in my constituency of Redberry Lake. 

 

Now if the federal government would commit to a national 

highway program, we would be like every other industrialized 

country in the world. I want . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The hon. member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Humboldt Youth Awarded Junior Citizen of the Year 

Award 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize a young person from my constituency from the 

community of Humboldt, Terri Simon. Terri was one of four 

individuals to receive a Junior Citizen of the Year award at the 

annual convention of the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 

Association held last September. 

 

The Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year award program 

recognizes outstanding youth between the age of 8 and 18 who 

help the community, support an environmental cause, or has 

overcome a personal hardship or challenge. Terri is an 

individual who fits this criteria. She maintained a 95 per cent 

average while working part time and volunteering at the local 

nursing home. Terri was involved in school activities, helping 

with the yearbook, grad fund-raising, and playing badminton. 

At the same time Terri did a lot of housework and cared for her 

mother, who has a number of illnesses including diabetes, 

arthritis, heart and lung disease. Throughout all of this, Terri 

was cheerful and very positive. So congratulations, Terri, on 

this achievement - Junior Citizen of the Year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Producer-assembled Grain Train in Eston 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to share yet 

another example of how prairie farmers are innovative, 

efficient, and community-minded. On December 9 of this year, 

around 500 farmers gathered in Eston, Saskatchewan to load no. 

1 and no. 2 durum on their own producer-assembled grain train. 

Long lines of 3-ton, tandem, and semi-trailer trucks could be 

seen participating in the loading of the 80-car train which then 

hauled the grain to the west coast. 

 

The farmers that participated in this historical event belong to 

the West Central Road and Rail Committee. This organization 

and the people who farm it are to be commended on their 

determination and ability to solve problems collectively. That’s 

how this province was built, Mr. Speaker. They typify the 

Saskatchewan spirit of cooperation and prove that by working 

together we can solve problems that otherwise are 

insurmountable. 

 

The West Central Road and Rail Committee is made up of 

producers and individuals from business, communities, and 

local governments who share common interests about the 

impending loss of their rail lines and elevators. In the absence 

of Ottawa taking charge of transportation, prairie farmers will 

have to work together and take action themselves. The success  

in Eston last week convinced me that we can do it and the West 

Central Road Committee will be likely leading the way. 

Congratulations to all involved, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Recall of the Legislature 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier. Well, Mr. Premier, here we are. 

First session in six years and why are we here? Are we here to 

address the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) destruction of the 

health care system? No. Are we here to bring a new system deal 

to the NDP rate hikes to SaskTel, SaskEnergy and SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance)? No. Are we here to 

pass legislation to outlaw night hunting? No. Are we here to 

debate the NDP’s half-baked scheme to buy the Guyana Power 

Company? No. 

 

Instead of dealing with these pressing issues, we are here to 

deal with the Premier’s personal agenda, this guy’s urgent need 

to make amends for the way he screwed up this country’s 

constitution. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will recognize 

that he’ll want to use language in the House that is befitting 

debate in the Assembly and I’ll ask him to simply withdraw his 

most recent remark and directly put his question. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Okay, we’ll insert the word, messed up this 

country’s constitution. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I requested the hon. member to 

first of all to withdraw the remark and then proceed directly to 

the question. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — I withdraw that remark. And we’re looking 

for the way that he messed up this country’s constitution in a 

kitchen back in 1981. As it says on Quebec’s licence plates, I 

remember. Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I will give the hon. member for 

Rosthern one last opportunity to put his question directly now. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Okay. And the question is, to Mr. Premier, 

whether he will set aside his personal obsession with the 

constitution and allow this legislature to debate, each and every 

fall, the issues that are far more pressing to Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the legislature and 

members of the Legislative Assembly are free to debate 

anything that they wish to debate or to raise. I would hope that 

this is done in a way which is positive and constructive, but 

sadly I think — given the tone of the first question of this fall 

session — that’s not likely to be the case from this so-called 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

It may be that the Saskatchewan Party, or the Tories by any  



1948  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

other name, opposite, don’t believe that saving Canada is an 

important mission. They may not think that the uncertainty 

surrounding Quebec affects the dollar or the currency or the 

passport. They may think that it’s not important to the 

Saskatchewan farmer to solve this matter, that it’s not important 

to Saskatchewan small-business person to solve this matter. 

 

I say they can think that. But the people of Saskatchewan know 

that it is important business to work to save this Canadian 

nation and country — not the Tory way of destruction, not the 

negativism, not the yelling that’s going on by you folks 

opposite there; the two of you who got together in the middle of 

the night and made a secret deal, concocted a deal — it may not 

be important to you, but it is important to Canada and this 

legislature is going to speak in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Night Hunting 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 

Premier recognizes that he will have a new role to play after the 

next election as Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Minister — my question is to the Minister for the 

Environment — it’s funny how fast, Mr. Minister, you leapt in 

front of the television cameras last week, all big-eyed, like a 

deer-in-the-headlights look, hoping to dodge the bullet. Your 

little announcement on Friday about night hunting hasn’t done a 

thing to address the issue. Last February when I brought it up, 

you said there wasn’t a crisis. You said there was no need for 

action; you were going to meet and review. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it’s been almost a year and you’re still 

slinking about in the dark. In the meantime, Saskatchewan 

people are in danger because you haven’t banned night hunting. 

Our big game populations are being wiped out. Our province 

stands to lose $60 million a year in hunting revenue. 

 

Mr. Minister, why have you ignored the people of 

Saskatchewan, and the warning signs, and allowed night 

hunting to escalate in Saskatchewan to this point, while other 

provinces have passed laws dealing with it years ago? What’s 

your excuse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 

opportunity to comment on this very important issue. Contrary 

to what the hon. member opposite may believe, under The 

Wildlife Act we have section 41 regarding the use of lights for 

hunting prohibited. 

 

No person shall, at any time, use a searchlight, spotlight, 

flashlight, jacklight, night light, headlight or any other light 

or cast a ray of light for the purpose of hunting any 

wildlife. 

 

Well obviously if night hunting is still going on, it is because 

. . . it’s not because we do not have legislation; it’s because of 

treaty rights, which we are going to respect, and it’s because of 

court decisions, which we are going to follow. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Minister, if it’s in the law why don’t you enforce it? Because 

you don’t have an excuse. Your actions have been impotent. 

Your solution is to talk about bringing in legislation several 

months from now, long after our wildlife numbers have been 

further depleted and the ban on night hunting is still not 

happening. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that may make it safer for some citizens but 

it doesn’t do a lot to save our moose and elk and deer. You want 

to ban night hunting with lights, that’s good. That’s a step in the 

right direction, but why wait? 

 

I’ve just given notice of a Bill that would deal with this issue 

immediately. It would ban all night hunting in Saskatchewan, 

period. It will carry hefty fines of up to $50,000 for persons 

violating the law. Mr. Minister, this will do the job that you 

should have done a long time ago. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you support this legislation? Will you do 

what’s right and protect both Saskatchewan people and our 

wildlife? Will you pass this Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the hon. 

member was as interested and knowledgeable about the issue as 

he lets on to be, he would have recognized the 1964 Supreme 

Court of Canada decision which said that aboriginal people can 

hunt day or night by any means. And a number of court 

decisions have reaffirmed that. 

 

So rather than the heavy-handed approach, which we know will 

not work, we are working with the FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and Metis Nation. We’re very 

pleased to be working with these groups. They too recognize 

this concern of night hunting — of safe night hunting that is — 

and we will work towards resolving this within the next few 

weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, I first 

brought up the issue of compensating hepatitis C victims when 

Louise Simard was the NDP Health minister. Mr. Minister, you 

are now the third Health minister since she’s left and still your 

government has done nothing. 

 

Mr. Minister, I am healthy and continue to ask questions year 

after year, but hepatitis C victims are dying; they’re fighting for 

their lives; and they shouldn’t have to fight you in court as well. 

The Krever Commission says it’s only fair these people should 

be compensated. 

 

The lawyer for hepatitis C help in Saskatchewan, Mr. Sellness, 

is here and some of his sufferers today. And they are here to 

seek fairness from you, Mr. Minister. They’re asking today for 

fairness. 



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

Mr. Minister, you could have led the pack of provinces in 

helping hepatitis C victims if you wanted to. But instead, you 

have to play follow the leader once again. It’s been announced 

that Quebec is the first province to set up joint plans to 

compensate hepatitis C victims. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you do the right thing and follow Quebec? 

Will you immediately put together a compensation package for 

hepatitis C victims? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

the member opposite in respect to the question, first of all it has 

been a very, very unfortunate situation, as the member knows, 

that we have in this country people who have been infected by 

tainted blood. 

 

As the member opposite knows, over the last several months in 

this country we’ve been establishing a new blood agency. The 

new blood agency is going to address itself in a very 

comprehensive fashion and way to ensure that into the future 

Canadians will have a safe blood system, that it will be 

transparent and would be accessible. 

 

In respect to the issue of hepatitis C, the member knows that the 

resolution that was put forward in Quebec speaks to the issue of 

looking at how compensation will occur in the future. There are 

three important issues that the member needs to remember 

there: one is that there has been no commitment by the 

Government of Quebec for compensation; secondly, nor has 

there been any commitment on the part of the federal 

government for any kind of commitment; and finally, all the 

Canadian ministers will be looking at this for a decision 

resolution within short order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporations’ Foreign Investments 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 

of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Minister, these days you’ve probably racked up more 

frequent flyer points than Donald Trump, flying off to all 

corners of the world with your political flunkies looking to 

blow millions of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars. And who are 

you accountable to? — no one. You hop on a plane with your 

patronage buddies, like Don Ching and Jack Messer and Carole 

Bryant, with absolutely no accountability to the people who pay 

the bills. Taxpayers have a message for you, Mr. Minister. It’s 

not your money. 

 

Mr. Minister, taxpayers don’t want their money, collected 

through huge rate increases, spent in Guyana or Australia or the 

Caribbean or anywhere else. They want their money to stay 

here in this province, invested in our hospitals, our schools and 

universities, our roads, and most of all our people. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify this lack of investment in 

Saskatchewan, while you’re spending that money all over the 

world? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be 

able to rise in the first day of this renewed session, on such a 

beautiful, wonderful day outside, with El Nino providing 

wonderful temperatures. 

 

But I want to say to the members opposite, that when they talk 

about, when they talk about rate increases and the charges that 

our utilities charge in the province of Saskatchewan, I’m going 

to be tabling for that member opposite, so that he can get his 

line straight and maybe gain some credibility, that we have the 

lowest — in most cases — rates of any utilities in Canada, bar 

none. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I want to say on the issue of 

credibility to that member, because he raises the issue of 

credibility, I want to quote when he was asked about crossing 

the floor, whether he intended to cross the floor, and I quote, he 

says, the member opposite who asked the question: “I 

absolutely can say I never, ever considered, never mind 

participated, in any discussion, that is to cross the floor.” 

 

Now you, sir, if you want credibility in this House on this issue 

or others, maybe you want to straighten this one out first before 

you go on with your supplement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, you’ve got a lot of 

straightening out to do for your political fellows. Don Ching 

said the other day that SaskTel plans to invest 150 to $200 

million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money all over the world 

without any accountability at all. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’re taking this money from Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and you’re, without any checks and balances, are 

going to invest this money anywhere you and your political 

flunkies feel that they’d like to do it. Mr. Minister, earlier I 

served notice that there is going to be, in my Bill, the proposal 

that you’re held accountable under a rate review process for 

investment and proper utility hike review. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you support that motion, or that Bill, that will 

call for real accountability by your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, I want to say that I thought the editorial in the 

Leader-Post of December 6, captured the spirit of 

Saskatchewan on the issue of Crown corporations when it said: 

“Crown export of its expertise is welcome.” 

 

And I want to say that this is what the majority of people are 

thinking in the province. Now you mention Mr. Ching and his 

secret announcement of the investment. I want to remind you 

that he made it at Crown Corporations Committee meeting with 

your people sitting there and the press reporting on it. That’s 

how secret it is. 



1950  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

But I want to say to you about your secret deals. Here is a 

report, Liberal MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

denies defection rumours, and I want to quote. This is the 

member opposite speaking: “I was elected in Melfort-Tisdale as 

a Liberal and will continue to represent Melfort-Tisdale.” 

Credibility? Sir, you’re going to have to work on that a little. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. members 

from the government side and the official opposition to come to 

order. Order. Order. 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

Harry Kotyk of Watson underwent heart surgery a few years 

ago, he had no idea he was going to contract another disease. 

He was infected with tainted blood. Now he has only days to 

live and his main concern, Mr. Speaker, is the mountain of bills 

his wife of 51 years will be left with after he is gone. 

 

The Krever report has recommended that the provinces and 

Ottawa provide compensation to hepatitis C victims. Ottawa is 

willing, the province of Quebec is willing, and the stumbling 

block is the province of Saskatchewan. This NDP government, 

Mr. Speaker, is once again stalling. It is a wonderful day 

outside today, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not so wonderful for Mr. 

and Mrs. Kotyk. 

 

Mr. Minister of Health, the Liberal opposition will be moving a 

resolution, following question period, calling on all members of 

this Assembly to unanimously support the principles of 

compensation in this report. Will you and your colleagues on 

the government side support this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

to the member from Arm River, as I said earlier to the member 

from Moosomin, this is a tragic situation as the member knows, 

that Canadians today are experiencing the issue of tainted 

blood. 

 

As a Health minister for Canada, or for Saskatchewan, and as 

Health ministers across the country, we are coming together to 

address the issue in a very, very broad way, and a very specific 

fashion as well. As I said earlier, we’re going to have in this 

country, a new blood system that will attempt to ensure that 

never again in this country will we see and experience like the 

folks that you talk about are experiencing today. 

 

By the same token, Mr. Member, I have recently, as of this 

afternoon, spoken with Mr. Rock, who tells me that there isn’t a 

specific amount of dollars of any kind on the table. Now if you 

can provide that for me, I would be pleased to see that. 

 

Secondly, I would like to say to the member that the resolution 

from Quebec speaks to the issue of examining in a broad way 

what the compensation package for Canadians will be who are 

hep C infected. That will be the position that this province will 

take, and I would suggest to you that that will be the position 

that all Canadian provinces will be taking. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Harry Kotyk can’t 

wait any longer, Mr. Minister. His life is short. There are other 

people in this province in the same position as he is and his 

family. Why can’t this province, for once in its life, not take a 

lead role in this? Why can’t you say to those people: yes, we’re 

willing to look at it; Saskatchewan’s going to be the leaders 

here; the NDP government’s going to take the lead instead of 

sitting back? 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you again, will you support our resolution 

later this afternoon, and will you immediately start a package of 

remuneration for these folks that so desperately need it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just first to 

the member, as the member knows, in Saskatchewan we have 

been leaders in medicare and health reform for ever. And this is 

another example, Mr. Speaker, of where it will require, where it 

will require for all of the provinces in Canada to ensure that 

people are treated fairly, compassionately, and equally across 

the piece. 

 

I don’t believe for a minute that the member opposite is 

suggesting that Saskatchewan should do something that would 

be indifferent to what other Canadians should experience in 

terms of compensation as it relates to hep C. 

 

As the member knows, we’re meeting again in the end of 

January. At the end of January all of the provincial ministers 

will be coming together, along with Mr. Rock, to ensure that we 

have a systematic, fashionable, appropriate compensation plan 

for all people who are affected with hep C. 

 

And to the resolution that you speak about later this afternoon, 

Mr. Member, I will be supporting it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m 

extremely happy to hear that, Mr. Minister, and that is a start, 

however there are people . . . Mrs. Kotyk is here today in our 

gallery. Her husband is at home dying and they need help. He 

needs to die in a peaceful manner, knowing that his wife and his 

family will be looked after. He’s sustained tremendous bills and 

costs from this illness. They don’t have the time, Mr. Minister. 

 

If you don’t believe me, Mr. Minister, I challenge you and I’ll 

ask you, if you will, will you accompany me to Watson to meet 

Mr. Kotyk and his wife and their family and sit down and talk 

and see if you don’t think that compensation is a need 

immediately there. I offer the challenge to you, Mr. Minister. 

Will you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 

don’t need to be convinced that there are people in 

Saskatchewan who are suffering from hepatitis C to the same 

extent that the Kotyks are. I don’t need to be convinced of that. 

 

I have already said to the member opposite that people who are 

infected in this province by hepatitis C and Canadians who’ve 

been infected by the tainted blood are going to receive, are 

going to receive some type of a compensation. We don’t know  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

what that compensation will be today because there are a 

variety of different ways in which hepatitis C affects people 

today. 

 

There are different kinds of procedures at which we need to 

look at that will further extend the kinds of treatment that these 

individuals will require into the future. And the question isn’t 

only about a financial compensation package, I’m sure the 

member isn’t suggesting, but there’ll be education. There’ll be a 

requirement for additional health services across the country. 

There’ll need to be an enhancement of the blood system in a 

variety of different ways. 

 

This isn’t a simple issue that provides only an opportunity of a 

small payment. And I understand — and I’m sure that you 

understand that, I’m sure that the Kotyks understand that, and I 

know that all Canadians who are affected by this way 

understand that, and you need to allow us to complete the 

process with our federal friend. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. Next question. 

 

Report on Betaseron 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There seems to be a 

lack of compassion which exists in the members opposite. 

When this government finally brought Betaseron under the 

scope of the exception drug status, it was only after repeated 

calls by the Liberal opposition and MS (multiple sclerosis) 

victims being forced to beg for these drugs on the steps of the 

legislature. 

 

Now a freedom of information request has confirmed that the 

former Health minister sat on the findings of a report on 

Betaseron for nine months before making it public, while MS 

victims continued to suffer attacks; while their health 

deteriorated, the member from Saskatoon Mount Royal hid the 

findings of this report. 

 

My question for the Premier: we have to assume, Mr. Premier, 

that you instructed your minister to sit on this report. If not, will 

you not be . . . will you be calling for his resignation for his 

failure to live up to his responsibility to the chronically ill of 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as hepatitis C is a very 

difficult issue to address, as was MS, and the member opposite 

knows that there are a vast number of reviews that have been 

done, a number of studies that have been done on the value of 

the drugs, of Betaseron for MS patients in terms of 

rehabilitation and convalescence and treatment — the member 

knows that. And this government at no time has ever said — 

and closed the door — that we would not cover Betaseron from 

the first time that we looked at it. 

 

And again in September of this past year, I said to the member 

opposite and all MS patients that at this particular point in time 

we would not cover Betaseron. And the rationale behind that, 

Mr. Speaker, was that we have a new drug on the system, which 

was Copaxone. And I wanted a full review and examination of 

the benefits that these drugs would provide to Saskatchewan  

MS sufferers. 

 

As a result of that, that’s why you’ve seen the delay. Was it too 

long? Absolutely it was too long, Mr. Speaker. Are we going to 

have another method of dealing with this? — yes. We now have 

the task force on high-cost drugs to ensure that in the future we 

don’t experience the same kinds of issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In spite of 

repeated requests from the Liberal opposition during the last 

session of this legislature, the former Health minister refused to 

confirm he had received the report on Betaseron and what the 

findings were. Obviously he did not want to confirm the report 

at a time when the legislature was sitting and the federal 

election was looming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Premier, it smelt like a cover-up then and 

it smells like a cover-up now. How can you look in the mirror, 

Mr. Premier, when petty political games were played while MS 

victims were suffering attacks, their health was deteriorating, 

and they were forced to beg for Betaseron on the steps of the 

legislature. 

 

Now we have a similar situation with victims of hepatitis C. Do 

you have no more compassion left, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

should be reminded that the recommendation of the Formulary 

Committee was not to approve Betaseron. And the examination 

of the Department of Health and this government was to look 

fully to see how we might be able to enhance the lives of people 

who were affected with MS. And at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, why isn’t the member opposite standing up in this 

House and talking about what we have done for MS patients in 

this province. Why isn’t he doing that? For we’ve covered 

Betaseron, with only four other . . . three other provinces in this 

country. Six other provinces do not cover Betaseron. Why 

doesn’t the member talk about that? 

 

And why doesn’t the member opposite talk about the fact that 

we are the only province in Canada that covers Copaxone — 

the only province in Canada that covers Copaxone. Instead the 

member opposite dwells on process, on which this government 

and the Department of Health, it tried to ensure due diligence so 

MS patients in this province were well covered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, before orders of the day, the 

Chair has a number of tasks to complete. And the first thing I 

want to do is to introduce to the members the pages for the 

resumption of the second session of the twenty-third legislature. 

 

And I’ll ask if the pages will stand as I introduce them, or if 

they’re standing if they would wave. Daniel Abramson, 

Rebecca Fiissel, Kristina Potter, Graham Condo. And, hon. 

members, tomorrow Aamna Afsar will join these four pages. 



1952  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

I wish to advise all hon. members that the pages are volunteers 

from visitor services branch and the Legislative Library. Hon. 

members, your pages for this session. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair wishes to table the, pursuant to 

section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, the annual report on 

operations for the year ended March 31, 1997 by the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Also, pursuant to the Speaker’s decision of August 21, 1997 

regarding the status of opposition caucuses, I hereby table the 

decision and relevant documents. 

 

Also I table the audited financial statements and schedule of 

assets of the government caucus office for the fiscal year ended 

March 31, 1997. 

 

As well I table audited financial statements and schedule of 

assets of the opposition caucus office for the fiscal year ended 

March 31, 1997. 

 

Order. Also I table audited financial statements and schedule of 

assets of the third party caucus office for the fiscal year ended 

March 31, 1997. 

 

I also wish to table a members’ accountability and disclosure 

report for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1997. 

 

Also pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I 

table the Provincial Auditor’s 1997 Fall Report, Volume 1. And 

in accordance with the provisions of The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act, as well as The Local 

Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 

Act, I submit the fifth annual report from the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner. 

 

Also pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I 

table the Provincial Auditor’s business and financial plan for 

the year ended March 31, 1999 . . . Order. Order. 

 

I also table the audited financial statements and schedule of 

assets for the Progressive Conservative caucus for the period 

from April 1, 1997 to August 7, 1997. Order. Order. 

 

Also pursuant to section 14 . . . Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask — 

order — I will ask all hon. members on both sides of the House 

to . . . Order. I’ll ask the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale to 

come to order, please, and the Deputy Premier. And I will also 

ask the House Leader of the third party to come to order as 

well. Order. 

 

Pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I table the 

Provincial Auditor’s 1997 Fall Report, Volume 2. Order. And 

also I table the library report for the period ending March 31, 

1997. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on her 

feet? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — To propose . . . Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise to move the following procedural enabling 

motion by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That private members’ motions be designated as a special 

order on December 15, 17, 18, and 19, 1997 for the 

purpose of members of the opposition to move private 

members’ motions, with the topic of debate to be chosen in 

sequence each of the said days by the opposition, third 

party, and independent members, with order of rotation 

fixed so that the opposition topic of debate will take 

priority on December 15 and 18, the third party topic of 

debate will take priority on December 17, and an 

independent member’s topic of debate will take priority on 

December 19. And except that on December 17 and 

December 19, the second topic of debate taken up in the 

sequence shall be designated by the opposition. 

 

And further, that debate on any private member’s motion 

moved pursuant to this order be subject to time limits as 

follows: that debate on a private member’s motion moved 

by a member of the opposition, for a period of no longer 

than 60 minutes; that debate on a private member’s motion 

moved by a member of the third party, be for a period of 

no longer than 45 minutes; and that debate on a private 

member’s motion moved by an independent member, be 

for a period of time no longer than 25 minutes. 

 

And further, that at the expiration of the time designated 

for any private member’s motion made under this order, 

the Speaker shall interrupt proceedings, unless sooner 

concluded, in order to put every question necessary to 

dispose of the said motion. 

 

And further, that the notice of motion provisions provided 

under rule 18(2) be suspended for the purposes of this 

order so that private members’ motions moved on 

December 15 may be made without notice, but thereafter 

all other private members’ motions made under this order 

shall be required to have notice pursuant to rule 45. 

 

And further, that on December 16 a special order be 

designated for the purpose of a government motion to be 

moved without notice, and debate on the said motion shall 

continue no longer than until 4:45 p.m., at which time the 

Speaker shall interrupt proceedings, unless sooner 

concluded, in order to put every question necessary to 

dispose of the said motion. 

 

And further, that the mover of the said government motion 

will have a maximum of 30 minutes to speak to the motion, 

to be followed in sequence by a member of the opposition, 

followed by the member of the third party, both of whom 

will each have a maximum of 20 minutes to speak to the 

motion. Followed thereafter by independent members, who 

will have, cumulatively, a maximum of 15 minutes to 

speak to the motion, with the balance of time being 

available to any other member, who may speak to the 

motion for a maximum of 5 minutes. 

 

And further, that this order will expire upon adjournment 

of the Assembly on Friday, December 19, 1997. 



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

Leave granted. 

 

(1430) 

 

MOTION TO ESTABLISH A SPECIAL ORDER 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I move, seconded by the Opposition 

House Leader: 

 

That private members’ motions be designated as a special 

order on December 15, 17, 18, and 19, 1997, for the 

purpose of members of the opposition to move private 

members’ motions, with the topic of debate to be chosen 

in sequence each of the said days by the opposition, third 

party, and independent members, with order of rotation 

fixed so that the opposition topic of debate will take 

priority on December 15 and 18; the third party topic of 

debate will take priority on December 17, and an 

independent member’s topic of debate will take priority on 

December 19; and except that on December 17 and 

December 19, the second topic of debate taken up in the 

sequence shall be designated by the opposition, and 

further; 

 

That debate on any private member’s motion moved 

pursuant to this order be subject to time limits as follows: 

the debate on a private member’s motion moved by a 

member of the opposition be for a period of no longer than 

60 minutes; that debate on a private member’s motion 

moved by a member of the third party be for a period of no 

longer than 45 minutes; and that debate on a private 

member’s motion moved by an independent member be 

for a period of time no longer than 25 minutes, and 

further; 

 

That at the expiration of the time designated for any 

private member’s motion made under this order, the 

Speaker shall interrupt proceedings, unless sooner 

concluded, in order to put every question necessary to 

dispose of the said motion, and further; 

 

That the notice of motion provisions provided under rule 

18(2) be suspended for the purposes of this order so that 

private members’ motions moved on December 15 may be 

made without notice, but thereafter all other private 

members’ motions made under this order shall be required 

to have notice pursuant to rule 45, and further; 

 

That on December 16, a special order be designated for the 

purpose of a government motion to be moved without 

notice, and debate on the said motion shall continue no 

longer than until 4:45 p.m., at which time the Speaker 

shall interrupt proceedings, unless sooner concluded, in 

order to put every question necessary to dispose of the said 

motion, and further; 

 

That the mover of the said government motion will have a 

maximum of 30 minutes to speak to the motion, to be 

followed in sequence by a member of the opposition, 

followed by the member of the third party, both of whom 

will each have a maximum of 20 minutes to speak to the 

motion, followed thereafter by independent members, who 

will cumulatively have a maximum of 15 minutes to speak  

to the motion, with the balance of time being available to 

any other member, who may speak to the motion for a 

maximum of 5 minutes, and further; 

 

That this order will expire upon adjournment of the 

Assembly on Friday, December 19, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Night Hunting 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise today to address something that’s very 

important to the people of Saskatchewan and that’s the issue of 

night hunting, on which I’ll be moving a resolution at the end of 

my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very time-sensitive issue. It’s important 

right now for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. First off, 

because of the safety of Saskatchewan citizens; secondly, 

because of the depletion of our natural resources, our big game. 

And some people would say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s an issue of 

fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the government this past week 

and in question period today a little bit about what their 

response is to this issue. And I think the term, little, is 

appropriate in this particular case, because it is an extremely 

little response. 

 

We brought this issue up, Mr. Speaker, during the last session 

back in February. The minister at that time didn’t believe it was 

an issue. It wasn’t a crisis. There was no need for action. He 

was going to meet and review the situation with his department 

and with people affected. It’s taken him a year almost, Mr. 

Speaker, to finally say we’re going to do something. 

 

He’s not exactly saying what he’s going to do, but he is going 

to do something in February, so a year from the time that we 

first brought this issue forward. And it wasn’t just an issue that 

came forward in February, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This was an issue that came forward the fall before, during 

hunting season of that year, when it became evident that there 

was a serious depletion of big game at that time; that night 

hunting was one of the causes of that game depletion. 

 

But after this fall, after the NDP’s convention, the minister did 

come out fairly quickly and make a statement, because the NDP 

membership at their annual convention supported a move to ban 

night hunting. Now some people have attributed that to the 

minister’s move. I think, Mr. Speaker, it was more likely the 

fact that we were going to have this fall session and the minister 

didn’t want to get caught in the headlights. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, his response last week was indeed just that. 

He was caught in the headlights like a deer and didn’t know 

which way to turn, and he finally had to say something. And he 

finally responded. 



1954  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

Now he doesn’t know what he’s going to do with his response. 

Some people are saying he said this. Some people are saying he 

said that. No one in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, knows what 

this minister intends to do, if he intends to do anything. 

 

I think it’s very incumbent on the government, on the cabinet, 

on the Premier, to do something about this particular issue. The 

minister has talked about restricting spotlight hunting, and he’s 

mentioned truck lights and other night-scopes and those kinds 

of things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s talked about . . . I heard him on the 

radio this morning saying that in southern Saskatchewan 

hunting with artificial lights would be restricted, would be 

banned for everyone. 

 

It went on to say that in the North though, however, it may be 

possible to hunt at night. Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, if it’s 

a danger to Saskatchewan citizens in southern Saskatchewan to 

hunt at night, isn’t it also a danger to citizens in northern 

Saskatchewan if someone is hunting at night? 

 

The minister talks about it being bright up north in the night. 

Well there are days, Mr. Speaker, in southern Saskatchewan 

when with a full moon and snow on the ground, it can be fairly 

bright. But not every evening, not every night, Mr. Speaker, has 

a full moon, has snow on the ground, and is bright. But the 

minister in his comments seemed to indicate that any night up 

north would be fine for hunting. 

 

One of the problems that the minister’s comments bring 

forward is this will not take into . . . won’t take effect until next 

year; so we have another entire season to go through before any 

regulations, any restrictions are put in place. And he still leaves 

undefined the meaning of the terms, unpopulated area, and it 

still leaves the leeway of Metis hunting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But who is penalized by this? The people who are penalized are 

those today who buy hunting licences. The minister has talked 

of restricting certain areas. Well in restricting hunters in certain 

areas, the only people he has the ability to restrict under the 

current regulations are people who buy hunting licences. 

Everyone else is still entitled to go ahead and do exactly the 

same hunting they were doing previously. 

 

And his rationale for this course of action, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that he believes the courts will not allow any regulation that 

might infringe on treaty rights. Well, Mr. Speaker, that might be 

the case, but in Manitoba and Alberta they have put in 

regulations that ban night hunting, and as of yet they have not 

been challenged in the courts. And they have those laws in 

place now for approximately three years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at least we would get three years worth of 

reprieve, three years worth of safety for Saskatchewan citizens, 

three years for which our wildlife to recover if these kind of 

laws and regulations were put in place in Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba legislation forbids the discharge 

of a firearm anytime after one-half hour after sunset and 

one-half hour before sunrise. It seems to be effective, Mr. 

Speaker, because the poachers, the night hunters from 

Manitoba, do it in Saskatchewan. They don’t do it at home —  

they do it in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, our wildlife resources are being 

depleted at four times —four times — the normal rate. We have 

heard reports, Mr. Speaker, of widespread Indian and Metis 

groups coming across from Manitoba to hunt in Saskatchewan. 

In fact we’ve heard reports of people coming in from Ontario to 

hunt in Saskatchewan, and Alberta, to hunt in Saskatchewan, 

because in their own jurisdictions there are rules and regulations 

in place which do not allow for indiscriminate hunting. We 

need the same kind of rules and regulations as are across the 

rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker. Why is Saskatchewan an island 

unto itself? Why is Saskatchewan becoming an island denuded 

of large game animals, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Last February, in a response to reports of depletion at that time, 

the minister said, it’s not a crisis. We are not in a position to say 

any one cause is responsible for declining game populations at 

this time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he may not have been in a place to make 

those comments at that time, but if he had contacted his 

department and asked the questions — because the information 

was coming from one of his own department representatives — 

they were saying that indiscriminate night hunting, 

indiscriminate hunting by Indians and Metis, were the cause of 

the game depletion. Year after year after year, Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen a declining number of licences issued to hunters and 

yet the big game populations are decreasing dramatically, 

particularly up in the Hudson Bay area of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This was a problem a year ago and nothing has been done about 

it to date. It will be a problem a year from now if that minister 

isn’t prepared to act, Mr. Speaker. And he has to act 

immediately, because while the government is sitting on their 

hands, Mr. Speaker, people’s lives are at risk. People don’t let 

their children go out to play after dark for fear of being shot. 

People are having their cattle shot, Mr. Speaker, during the 

night from night hunters. And no action is taken, Mr. Speaker, 

no action at all in these cases, because nobody comes out to 

check. 

 

When someone in a rural area phones the game department and 

says somebody is out night hunting in my pasture or the field 

across the road or wherever the case may be, what’s the 

conservation officer’s response? Generally, Mr. Speaker, there 

is no response, because they say, what’s the point of me coming 

out? I can’t do anything about it anyways. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we see the case where the conservation 

officers are not prepared to go out at night because the 

government refuses to issue them side-arms. That’s a separate 

issue, Mr. Speaker, but what it does is allow more and more 

people to abuse the law and night hunt. The minister stood up in 

question period and said they have a rule no. 41 in the Act that 

says no one is allowed to use a spotlight or any other artificial 

means to hunt at night. So, Mr. Speaker, when is he going to 

enforce it? He certainly isn’t doing it now and I suspect he will 

not be doing it in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other part of the issue is the destruction of our 

wildlife reserves. If the minister doesn’t act soon, Mr. Speaker,  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

he will not have to act at all — there will be no big game left in 

Saskatchewan. Moose and elk in Saskatchewan will be similar 

to the dodo birds in Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be 

history. 

 

We will talk about them fondly but we will not see them. Your 

children and mine will not be seeing them. And we’re not that 

far from it. We have a chance though, Mr. Speaker, to allow 

those stocks to replenish, but only, Mr. Speaker, if we get the 

indiscriminate hunting under control, if the government is 

allowed to manage the wildlife resources like they should be, 

Mr. Speaker — like we all expect them to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we met last week with one of the chiefs of one of 

the bands. He believes that there is a problem here; that there 

needs to be a solution found. But, Mr. Speaker, he admits that 

we can’t wait too long either; that it has to be done as soon as 

possible. But yet the minister simply says we’re going to talk 

about it. Well we can talk and we can talk and we can talk, but 

if all you’re going to do is talk, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

resolution. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the solutions to this, the 

minister’s is to penalize those who are already purchasing the 

hunting licences. Mr. Speaker, that is not a good solution; that’s 

an impossible solution. 

 

(1445) 

 

You have to go back to the cause, to the root of the problem, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s indiscriminate night hunting, which 

needs to be banned across Saskatchewan, not just in half of 

Saskatchewan, not in a small portion, not in designated areas, 

but the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Night hunting across North America has been agreed to be 

unacceptable. It needs to be unacceptable in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Therefore I’m calling on the minister, on his 

colleagues, on the Liberal members, on the independent 

members, to support our caucus in the following resolution. 

 

And I would like to move this resolution, seconded by the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for not 

dealing with the ongoing problems of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan and the effects this dangerous practice has 

on the safety of Saskatchewan people, the depletion of our 

province’s wildlife and our ecosystem, and the loss of 

millions of dollars in tourism to our province; and further 

demand the government immediately follow the province 

of Manitoba and ban all night hunting in the province of 

Saskatchewan instead of continuing to ignore this issue. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as we said, I’m 

happy to go ahead and second that particular motion. 

 

There a number of things that I think that we need to be aware 

of. In the discussion of night hunting, that has been excellent 

cooperation on behalf . . . on the part of our aboriginal 

communities. They agree that night hunting is a problem. They  

agree that there is a safety problem over there. They agree with 

the fact that with the night hunting you have game that may be 

not always be brought in. They agree with the danger to the 

residents of the area. 

 

And so it’s surprising, with all that agreement that’s out there 

for the concerns for night hunting, that this government has 

taken literally years to start to put the whole program together 

and to even admit at this particular point that there is a problem 

and that they may actually be doing something about it. 

 

Game numbers are always a concern to people living off the 

land and people living near the land. And I think in a province 

such as Saskatchewan, which is as open and as free as it is, it is 

a concern to every single individual in this particular province. 

 

It is not in the interests of either the aboriginal or the 

non-aboriginal communities to see wildlife depleted. And it 

matters not where we go in this particular province of ours, on a 

holiday or on a trip, that we run into some of the beautiful 

sights that we have. Whether we’re down with the elk in the 

Cypress Hills and we say this is truly unique, this is a very 

special sort of a place. Antelope in the south-west part of the 

province as well. Whether we talk about moose in the North or 

deer throughout our whole province, it’s something that we’re 

very fortunate in this province to have and every single 

individual in this province has a responsibility to make sure that 

wildlife is not depleted. 

 

Merril Fiddler, communications director of the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan local 269, said, and I quote: “Metis people are as 

concerned about wildlife as anyone else.” 

 

So when we have that kind of a statement from communications 

directors, why has it taken this government so long to even 

think that there’s a problem, to even think about maybe they 

should take some form of action. And as we’ve seen, the action 

they’ve taken is too little too late and won’t do much good in 

the future either. 

 

There are widespread reports of Indian and Metis people 

coming from Manitoba to Saskatchewan to night hunt. And 

we’ve talked particularly about the area in the north-east corner 

of our province. And we know it’s true. But it’s not just in the 

north-east corner of the province. It happened to elk last year in 

the Cypress Hills. There is no antelope season in Saskatchewan 

this year, and yet they were still being hunted. And what did our 

government do? The same thing they did last year — nothing. 

 

And so we have numbers that are so low that there can’t be a 

season on it, and yet they’re not enforcing any of the protection 

of the wildlife that needs to be done. 

 

All native groups know that spotlight hunting is not a part of 

traditional hunting — never has been. But where is this 

government? — just doesn’t want to wake up to the problems 

that are out there. 

 

In the answer that was given earlier on, the minister said 

something about the various treaties that were out there. Well 

we need some definitions. We need a definition of the Metis 

Nation that is not as vague and undefined as it is right now. No 

one knows how many there are in the province. No one knows  



1956  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

what the effect on hunting in Saskatchewan’s going to be. 

 

To allow any group to be unrealistically encompassing in 

membership is questionable at best. But when this places 

support requirements on the rest of society; when businesses, 

from outfitters to tourism, are damaged; and the very natural 

resources that make Saskatchewan special are in danger, then it 

is no longer just questionable, it is also unacceptable. 

 

Jim Deroucher, provincial president of the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, describes the Metis status application process as 

a kind of honour system. Now that in itself is honourable and 

will work very well for all the people of Saskatchewan who are 

honourable. But as Shakespeare himself said, everyone may not 

be. And so that opens a very large door for misuse. 

 

No census of the Metis population has ever been done. And 

you, Mr. Minister, do not know how many people are out there 

hunting. You have no idea. The government response is, and I 

quote from the minister: 

 

If Metis people abuse their aboriginal hunting rights by 

killing too many animals, the provincial government may 

declare some areas of . . . province off limits to hunting 

 

And then comes an interesting part. 

 

In the worst case scenario, if the moose or whatever are 

completely wiped out, we will close . . . hunting in that 

area to allow the population to build back up. 

 

So it looks like we’re going to go to the place where we have 

nothing left of the population and then we’ll shut down hunting. 

Well I suggest to you, that is a very barn-door operation — 

when what we will do is wait till the last animal is gone and 

then we’ll decide there’s no hunting in the area. 

 

How utterly ludicrous to do that. Why wait till our wildlife 

population is gone? Why wait till our outfitters are broke? Why 

wait till our tourism falls flat on its face? And why wait till 

we’ve destroyed a major part of what all of Saskatchewan is 

about, and that is our natural resources? 

 

And that particular quote from the minister comes from 

Star-Phoenix, December 14 of ’96. I think what we must make 

sure that what happens here is that a few hunters are not 

penalized for the actions of a few other ones. We must make 

sure that what happens is fair and just for everyone. 

 

It is urgent that the province have comprehensive laws to deal 

with all residents in a fair manner. Metis and natives claim 

hunting rights under the Constitution Act and the Natural 

Resources Transfer Act of 1930. However, according to Metis 

lawyer, Clem Chartier, both allow infringement of hunting 

rights for justifiable grounds, one of which is conservation. 

 

And one of the key things we’re talking about in this whole 

thing is conservation. When our wildlife populations become 

endangered, the numbers are going down and we have to stop 

all hunting altogether, as has happened with the antelope 

situation, then those justifiable grounds, the ground of 

conservation, is in fact there. 

Aboriginals claim a need to retain the right to hunt for food and 

we have no argument with that, but this was put in place when 

there were no social safety nets. No hunting at that time would 

have brought about the death and starvation of those whole 

populations. They needed to be able to be allowed to hunt. 

 

We must however, deal with our resources as they are today 

and the people of this province as our society is today. In 

Manitoba, Metis have been required to prove that they use 

hunting as a major source of food and we need to do that in 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

And the government, it appears, are using the courts and Metis 

rights as the excuse not to do anything. Other jurisdictions have 

acted on these issues and they have acted successfully. 

Therefore I ask the support of every member in this House for 

this piece of legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 

appreciate the opportunity to speak on this very important and 

current issue. It is obvious that this is a very real concern with 

the people of Saskatchewan, obvious in many ways, including 

the number of petitions which were presented, tabled here today 

by the members opposite. 

 

I can assure that the members opposite and everyone else that I 

share the concerns expressed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

We have received a very clear message that enough is enough 

when it comes to unsafe night hunting and we are working 

towards that. We are continuing to work towards resolving this 

very complex and even volatile issue out there in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However, I do oppose the motion as presented by the members 

opposite because a total ban on all night hunting in 

Saskatchewan will not work. And we in fact have . . . our 

Wildlife Act states in section 41: 

 

No person shall, at any time, use a searchlight, spotlight, 

flashlight, jacklight, night light, headlight, or any other 

light or cast a ray of light for the purpose of hunting any 

wildlife. 

 

So we have this law on the books, Mr. Speaker, but apparent 

. . . obviously the courts and treaty rights, aboriginal rights, 

have superseded this legislation. So what we must do is find a 

solution and that’s what we are doing. 

 

The treaties, Mr. Speaker, which were passed over a hundred 

years ago now, clearly stated that aboriginal people, that treaty 

Indians, have the right to hunt and fish day or night and by any 

means. Now some have questioned, in those days when the 

treaties were signed, the aboriginal people hunted with bow and 

arrow, so they should still be doing that. Well the response to 

that, Mr. Speaker, is when farmers started farming here a 

hundred years ago, they used horse and oxen and one-furrow 

ploughs. 

 

The courts have indicated that as technology and more 

information comes forward, the aboriginal people can use these, 

this technology and new ways of doing things, like anyone else. 

 

In 1964 the Supreme Court of Canada ruled, in what was called  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

the Prince decision, that indeed aboriginal people have the right 

to use lights for hunting at night and that decision has stood. 

There’s been other challenges since that time, and in 1990 the 

Grumbo . . . or sorry the Sparrow decision was ruled by the 

Supreme Court of Canada. The Sparrow decision was very 

significant. The Sparrow decision said, if there was good 

reason, for an examples, public safety or conservation, treaty 

rights may be encroached upon, but only minimally and this can 

only be done after adequate consultation. So that is the avenue 

we are looking at. 

 

On top of this, Mr. Speaker, we have the Grumbo decision of 

1996, where the court ruled that Metis have the same rights as 

treaty Indians for the purposes of hunting and fishing. So unlike 

the courts in Manitoba, which ruled they do not have that right, 

this has created a bigger additional problem for us, but we are 

. . . we have appealed that decision. The appeal was heard in 

June and we are awaiting for the results of that appeal. 

 

As I referred to the Sparrow case, Mr. Speaker, this is what we 

are looking at. Obviously there is a problem out there, safety 

and conservation. And we do respect the treaty rights and we 

are looking at how we can solve this problem. And certainly 

consultation is clearly outlined as one of these processes. So we 

are at the stage now where we’ve been working with the various 

first nation bands for over a year on this important issue. And 

we commend the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

and their leaders, along with the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan 

and their leaders, who have come to the table, who also 

recognize this is a very serious problem and they too want to 

end unsafe night hunting. 

 

They are concerned about safety and conservation, like 

everyone else. And they have also publicly condemned the use 

of lights for hunting at night and they have said this is not an 

original treaty right — this is not an original practice carried out 

by aboriginal people. 

 

(1500) 

 

So we are working to resolve this very important issue with the 

FSIN and it is our goal to ultimately end unsafe night hunting, 

which would include the use of any lights in Saskatchewan, 

while respecting the treaty rights. 

 

Conservation is certainly a very important issue in addition to 

the safety. We will be carrying out very extensive aerial 

surveys, if and when we get some snow to do this work in the 

new year. All reports indicate that in some areas the moose 

population is down considerably and there’s other pockets 

where there may be problems. We will be addressing this, and if 

need be we can create a game preserve which will eliminate all 

hunting. And we will not wait until a species is completely 

wiped out; we will make sure that the population is still viable. 

But if we have to, we can take the steps to curtail any hunting. 

 

We believe that the cooperative approach of working together is 

much preferred and is our only hope, rather than the 

heavy-handed approach that has consistently failed in court. We 

look forward to consulting, as required, with the FSIN and the 

Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, and certainly other groups like 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. We will have a solution  

to the unsafe night hunting issue following meaningful 

consultations, which will end with the FSIN chiefs’ conference 

around February 1. Within a couple of weeks after that we will 

have a solution to this. 

 

I guess in closing, we will continue to respect treaty and 

aboriginal rights, but we are also committed to ending unsafe 

night hunting in Saskatchewan and we look forward to seeing 

this day a few weeks down the road. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to support the motion put forward by the member from 

Cannington regarding the problems associated with night 

hunting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had a number of Humboldt constituents 

bring to my attention their complete disapproval with night 

hunting. They have spoken of their fears connected to the 

obvious dangers and they’re wondering why government would 

allow the extremely hazardous condition to continue on. 

 

In addition, the big game population is being seriously eroded 

and the people of my constituency would like the government 

to do something now in order to expedite the process as soon as 

possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

also rise in support of the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I personally have only hunted one season in my 

life and that was because my father-in-law was an avid hunter. 

And when I was first dating my present wife you had to do the 

things that you had to do in order to impress a potential 

father-in-law, and one of them was to go hunting. Mr. Speaker, 

it would probably be a lot more riskier now if he could take his 

son-in-law; after 30 years it may be a different situation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that really, really concerned 

me in my one season of hunting experience with my 

father-in-law was the whole issue surrounding safety. Mr. 

Speaker, it struck me that even when you have hunters properly 

attired in the daylight with reflective coveralls and things of that 

nature, many times when you’re in the bush and you’re 

tramping, looking for an animal to hunt, you very often are 

misled by what your eyes see, and every year unfortunately and 

tragically, there are a number of hunting accidents — and some 

of them fatalities — in the hunting season in daylight hours, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly that is always an issue that we have to 

have before us first and foremost. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the situation is 

compounded by a hundredfold in night hunting. Certainly that if 

a person with a spotlight captures an animal in the rays of that 

spotlight, you can see the animal, and you freeze the animal and 

you shoot. The problem is you don’t see anything that’s beyond 

the range of that spotlight and we all know that the bullet goes a 

lot further than the range of the lights. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister saying that 

they’re really concerned about the safety issue, but the safety  



1958  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

issue didn’t just suddenly happen this weekend. The safety 

issue has always been there. The safety issue should have been 

something that we’d talked seriously about all along. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is the problem here. There’s a number of 

problems with this issue and the first and foremost one, in my 

experience, is the issue surrounding safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that when we look at some of these 

fundamental issues that there can be surely no argument about, 

that surely we should find a way to be able to act very quickly 

and very effectively in order to address the seriousness of that 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are genuinely fearful. In the areas where 

the hunting is actually occurring, it’s been reported that people 

see lights at night in a haphazard and a random way, and people 

are almost certain before any shots are fired that what’s 

happening is people are spotlighting for game animals. 

 

And so what we have, Mr. Speaker, is people then on their 

farmyards who see the lights and are fearful for what it means 

for the safety of themselves and their families. And so what 

happens, you got to go into your house or you got to go into 

your basement in order to protect yourself from the fact that a 

random, stray bullet potentially could do serious damage 

beyond the range of those spotlights. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it strikes me as strange, as what we’ve 

been doing is talking for over a year about something as 

fundamental as safety. Surely something could have been done 

a lot sooner, particularly when we recognize that other 

provinces have recognized this great danger and have banned 

all hunting at night, period; discharge of firearms in the instance 

in Manitoba, period. And not just for hunting, period, because 

they recognize how dangerous to discharge a firearm at night 

may be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what this motion talks about is the discharge 

of firearms for hunting purposes, because there may be 

instances where a farmer has to shoot a skunk that’s terrorizing 

his chickens or something of that nature that is justifiable and is 

reasonable. But hunting never can be. 

 

The other thing that I think is very important to think about in 

the whole safety issue is what it does to people generally when 

they realize that this is going on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s happened is people have become so fearful 

and so upset about this very issue, and so upset about the fact 

that the government has been so extremely slow to take any 

action at all — and then only now when pressured not by the 

logic of safety, but being pressured by the signatures on 

petitions; not by the logic of safety, but being pressured by the 

fact that we’ve been raising this issue for sometime — finally 

the government acknowledges that it’s at least talking. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, simply is not good enough in people’s 

minds and so you end up with people saying, if the government 

is not willing to act, we’ve got to take matters into our own 

hands. And it concerns me a great deal. 

 

And I notice in an article from the P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald, 

October 22, 1997, where Candle Lake residents are quoted as  

saying they’re ready to take on poachers. And Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to quote from that. It says: 

 

“Night hunting has taken off again this fall,” . . . (Not for 

the first time, again.) “From mid-September to 

mid-October is the worst time because it seems that night 

hunting is the favourite time for Indian and Metis hunters, 

and the . . . (conservation officers) are not responding to 

calls. 

 

“If SERM . . . is not going to enforce the law then it’s 

going to be up us to do it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concerns me a great deal. When you have 

people so concerned about their safety that they’re willing to 

consider taking the law into their own hands, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a concern to me and it should be a concern to all citizens 

of this province. 

 

And this government should be held responsible for not only 

not doing anything this whole while, now coming up with a 

very, very half-hearted effort while people’s safety is at risk 

here, Mr. Speaker. Safety is a constant that we have to deal with 

and we have to deal with effectively and efficiently, and I urge 

all members to support this Bill because it’ll deal with the issue 

today. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today, 

Mr. Speaker, to include a few words with this debate in terms of 

defending motherhood and apple pie. Obviously those of us in 

south-west Saskatchewan, from the Cypress Hills, would want 

to do that. 

 

I think I would be remiss, though, if I missed the opportunity to 

not congratulate the Nekaneet Band, who reside in my 

constituency, on their forthright moves in the past and I think 

shown even today in trying to cooperate with and live with the 

neighbours in our community. 

 

It is true that night hunting is a bad thing and it is true that some 

people do that sort of thing, but I would say that the fathers of 

the Nekaneet reservation have shown an example to all of us in 

the past few weeks wherein they have said that they will adopt a 

program of non-drinking in order to show the way by example 

to the young people in the band. 

 

They’ve had some problems with drinking in the band and that 

sort of thing by the young people and so they took the initiative 

and said we’re going to abstain to show the young people how 

to live. 

 

That is the kind of cooperation the Nekaneet Band has shown in 

everything that’s come up in terms of getting along with the 

community in the past and would do so in the future. I have no 

reason to suspect that they wouldn’t go along with sitting down 

and negotiating some kind of a plan with the minister so that we 

no longer will see this as a problem. 

 

They don’t want anybody to get shot in the dark. They only 

want to feed their people, and have the right to do that. And the 

folks down there are definitely willing to work along with  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

everyone else. There have been complaints from the 

conservation officers about people coming in from outside 

reservations and depleting our gene pool, especially in the 

larger animal categories. Animals with the big horns, of course, 

are the attraction for hunters that pay big bucks to be out there, 

and that is another issue that needs to be addressed. 

 

We got to talk about how we’re going to preserve some of the 

gene pools out in our herds throughout the province, but it’s not 

my band in the Cypress Hills that causes the problems. And I 

just want the people of Saskatchewan to know that if they want 

somebody to set an example of cooperation and getting along, 

they should talk to Larry Oakes and his band because they 

certainly are good people. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, again, Mr. Speaker. I would also 

like to add my voice to the very real concerns my colleagues 

have over the night hunting issue in Saskatchewan. The effects 

this dangerous practice has on the safety of the people in 

Saskatchewan, the depletion of our population of our province’s 

wildlife and our ecosystem, and the loss of millions of dollars in 

tourism to our province is not being addressed by the 

wishy-washy response the government gave to night hunting. 

 

I’m not surprised, because taking a stand on anything except 

taxes and cutting services has been something they’ve done for 

the last six years, but it is disappointing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, living in a constituency with three reserves and 

large tracts of forest with wildlife, the issue of night hunting is 

one that affects many of the people of my area. These people 

have to live with the consequences of night hunting, while 

many of the fellow members of the legislature and their 

constituents have only a vague idea of the true consequences. 

 

Maybe we should have gone about explaining the problem in a 

different way. Maybe we should just have talked about the loss 

of money and it would have got more attention. 

 

Most Saskatchewan people can see that those of aboriginal 

ancestry have a right to hunt for sustenance as part of their 

treaty agreement, and some may question the meaning of 

sustenance. Is someone who’s making over $25,000 a year 

considered living on sustenance or is that only if you are on 

social services? 

 

While we could debate the issue of the true meaning of it, the 

real point is that the issue of night hunting and depleting the 

animal population and placing those who live within the 

proximity of forests in danger of . . . in their own homes that are 

in danger. 

 

You may scoff at the idea of living in the close proximity to 

reserves or forests as being dangerous, but the facts are there. 

I’ve been approached by many constituents who are living in 

fear. Just last week one of the gentlemen in our area who lives 

close to a reserve heard shots at night and was telling me he’d 

bought a brand new tractor and placed it in the shed for the 

winter. The next morning when he got up there was a flat tire 

on the tractor and there were bullets holes in the side of the 

shed. Fortunately the bullet was in the shed and not in his home. 

 

Many people choose to live in rural Saskatchewan because the  

sense of security that they have there, and yet now they are 

beginning to be afraid for their lives. Our homes are considered 

a source of security from the outside world. Should families that 

are living close to forest and native communities have to fear 

for their safety because government is unwilling to pass a law 

that would discontinue the unsafe practice of night hunting? 

 

(1515) 

 

It is not only the residents who live close to reserves or forests 

who are concerned about night hunting, our enforcement 

officers are as well. A couple of weeks ago I went on a ride 

along with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and 

they expressed their concerns about the practice of night 

hunting and the ramifications it had on the safety of residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope it doesn’t take a fatality before this 

government is willing to do the banning that is necessary. The 

provinces of Alberta and Manitoba seem to be more interested 

in protecting the residents of their provinces than this 

government. They have placed the ban that we need on hunting. 

 

The issue isn’t only one of safety. It is one of defamation of our 

wildlife population due to unsportsmanlike hunting practices. If 

this government continues to drag its feet on this issue we will 

no longer have a moose population to protect. 

 

The government says they will do a study on the moose 

population this year and if the accounts from the hunters in my 

constituency who have hunted for 20 or 30 years are accurate, 

I’m sure they will find that this population is in serious danger 

of being decimated in north-eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

The hunters that are living there know what’s going on. Many 

hunters went to their favourite hunting spot for a week or two 

this fall and didn’t see any signs of moose. When they’re 

stopping at the stores, in the hotels and the restaurants, and 

talking to fellow hunters the talk centred around the lack of 

game. 

 

And when the hunters leave, the talk centres around the future 

of the towns where the animals are all gone and what will 

happen when hunters no longer come to our area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that when the treaties were signed 

giving aboriginals the right to hunt the intent was not to give 

them the right to endanger lives. I’m sure that when we do some 

changing in here I think that the people in my constituency are 

saying let’s look at the treaties. They have to be . . . we have to 

look at them and appreciate the intent in which they were 

written. But we also have to work with everyone in our area, 

and everyone has to live within what is happening with our . . . 

with the population as well. 

 

Another factor that must be considered in the night hunting is 

the decrease in tourist dollars to rural Saskatchewan in the 

eastern part of our province. Tourism is considered 

Saskatchewan’s fastest growing and fourth largest industry, yet 

the government is quite willing to drag its feet and let rural 

Saskatchewan businesses suffer at the decrease in tourist dollars 

created by the hunting season. 

 

I spoke to the owner of the Fishermans Cove in Greenwater  



1960  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

Park near Porcupine. This is an area where there is usually an 

abundance of moose and the area businesses rely on the annual 

hunting season. For those of you who have never been there, 

Fisherman’s Cove offers meals, a lounge where hunters gather 

in the evenings for accommodation, and a store for gas and 

supplies. 

 

They report this year the number of hunters were down and the 

dollars that were generated during hunting season were 

decreased. Those who came were disappointed with the lack of 

animals in the area and many expressed concerns about night 

hunting. Many were also concerned with the increase of hunters 

from out of province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns and the priorities at Fishermans Cove 

are not isolated. Many of the small hotels and restaurants were 

also affected by a reduction in business due to a reduction in 

hunters and game. Many of you read the three-part series in the 

Star-Phoenix on night hunting, about the concerns of people in 

the Hudson Bay area, and they are very real concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time for the government to take action to 

protect its people and its wildlife population and it’s time to 

pass legislation that bans all night hunting. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased as well to enter this debate about night hunting, in view 

of the fact that it’s a concern that’s been raised by a number of 

my own constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost immediately when the courts overruled and 

allowed for Metis hunting in the evening, gave them basically 

the same privileges as aboriginal peoples in our province, well 

I’ve had calls to my office from people concerned about their 

very safety, certainly in the evenings. And the fact that in our 

area, outside of an area that was very close to where the 

aboriginal community would have formerly hunted, the fact that 

it became more local, many people were becoming very 

concerned as some of my colleagues have already mentioned. 

 

They brought up the fact that they could see spotlights in the 

area that they had never seen before. Dusk had fallen, or even, 

say, in that later part of the evening, in that 10 or 11 o'clock 

range, they’d hear gunshots and there was a fear, if they were 

outside, what if a stray bullet happened to go through the 

farmyard? 

 

Because in most cases when you talk about night hunting, and 

especially when you’re dealing with individuals who may not 

be familiar with the area and they’re out night hunting, Mr. 

Speaker, the concern is the fact that they’re shooting 

sporadically. They’re not really aware of what might be on the 

other side of that spotlight, what direction they might be firing, 

and they might be firing in fact right into a farmyard. 

 

And so it’s an issue that has come to the forefront and that 

people have been very concerned about and I think, Mr. 

Speaker . . . This article talks about night hunting, “Partial ban 

on night hunting not enough.” The comment, the first paragraph 

or sentence reads: 

 

The province will ban night hunting in most of 

Saskatchewan by the end of February, a move critics  

charge will be too little, too late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even just talking to a number of individuals in my 

area who are avid hunters and who have been out hunting, they 

said this fall was one of the most difficult falls to hunt in and 

part of the reason was, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have 

enjoyed a very special fall. It’s been one of the nicest falls 

we’ve had on record. The temperatures have been nice and so, 

as a result, the game have been basically back in the bush and 

it’s taken a lot more work to try and find that animal — that 

elusive animal — that you’re after. 

 

But as well, Mr. Speaker, we’re also noting that we’re not 

seeing the amount of animals that we have, even that we saw 

last fall. The number . . . I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that SGI is probably more than pleased not just with the 

elements we’ve had this fall, but even with the winter we had 

last year as a result of the reduced numbers of animals and that 

reduction has certainly led to, I would have to perceive, a lesser 

volume of wild animal claims on vehicles. And I can certainly 

attest to that fact that even for the amount of driving I do, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have not seen the same amount of animals. 

 

So when you add the weather elements combined with the 

increased activity and hunting certainly of the Metis people in 

our province . . . and I would suggest as well that in many cases 

I hear more complaints coming as a result of people coming up 

from other provinces into our province as a result of the loose 

hunting laws we have in our province, And I have talked to 

certainly Metis people themselves who are quite concerned 

about this problem. 

 

So I think it’s more than fitting that here we are December 15, 

in the fall of 1997, that we are debating this issue because it is 

an issue that is on the forefront and in the forefront of people’s 

minds — an issue that they feel quite strongly about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about local residents I think we 

forget as well about individuals who may be travelling up and 

down our road system, our rural road system, and if you have 

someone out night hunting . . . As someone said to me the other 

evening they saw lights about half a mile away just bombing 

around the field and their fear was: are these hunters? Are they 

looking to stir up deer? Are they going to be shooting? What’s 

going to happen? Are they going to be shooting in our 

direction? It’s not just the residents living in farmyards, what 

about the person travelling down the road who may end up in a 

scary situation. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time the Minister of the 

Environment and responsible for natural resources in this 

province certainly stood up and addressed this issue. 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation has raised it for a number of 

years and hunters have raised it for a number of years, Mr. 

Speaker. Resource officers are raising the issue because they’re 

finding themselves in the position that cut-backs and 

government spending have basically taken people out of the 

field and as a result we have, if you will, just a freedom to 

abuse the laws. And unfortunately we don’t even have the laws 

that the resource officers can utilize to indeed address the 

situation of night hunting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we look at Manitoba, we see in Manitoba that  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

they ban all discharge of firearms at night regardless of persons’ 

Indian or Metis status. And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, to my 

knowledge that that law has not been challenged. There are 

fines of up to $50,000 or a year in prison or even the 

impoundment of your vehicle. Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

the costs that people are putting into buying rifles, buying their 

licences, the types of vehicles they use, it certainly becomes 

quite an impediment, and certainly an obstacle to be looking at 

very carefully. If indeed you’re out hunting and you disobey the 

rules in Manitoba and all of these circumstances come into play, 

it’s a fair cost to you as a hunter. 

 

One exception though, they have . . . if Indian and Metis 

persons can prove they were subsistent hunting, and that’s the 

one thing that Manitoba does allow — sustenance hunting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think in this province as well our 

aboriginal people and our Metis people firmly believe in that, 

and I think when you look at . . . when you talk to them, you 

will find many people feel quite satisfied that in daylight hours 

they certainly do have an opportunity to hunt so that they can 

provide for their families. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some of the arguments that the minister is 

giving, some of the arguments that the government is bringing 

forward, I don’t believe, really hold water. I believe that there 

are areas the minister could move in, the Premier could move 

in, and his government, to address this issue today. The fact that 

the minister has said that they are looking at it and they hope to 

have some legislation here in the spring does not address the 

immediate concern. And the fact that this . . . the night hunting 

is going to be a problem that will go on through the winter 

months and become more of a problem and I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be . . . 

 

I guess what we need to do and what we’re asking the 

government, asking the minister, is to show some leadership., 

We’re here right now, the session has been called, we have the 

opportunity to debate this issue even in a greater manner. We 

would ask the minister if he would bring a piece of legislation 

to the floor of this Assembly today. We would certainly, over 

the next few days, be able and be more than willing to debate 

the issue if it was meaningful and it really addressed the 

concerns out there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in order to give some of my colleagues an 

opportunity to address this issue as well, I will end by 

suggesting that the people are behind this issue. The public of 

Saskatchewan believe that it needs to be addressed. I believe the 

government is hearing that and I believe the minister 

responsible and certainly the Premier could give some real 

leadership and show that a fall session can do something 

meaningful and can address concerns that really are on the 

minds of individuals. 

 

And I certainly stand with my colleagues in support of the 

resolution that’s been brought forward. I would ask all members 

of this Assembly to work with us to address this issue by 

passing this resolution. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, today to speak on the 

night-hunting issue, which I’ve been at meetings in the last two,  

three weeks out in the Kamsack, Togo, Runnymede area where 

white people are very upset. But to stop there would be wrong, 

because the other night at a meeting there was Metis people 

there. And these people are every bit as upset as the white 

people are, in fact maybe more, because what the lack of the 

minister taking the bull by the horns and then acting on this has 

done, is created a shortage of wildlife for these people even 

every bit as much as the white people. So the problem is not 

just the white people out there; it’s the aboriginal and the Metis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Environment minister finally got off 

his hands and took the first step to end night hunting, or so his 

announcement would have the people of Saskatchewan believe. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s like putting a Band-Aid on an eight inch 

cut; the bleeding continues. It leaks out both end of the bandage 

and that’s exactly what’s happening here. 

 

The promises made by the minister are far too little too late, 

from a government the people of Saskatchewan no longer trust 

to do what they say, let alone what is right. There is no need to 

wait until February, Mr. Speaker, to bring about changes to The 

Wildlife Act, when there is a private member’s Bill on the order 

paper which will do all that and more. 

 

I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, in talking to an outfitter 

this morning that said, knowing the minister very well, that at 

one point the minister didn’t even allow for gophers to be shot 

on his own land. So I know he knows the problem is serious; he 

agrees with what we are saying and yet someone on that side of 

the House is forcing him to drag his feet. And again we see the 

bureaucracy, and the majority on that side doesn’t really let the 

ministers on that side of the House do what’s right for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bill presented by the Saskatchewan Party would make all 

night hunting in the province illegal; not just hunting with the 

use of artificial lights. It also strengthens the penalties for night 

hunting to a maximum of $50,000. This is important because, 

according to outfitters such as Len Romaniuk from Candle 

Lake, only banning night hunting by spotlight will be very 

difficult to enforce. 

 

Conservation officers will have to prove that with headlights, 

that headlights were on at the same time the trigger was pulled. 

Just about impossible, Mr. Speaker. A conservation officer was 

telling me, the other morning he spotted at 8 o’clock in the 

morning in the town of Kamsack, a half-ton with four deer and 

some elk in the back of the truck. Well at eight o’clock in the 

morning, Mr. Speaker, it’s just barely daylight. If he would find 

that same thing, with the spotlight part of the Bill being 

introduced, he would be completely, totally useless to do 

anything about it because he wouldn’t be sure whether a light 

was used or not. He would have to let the culprit go. 

 

So despite the government announcement on Friday, it is clear 

their intentions do not go far enough to ensure safety of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. The bottom line is that 

night hunting is not safe and all forms of it should be banned. 

 

Both Manitoba and Alberta have recognized the importance of 

all-inclusive night-hunting legislation. The changes in our 

private member’s Bill are similar to the changes made to 

Manitoba’s legislation in ’94. The only excuse the Romanow  



1962  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

government can come up with . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will recognize 

that he’s not permitted to use proper member’s names in the 

House and must refer to all members by the position or title 

they hold in the Assembly, and I’ll remind him of that and 

allow him to continue. 

 

Order. Order, order. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the only 

excuse that the government can come up with not to ban all 

night hunting is because they do not have the political will to 

deal with the treaty rights of first nations and Metis people. The 

Environment minister would have us believe that he cannot 

legislate a total ban on night hunting because it would not hold 

up in a potential court challenge. 

 

Even Saskatchewan government constitutional lawyer, Mitch 

McAdam, was quoted in the Star-Phoenix saying that although 

a court precedent from the ‘60s suggest natives retain the right 

to night hunting, it’s since that time that cases have started 

talking about safety requirements. The government must 

consider the safety of all Saskatchewan people over the 

unregulated hunting rights of a few. Unregulated night hunting 

is also a major contributing factor to the depletion of big game 

in Saskatchewan at the rate four times the average. 

 

This not only has major ramifications on our ecosystem but also 

hits us in the pocketbook. Big game hunting brings in over 60 

million annually to Saskatchewan tourism industry. There have 

been many instances where Metis and aboriginal people from 

Manitoba come into Saskatchewan with big trucks and 

slaughter animals at night and return to Manitoba with 

refrigerated trucks of big game in the morning. 

 

According to Duck Mountain Provincial Park manager, Rick 

Shussel, people from Manitoba are not familiar with the local 

area and they don’t have a clue where those bullets are going in 

most cases. This does not seem to bother the minister though. 

He is content to sit back and wait for the court of big game . . . 

the count of big game to be taken in the spring. 

 

The minister has said that if this count shows that if the big 

game has been substantially depleted, with the danger of not 

recovering for several years, that he will move to designate 

protected areas in the province as a reactive measure. Spring is 

too late, Mr. Speaker, to take serious, proactive issues to protect 

our wildlife. Why not pass the amendments to The Wildlife Act 

the Saskatchewan Party has put forward to ban all night hunting 

in the province? Therefore I support this resolution, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to enter into the debate on this very important issue 

before Saskatchewan people. And as someone who is a 

non-hunter in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but represent people 

in a constituency that there’s a great deal of hunting, this issue 

frankly came as quite a surprise to me and I’m surprised that the 

minister, who is a well-known conservationist here in 

Saskatchewan, would not be taking some more serious steps in  

this area. 

 

I could not believe it. I have to plead some degree of ignorance 

when it comes to hunting, as I said, but I could not believe that 

we have actually people wandering around out in the bush with 

high-powered rifles in the dark, shooting at things. I just 

couldn’t believe that that is an actual . . . something that society 

would put up with, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not surprised that the 

members opposite are shocked at that kind of admission when 

you have people out doing those kinds of things. It isn’t an issue 

we believe necessarily about whether you should or shouldn’t 

have the right. It just simply is unacceptable to have people out 

hunting at night with high-powered rifles, not to mention the 

conservation officers . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Pursuant to a special order 

passed by this House earlier this day, the time on this debate has 

expired and the Chair must now put the . . . Order. And the 

Chair must now put the question. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:35 p.m. until 3:37 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 15 

 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 

D’Autremont   

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now it’s impossible to take the 

vote in an orderly manner if the members are shouting across 

the floor. Order. And I ask all our members to cooperate in 

taking the vote. 

 

Boyd Draude Gantefoer 

Heppner Osika Hillson 

McPherson Aldridge McLane 

Haverstock Goohsen  

 

Nays — 30 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 

MacKinnon Shillington Tchorzewski 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Now I will ask the hon. 

members in the opposition to allow the vote to be taken in an 

orderly manner and so that it can be heard. Order. 

 

Johnson Whitmore Goulet 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Calvert Teichrob 

Pringle Trew Lorje 

Bradley Scott Nilson 

Hamilton Stanger Sonntag 

Kasperski Ward Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

 

The Speaker: — The special order continues. 

 

Hepatitis C 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly today and talk about an  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

issue, Mr. Speaker, that is very much in the minds of most 

people across Saskatchewan and that is the issue of hepatitis C. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will be moving a 

motion, but I would like at the start of it to read some of the text 

of it to give the Assembly some idea of what we’re going to be 

talking about. Certainly the basis of this motion is certainly to 

see that the people of this province receive the fair and healthy 

treatment that they deserve; and certainly our health care system 

has been suffering a bit in this province under the regime of the 

NDP. 

 

In our motion that we’ll be moving at the end of my remarks, 

we talk about the Krever report, Mr. Speaker, and maybe I’ll 

just quote a little bit from the motion: 

 

And in view of Judge Horace Krever’s report, in which he 

states that a system which produces such consequences that 

it had nevertheless foreseen has, at the very least, the moral 

obligation to take into consideration the matter of the 

legitimate compensation of the victims of these inevitable 

events; 

 

Firstly the Governments of Saskatchewan . . . consider, as 

soon as possible, setting up a compensation plan for (the) 

victims who were given contaminated blood or blood 

products, including the victims of hepatitis C; including 

interim compensation to be provided until the final details 

of the compensation program are agreed to; 

 

And secondly we’ll be talking about: 

 

That the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 

consider including secondary victims in the compensation 

program; establishing the program so that other social 

benefits received by the victims are not compromised; and 

ensuring that there is access to care and to just and 

equitable allowances established according to the severity 

of the disease, following a consultation with the 

organizations representing the victims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the gist of our resolution which again, as I 

said earlier, we’ll be moving at the end of my remarks. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to bring the people in this 

room to a few thoughts as to what if. And I guess as we look 

into our own lives and the people that we love and spend our 

lives with, let’s think for a moment about a four-year-old child 

— could be our son or daughter, could be a grandchild — 

becomes ill, is taken to a hospital, given treatment. Part of the 

treatment is to receive a blood transfusion and the child 

recovers quite nicely from the disease that it was taken to the 

hospital for. 

 

Some months later all of a sudden this child, this four-year-old 

child, becomes ill again with a new disease, and the parents are 

told that they received, that their child received, some tainted 

blood and that this child now has hepatitis C. How would we 

feel, all of us in this room? 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about our spouses, our wives, or our 

husbands become sick, go to hospital, as part of the treatment to 

treat their illness receive tainted blood, unknowingly. Original  

illness is cured, they go back home to their families, everything 

is fine. Some years later they receive a letter that it was possible 

because they received this blood transfusion, that they could 

have contracted a disease. How would we feel, Mr. Speaker, if 

that was our spouse — how would we feel? 

 

Mr. Speaker, how would we feel if our mother or father became 

ill, went to hospital, received treatment, part of that treatment 

was a blood transfusion, were released, and many years later 

received the letter that they had received possibly blood from a 

tainted blood supply and could at sometime in the future come 

down with hepatitis C — how would we all feel? 

 

(1545) 

 

What if our grandmother or grandfather had occasion to be in a 

hospital in years gone by, Mr. Speaker, and had received a 

blood transfusion as part of the treatment of that disease or 

illness that they had, and now in the twilight years of their life 

had either contracted hepatitis C or the family was still 

wondering if that was a possibility, because they had received 

the letter that said that they may have received tainted blood 

and could contract some form of disease as a result of that. The 

very people that founded this province, Mr. Speaker, our 

grandparents, how would we feel watching them die from a 

disease that was through no fault of their own they had 

received? 

 

What about our best friend — we all have friends — what if our 

best friend had gone through the same process — been ill, 

received treatment, received a blood transfusion and at this 

point in our life he was told that the blood they had received 

from the blood transfusion through no fault of their own had 

been tainted, and now were either dying from the diseases they 

had contracted or were wondering if maybe they would or what 

was going to happen? How would we feel? 

 

How about a business partner, Mr. Speaker, who had gone 

through the same, whole process — been ill, been in hospital, 

received this blood — received tainted blood — and now was 

dying. How would we feel? What would happen to the 

business? How would this partner operate his share of the 

business? Who would pay his bills, unable to work? 

 

It’s a question, Mr. Speaker, that I ask everyone in this building 

today to address, and the people, if there are people watching, 

that what would they do? Well most of us would feel sorry; we 

would have compassion; we would do the right thing. We 

would try and help them. And certainly we would want our 

government to take the lead role in ensuring that these people 

were looked after in a society such as the one we have in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Does Mr. Kotyk of Watson have to spend his last days in this 

life worrying about will his family be looked after, Mr. 

Speaker? He shouldn’t have to. He lived his life; he worked 

hard; he raised a family, has a loving wife — he shouldn’t have 

to worry about that. He should be able to have his last days 

knowing full well that in Saskatchewan his family will be 

looked after. 

 

What about Bonnie Sorenson, whose small child has contracted 

this disease. She doesn’t know whether he’ll live a normal life  



1964  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

or any resemblance of it, whether he’ll be able to continue in 

school, will he be able to finish his schooling, will he ever enter 

the job force, the workforce — we don’t know all these 

answers, Mr. Speaker. But why should she have to worry about 

what’s happening to him? 

 

She gets calls from the teachers at her school where her child 

attends, asking maybe they could get her child to bed earlier at 

night because he seems to be tired at school — teachers not 

understanding that this is part of the symptoms of the disease 

that this child has. And so she has to be worried that even 

though her child gets 13, 14 hours of sleep at night, at school 

they think possibly they’re not very good parents because the 

kids are up all night. It shouldn’t have to be that way, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What will happen to these young people? What will happen to 

Scott? These people have come here today to be with us, talk 

with us, let us understand what they’re up against. And 

certainly we’re asking this government to have some 

compassion as they’re dealing with this issue. 

 

Part of the problem I think that a lot of us have with not 

knowing whether this government will take a lead role and find 

the compassion and do what’s right, is because of some past 

performances that the NDP have done. This very government 

that is a self-proclaimed saviour of medicare, Mr. Speaker, has 

really not shown that since the onset of health reform back in 

the early 1990s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me point out a few examples of why I say that. 

As health reform was initiated by this government without a 

plan, as many people have come to realize in the last couple of 

years because of the actions of this government and what hasn’t 

happened in the health care system, let us talk about the 

underfunding and the downloading to the health districts, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province by this government to reach that 

glorious balanced budget on the backs of the people of this 

province, on the backs of the sick, on the backs of the elderly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then when the crisis occurred, when the districts were . . . 

the only way to survive was cut funding, cut services — 

government cuts funding, the districts cut services. Waiting-lists 

grew. Doctors leave the province. People are left suffering. 

 

The pressure put on by the health districts, by the people of this 

province, and by the Liberal opposition, got the government to 

realize their mistake and had no choice but to inject $40 million 

into the health care system. But only under pressure did they do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the doctor shortage, which we 

still have today in this province not only in rural Saskatchewan, 

but right across Saskatchewan, and that of general practitioners 

and that of specialists. 

 

What did the government do when doctors were leaving, when 

doctors were leaving rural Saskatchewan because there was no 

relief for them? They said, here’s some money, and they threw 

some money without a plan again, threw some money in and 

said well, send a doctor in and we’ll give him 25 grand to set up 

a practice — only if it’s a multiple practice that’s there. Single  

doctor practice — no way, can’t be done. Threw the money. 

That’s going to fix the problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t 

fixed the problem but again they tried to fix it only because they 

were pressured. 

 

And most lately, what about the MS people in this province. 

Try to talk about we’re doing what’s right. Try to talk about 

doing what’s right, Mr. Speaker. Bring the drugs on that these 

people need and let them have a normal life. Don’t pick and 

choose. Don’t have a two-tier system where some people can’t 

afford the drug, other people can; some people’s drug plan 

provides it for them in the workforce, others don’t. That’s not 

what medicare is all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But only when the pressure was brought down by the people, 

the MS Society, people suffering with MS, and the Liberal 

opposition, only then did they say okay, let’s do something. 

Tremendous pressure. So you can understand, Mr. Speaker, 

why some of us are sceptical that this government is willing to 

take a lead and do what’s right for the people in this province. 

 

Now we’re finding there’s all sorts of problems and guidelines 

that people can’t meet to access the drugs that they need and the 

MS drugs. We’ll be raising that over the course of the next four 

or five days and probably longer than that, because I doubt 

whether this government will change anything over the next 

few months, but we can only hope. So that’s why a lot of us are 

sceptical about this government taking a lead role and doing 

what’s right with hepatitis C. 

 

And I guess when you look at some of the decisions, Mr. 

Speaker, that the provincial government has made over the last 

few years, it’s all about priorities. Every government has 

priorities and this government certainly has priorities. 

Unfortunately it hasn’t seemed to be the everyday citizens of 

this province. It certainly hasn’t been the sick and it certainly 

hasn’t been the elderly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question we would ask? Has the government put aside 

some money to fix this problem, to look after these people? 

Most people would say yes, they should have because we’ve 

known about it for a long time. The discussion has been 

ongoing. We’ve talked about it. So as part of a budget process, I 

would think that you would say, well sometime we’re going to 

have to have an expenditure here to look after this problem, to 

look after these people that have contracted hepatitis C through 

no fault of their own, to ensure that their families, they’re not 

having to suffer needlessly. 

 

Also if you look at some of the priorities that the governments 

have had, where they’re spending huge amounts of money, 

millions of dollars, right across the world in third world 

countries, money spent in Guyana, how much compensation 

would that provide for these people? 

 

How about in New Zealand, Mr. Speaker, where they’re going 

to spend excess of $30 million, knowing full well that for the 

next number of years there’s going to be a 3 to $5 million loss 

every year, and hopefully at five years down the road we could 

see a turnaround and an increase in profits. Maybe there won’t 

be any profits in five years, who knows, but how much money 

would this provide for compensation for these people? 



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

What about the patronage? What about Jack Messer’s salary 

and perks. What about Don Ching’s salary and perks. And what 

about all the other hundreds and hundreds of patronage 

appointments, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve done. How much 

compensation would that provide? I know the members 

opposite don’t like to hear about patronage but it’s a fact of life. 

They do it daily. How much compensation could we provide for 

these people with hepatitis C to ensure that they don’t have to 

suffer needlessly, Mr. Speaker, and that their families will be 

looked after? 

 

This government jumped very quickly to ensure that David 

Milgaard was compensated — didn’t hesitate for a minute. 

There was no pressure had to be put on by the public or anyone 

else. Just, bingo — we’ll do it, provide his compensation 

because he was unjustly treated. 

 

Fine. So what about these folks? Why don’t they jump right 

now and say yes, there’s a problem here. We will fix it. We 

want to look after their families. We have people dying. We 

have compassion, and we want to ensure that they have to 

suffer no more needlessly after their loved ones are gone. 

 

Take a lead role. Why can’t Saskatchewan take a lead? It’s 

great. We’ll sit around and talk for weeks and months with the 

other provinces, what they’re doing. I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, 

that someone will have the courage to take the initiative that 

they have in Quebec and take a lead role and say we’ll look 

after our people. What incentives are there for people who want 

to come to Saskatchewan if we have a government that’s not 

compassionate, that won’t look after its people in good times 

and in bad? Not very much, Mr. Speaker, not very much. 

 

I think there are approximately 400 hepatitis C victims in 

Saskatchewan who contracted it through the tainted blood 

supply, Mr. Speaker. That’s not a very huge number of people. 

However, think about the people that are connected to these. 

Think about their children. Think about their parents. Think 

about their cousins. Think about their friends. Think about their 

colleagues: people they maybe work with; people they grew up 

with. It touches a lot of people, Mr. Speaker — touches a lot of 

people, touches all of us. 

 

The former minister of Health stated on May 15, and I quote: 

 

Where negligence is established on the part of the 

government, we will consider settling such a claim. And 

each claim will be considered on its merits. 

 

I think the key there is, Mr. Speaker, each claim will be 

considered on its merits. Look at individual cases. Look at what 

those people are going through. Work with them and talk to 

them. As I said, we’re talking 400 people. Is that so hard? Is 

that so much to ask? I don’t think so. I don’t think so. 

 

Go and talk to the Kotyks and see what they’re going through, 

Mr. Speaker. And ensure that Mr. Kotyk can rest in peace for 

the rest of his days. 

 

Go and talk to Bonnie Sorenson and find out what needs to be 

done to ensure that her son can live a normal life and that 

people understand how these children receive this disease, how 

they got this disease, and what they have to do to understand it.  

And communicate to the people that are in the workforce so that 

they know what needs to be done. Why is the government so 

reluctant to do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

(1600) 

 

The Krever report has recommended that Canadians affected by 

tainted blood should get no-fault compensation from the 

government. Recommendation is there, that’s what these 

inquiries are for. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that everyone in this 

Assembly today would certainly support this resolution and 

would certainly feel compassion for these folks that need it so 

desperately now. 

 

And I would call on the government to put aside their politics, 

do what’s right for the people of this province, do what’s right 

for the people that have contracted hepatitis C, and get on with 

it and set up some interim financing for these folks that need it 

— while there’s still time — and continue on a long-term game 

plan. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I do so move, seconded by the member 

from North Battleford, and be it resolved that: 

 

In view of the human tragedy caused by the transfusion of 

contaminated blood and blood products and the untold 

losses suffered by the victims and their families; 

 

And in view of the Legislative Assembly’s sharing of the 

sorrow and its hope to be able to lessen the repercussions 

of this tragedy; 

 

And in view of Judge Horace Krever’s report, in which he 

states that a system which produces such consequences that 

it had nevertheless foreseen has, at the very least, the moral 

obligation to take into consideration the matter of the 

legitimate compensation of the victims of these inevitable 

events; 

 

Firstly, the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 

consider, as soon as possible, setting up a compensation 

plan for victims who were given contaminated blood or 

blood products, including the victims of hepatitis C; 

including interim compensation to be provided until the 

final details of the compensation program are agreed to; 

 

And secondly, that the governments of Saskatchewan and 

Canada consider including secondary victims in the 

compensation program; establishing the program so that 

other social benefits received by the victims are not 

compromised; and ensuring that there is access to care and 

to just and equitable allowances established according to 

the severity of the disease, following a consultation with 

the organizations representing the victims. 

 

I so do move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair would like to take a moment to 

review the motion regarding its permissibility. 

 

Order. The Chair has had an opportunity to review the text of  



1966  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

the motion submitted by the hon. member for Arm River and I 

do not find it, in its precise form, admissible for debate in the 

Assembly. I refer hon. members to Bourinot’s Rules of Order, 

Third Revised Edition, page 46, in which it says, and I quote: 

 

To the extent possible a motion should be worded in 

affirmative terms and it should express fully and 

unambiguously the intent of the mover. It should not be 

preceded by a preamble . . .  phrases such as . . .  (“whereas 

. . .  ” or “In order to . . .  ”), since these represent opinions 

which are arguable or make statements which may or may 

not be factual. 

 

This is further reinforced by rulings in this House dated March 

28, 1972 and February 2, 1973. And it is the ruling of the Chair 

that the phrases “and in view of” constitute preambles to the 

motion. If the hon. member wishes to move the motion without 

the preambles beginning with “be it resolved that the 

governments of Saskatchewan and Canada” the Chair will 

consider that motion acceptable. And I’ll ask the hon. member 

for Arm River to clarify his intentions. 

 

Why is the Government Whip on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . moments to 

consult on this issue and perhaps come back with a motion that 

would be acceptable. 

 

The Speaker: — That is in effect what the Chair has permitted, 

and I asked the hon. member for Arm River to clarify his 

intentions regarding the moving of the motion in an acceptable 

format. I’m willing to allow a moment for the hon. member to 

consider that. 

 

I’ll direct that the clock be stopped for this momentary recess. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could 

change that motion and read the following: 

 

Firstly, the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada 

consider as soon as possible setting up a compensation 

plan for victims who are given contaminated blood or 

blood products, including the victims of hepatitis C, 

including interim compensation to be provided until the 

final details of the compensation program are agreed to; 

 

Secondly, that the governments of Saskatchewan and 

Canada consider including secondary victims in the 

compensation program, establishing the program so that 

other social benefits received by the victims are not 

compromised, and ensuring that there is access to care and 

to just and equitable allowances established according to 

the severity of the disease following the consultation with 

the organizations representing the victims. 

 

And I so do move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now the Chair 

appreciates the willingness of everyone to assist in the process 

— order, order — however the Chair would like to 

acknowledge that to some degree perhaps confusion has been a 

factor of having . . . dealing with business as a result of this 

special order created earlier this day and so the normal period of  

notice that is required was set aside by a special order of the 

House. And the Chair would also like to acknowledge the 

cooperation of all hon. members in permitting the motion 

provided to be dealt with in a timely way by debate of the 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few 

moments this afternoon to bring the House information as it 

relates to the work that has been done on the hep C issue. I’m 

going to stick primarily to the issue as it relates to hepatitis C 

and not speak at length about the quality and the value of the 

health care system in Saskatchewan, which I’m sure that I’ll get 

another opportunity as time passes in the weeks to come, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I’m a little concerned, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that there 

would be some intent here or at least wisdom shared of that 

nature that this is a political issue that relates to the government 

on the province of Saskatchewan. Because clearly this matter is 

not about political parties. This is an issue that addresses itself 

to a very, very serious incident that occurred in this country of 

which we all need to take responsibility for. 

 

(1615) 

 

At the time that hepatitis C and people were infected by this 

unfortunate incident, Mr. Speaker, we were not the government 

of the day, but that doesn’t preclude for a minute that we should 

not take responsibility to ensure that we try to fix that and repair 

that in a comprehensive fashion across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I have the opportunity of sitting as the Chair 

of Canadian Health ministers in this country for the next year, 

only because it’s our turn in Saskatchewan to take on that 

responsibility not because it’s somewhat . . . it’s not because I 

lobbied for the job or somebody lobbied for me to have that job. 

But the fact is that we are going to work collectively as 

ministers across the country to deal with this very, very serious 

issue. 

 

To suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we in Saskatchewan should step 

out in front of anyone else and provide some kind of resolution 

or solution to this issue without joint cooperative participation 

by all the ministers across the country, or all provinces across 

the country and the territories and the federal government, in 

my opinion, would be irresponsible, would be irresponsible 

from the point of view that we need to collectively work out 

how it is that we’re going to establish in this country a safe and 

secure and comprehensive health care . . . or a blood system for 

all Canadians. And to date, as I mentioned earlier today during 

question period to the members of both opposition parties, that 

we’ve taken a long step in trying to repair the difficulties in this 

province as it relates to the blood issue. 

 

Now in Justice Krever’s report of which he’s worked diligently 

for, for the last four years, he puts forward the notion and 

recommendation that there should be no fault here; that it isn’t 

tied to the provincial governments; that it’s not necessarily tied 

to the federal government; that the Red Cross isn’t the people 

who we should be naming; but collectively, we should draw on 

our wisdom and put together a package that will serve 

Canadians well. 



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

And as a result of that, we’re coming together as provincial 

ministers from across the country to talk about how it is that 

we’re going to resolve this major issue as it relates to the 

individual who the member from Arm River talks about, as it 

relates to the individual of a young lady and her lad here in 

Regina, who he and I have both talked to, and many, many 

other people in this province of whom we want to do good for. 

 

The member from Arm River talks about there being 400 

people in this province who are affected by hep C. I don’t know 

where the member gets the number from because we in the 

Health department don’t know whether it’s 400 or whether it’s 

600 or whether it’s 800 or whether it’s 200. We do not yet have 

a solid indication of the number of people in this province who 

are affected by hep C. 

 

And accordingly, nor does any other province in Canada know 

what that number is of people who are infected by hep C. And 

so as a result of that, we need to complete that examination and 

prepare ourselves for how it is that we’re going to deal with 

people who are in fact infected by hep C. 

 

Is it problematic for individuals and families? Absolutely it is 

— a great deal of hardship that families and individuals 

experience today. And we understand that and appreciate that 

and try not to delay the matter any longer than we can. 

 

But it would be, I think, irresponsible for any one of us, be it the 

federal ministry or the provincial ministers to set up a strategy 

that would not be comprehensive for all of the people across the 

country. Today the member from Arm River talks about a 

resolution that was brought to the Quebec legislature and where 

in fact they have moved a resolution to proceed with 

compensation. 

 

Well in my discussions with Minister Rochon — and there’s 

been now three — he tells me that they’re doing what we’re 

doing here in Saskatchewan, that we’re going to be examining 

what type of a comprehensive package we can put together for 

Canadians, in partnership. And he tells me that he hasn’t got a 

commitment from the federal government in terms of a 

financial package, has not had the discussion with the federal 

Liberal minister about what the participation should be, and 

clearly, there needs to be participation. 

 

I don’t for a minute believe that the opposition parties suggest 

here that we in Saskatchewan should be assuming the full 

responsibility of compensation for everyone in Saskatchewan 

on our own. I don’t believe that they believe that. Nor does the 

federal Minister of Health believe that. He believes, the federal 

Minister of Health believes that this should be a partnership. 

That all of the provincial ministers, and all of the provincial 

governments and the territories, and he and the federal 

government should participate in a package. But he says to us 

like I say to you: what’s the criteria that we’re going to be 

using? 

 

Justice Krever says you should use a no-fault criteria which is a 

significant shift in this country in terms of how we compensate 

people. Because in the past we’ve compensated people on the 

tort system and people had to prove in fact that they had been 

wrongly done to. But Justice Krever says something different. 

Justice Krever says that we’re going to compensate people in a  

new fashion today who were infected or disadvantaged or 

disabled by a practice in the health system as to it relates to 

health. 

 

And so we ask the question about the examination to see 

whether or not this just applies to blood or does it apply to the 

whole piece of the health package. And what sorts of issues will 

we have in the future? If we compensate today on a no-fault 

system for blood, are we then expected to compensate for any 

other issue as it relates to in the health system? A very integral 

question, an important question that we need to answer as 

Health ministers and as the federal ministry. And part of that 

discussion we’re going to have over the next couple of weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we’re asked to take the lead role, we’re 

going to take the lead role in Saskatchewan through the 

responsibility that I have as the minister for other ministers 

across the country. And we’ve set some criteria for ourselves 

already in terms of process. 

 

We say to the House today that within the next six weeks we’ll 

be meeting and we’ve decided that that meeting will take place 

in British Columbia. And when we come to British Columbia 

we’re going to review in detail the recommendations of Justice 

Krever and asking in the interim that individuals across the 

country allow us some time to put together a package or a piece 

or an understanding that will reflect how we might be able to 

serve those individuals who are in fact affected by the tainted 

blood. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we move forward over the 

next couple of weeks we’re going to be speaking with our 

friends in the Red Cross, because it will be important for us to 

assume the assets of the Red Cross to ensure that we have 

stability within the blood system across the country. And we’re 

going to be speaking with the Red Cross about what the value 

of those assets are, and as the provincial government, will have 

responsibility to assume some of those assets and will have 

some responsibility to contribute towards the acquiring of those 

assets. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, as provincial governments, 

we’re going to be talking with our federal friends, of which the 

member from Arm River can help us with. Because when we sit 

down at the table to talk about a comprehensive compensation 

package, there’ll be a requirement for some assistance from our 

federal friends. 

 

And as much as they say to us that they’re prepared to 

participate, we’re going to need to ensure that that partnership is 

fully kept. And within this Assembly and within this House I’m 

going to be suggesting that we get that type of cooperation, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll be calling on my Liberal friends across the 

way to help us with that process as we go along. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close my discussion by outlining what 

I’d said earlier as it relates to the work that we’ve done with 

Quebec. Because in our discussions, because in our discussions 

with Quebec, they’ve indicated to us a couple of things. 

Minister Rochon says to me in our discussions that the 

discussions that he’s had with his cabinet members is that 

they’re prepared to look at a comprehensive package for 

victims, but they’re only prepared to look at a comprehensive  



1968  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

package for victims in the same framework that it applies to the 

rest of us across the country. 

 

And today we have a commitment from Minister Rochon to 

join us at the end of January to participate in that discussion so 

that we have all provinces from all across the country 

participating in that discussion which, to some degree, Mr. 

Speaker, is quite unique when we talk about the fact that in the 

past many of those discussions and many of those decisions 

have been made outside of the purview of the other provinces 

and the country. 

 

So I say to you and to the members opposite that this is a major 

undertaking — in our opinion, achievement — and it blends 

well to some of the discussion that we’re having here over the 

next four days. Because if in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have an 

interest and we have a compassion about keeping our country 

together, which will be the other part of the debate, it will be 

important for us to recognize how it is that we work in 

partnership with our friends from Quebec. 

 

And I reinforce today the position that Mr. Rochon has said to 

me and to the other provincial ministers across the country, that 

he will be a partner in our discussions at the end of January and 

he will want to see for Quebec the same kinds of compensation 

package that we have for all other Canadians. 

 

I want to also reinforce, Mr. Speaker, the earlier comment that I 

made about not knowing the number of people today who are 

affected by hep C. 

 

What we have done in Saskatchewan as a leader, because I 

know the member from Arm River talked a little bit about 

leadership that Saskatchewan Health plays, we sent to 

Saskatchewan residents — as best we knew from the records 

that we have kept — a questionnaire to identify whether or not 

over the past 10 years they have in fact been infected in any 

way, shape, or form, or been in contact with transfused blood. 

 

And today we’re starting to receive the responses. And many, 

many folks across the province . . . I believe it’s 50,000 letters 

that we sent out to people across the province, asking them to 

respond to us and advise us whether or not in fact they’ve had 

any contact with the blood system. And we expect that within 

the next several months we’ll be able to have a better 

understanding and appreciation of exactly how many people are 

affected by tainted blood in this country. 

 

So in concluding my comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

reinforce one more time that this issue about dealing with 

tainted blood in Canada is not one that’s going to be restricted 

or directed to any political party. It’s going to be done in a 

fashion that’s going to be representative of all provincial parties 

across the country, irrespective of who it is that governs. And it 

will be inclusive of the federal government as well. 

 

And with that I’m supporting the motion today, Mr. Speaker, on 

the basis that we’re going to put together our collective wisdom, 

that we’ll work hard as a unified group of provincial ministries 

and governments and the federal government, to ensure that we 

have, in the future, a very safe and transparent system of blood 

delivery in the country. 

And at the same time we’ll ensure as best we can that those 

folks who have been unfortunately, unfortunately affected by 

the blood system and/or their families, that we could provide to 

them a compensation that would be satisfactory to them and/or 

their families. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that I am 

pleased today to support the intent of the resolution and to move 

forward in working with my colleagues across the nation to 

ensure that people are better served by the blood system in the 

future. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if I could 

just add a few short comments to the resolution and certainly to 

the comments by the minister. It’s certainly gratifying to hear 

that after a number of years and specifically . . . in my case I’ve 

had the privilege of raising this issue since this government 

took office in 1991. And I’m pleased to see that the minister has 

indicated on behalf of his government that they’re going to 

certainly take and follow the lead. 

 

I believe in Quebec it was the Liberal leader who brought 

forward the resolution and the province of Quebec certainly 

adopted the rest of that resolution. I certainly believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that, and our caucus believes that, hepatitis C victims 

have waited long enough and it’s time that this issue was 

addressed. While we would have liked to have seen it addressed 

even immediately, we’re pleased to hear that there is discussion 

to debate, to address it further and to come to resolve. 

 

So I’d like to indicate that our caucus is certainly in support of 

this motion. 

 

(1630) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise in support 

of this motion which, as it’s been mentioned, also comes from 

the province of Quebec where the Liberal Party there took the 

lead in Quebec and now in Saskatchewan in asking for 

compensation. 

 

I was pleased with the Minister of Health’s comments this 

afternoon, but I would say that what is most important in this 

resolution is interim compensation. What I was not quite so 

pleased with the comments of the Minister of Health were when 

he started talking about the need for federal-provincial 

discussions, and the need to talk to other provinces, and the 

need for commissions, and negotiations, and inquiries, etc., etc. 

 

And I must say that part of the cynicism with modern 

government is that we know that issues can be shunted off into 

commissions and inquiries and hearings and we can literally die 

waiting for results. And it is terribly important that we act 

promptly and quickly as opposed to saying, well we’ve got to 

have some sort of federal-provincial negotiations before we can 

do anything. 

 

The unity resolution this week, which I might say I am proud to 

be here on this special session to pass this resolution, unlike the  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

members from the retread Tories, I’m not ashamed that we’ve 

come into special session to pass the unity resolution. I’m sorry 

that the minister for Rosthern is ashamed of that — I’m not. I’m 

proud to be here. 

 

But part of the unity resolution is that we’re showing we can act 

quickly and decisively to bring about a desired result for us and 

for all Canadians. And I think it’s important that we make that 

point on national unity. But it’s also important to make that 

point on other issues, and in this case compensation for hepatitis 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Pursuant to the special order 

passed earlier this day, the time for debate on this motion has 

expired. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Public Consultation on National Unity 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to 

the House order passed earlier today, I rise to move a motion, 

which I will do at the end of my remarks. 

 

I was pleased to have the opportunity to meet with the public to 

discuss the seven principles presented in Calgary in September. 

My Co-Chair and I held four meetings in my constituency in 

Domremy, which is a predominantly French community; in the 

town of Aberdeen; in Humboldt, and that’s a predominantly 

German community; and in the town of Bruno. Regardless of 

where the discussions took place, people that did attend had 

come willingly because they wanted to have their opinions 

heard. Demographically our groups were two men for every 

three women, with an average age in the mid-‘60s. Younger 

people were conspicuous by their absence. 

 

And what my constituents told us during those meetings was, 

keep it simple and keep it direct. As we all know, Mr. Speaker, 

there is a direct correlation between complexity and 

manipulation and thus political apathy. The more we continue 

with intrigues the greater the likelihood of a cataclysmic event. 

A partnership between Canada and its provinces cannot take 

place if there are contradictions and misunderstandings. Things 

have to be clear and unequivocal. 

 

At Meech Lake the premiers were closeted overnight to 

hammer out the accord. Top-down and secret agreements 

obviously did not work. The people of my constituency asked, 

when will politicians learn that orchestration and abuse of the 

democratic apparatus for the purpose of personal or party gain 

invites nothing but disgust for the political process. Both Meech 

Lake and Charlottetown accords failed because of politically 

attempted manipulations, and I do not want to see us fail again. 

 

My constituents were concerned — and hopeful — that political 

parties would not focus on their own individual agenda and 

policies. For if that happened, we would risk delivering a 

message to Quebec that is convoluted and not at all 

representative of the original Calgary Declaration. You do not 

qualify a passionate personal statement of, I love you, with a 

prenuptial agreement and divorce papers. 

 

We felt and measured a positive response to the seven  

principles. People were ready to give and take. There was a 

willingness to negotiate. Many said the seven Calgary 

principles were motherhood statements and acceptable to the 

majority of our participants. 

 

In reflecting on the outlined seven principles, the following 

analogy was offered. The commandments in the Bible are not 

the exclusive property of one religion. They are a guide to 

civilized human behaviour. All religions have a similar code of 

behaviour; so people recognize the Calgary Declaration is not a 

constitutional accord or amendment, it was to be a simple 

statement of principles that we all share, and people understood 

this quite clearly. 

 

Constituents were consistent in their comments. They stated 

that we cannot dispute or brush aside the existence of Quebec; 

however there seems to be something that the separatists are 

trying to say to the rest of Canada that we are having difficulty 

in understanding. If this is the case, we must determine what the 

missing consideration is and how to address it. 

 

No one at our meetings denied that Quebec is different. From 

the beginning, Quebec has been recognized on a basis of a 

linguistic head count, but we should not make the mistake of 

assuming that Quebec is a homogeneous entity. To do so would 

suppress, or worse still, ignore the rich culture of all groups in 

that province. Quebec is as much a heterogeneous society as 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Many constituents expressed uncertainty about the target 

audience. Was it Lucien Bouchard? Was it Gilles Duceppe? The 

francophones in Quebec? The allophones inside or outside 

Quebec? The soft separatists? Who was it? They stated we must 

determine the target. If we focus on the soft separatists, 

convincing them that they would be better off within Canada 

than as a separate entity — that makes good sense. The hazard 

identified is, if there is any intention to suppress the separatists 

through fear tactics, that taking the iron fist of their velvet glove 

approach, that our efforts at preserving Canadian unity would 

prove futile. 

 

So we must focus on a larger target group, the francophone in 

Quebec. One of the laws of nature is self-preservation. No 

rational human being will vote for self-destruction if there are 

other alternatives. Again this statement is directed as much 

outside Quebec as it is within Quebec. Quebec wants to make 

their own decisions about the education that their children 

receive or the best way to treat their elderly. And it is our 

observation that nothing in this declaration takes those rights 

away. Principle 5 clearly places the onus on Quebec to maintain 

their values. 

 

People in my constituency did not condone the attitude, 

expressed by some, that says if they want to go, good-bye and 

good riddance. We would pay a high price, a high price as any 

Quebecer if they vote to separate. While we want Quebec to 

remain in Canada, my constituents were not convinced that the 

separatists want a resolution to this problem. There were 

questions asked like, is becoming a majority their only goal? 

We all have the deepest desire to stay united, but if Quebec 

decides to choose separation it should then be the responsibility 

of the Prime Minister to negotiate the terms. 



1970  Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 1997 

Some constituents brought up the aboriginal issue; and one of 

the common threads in our meeting, there was no clear 

indication that the voice of our aboriginal people was heard via 

the seven principles. There was positive support for the 

resolution of aboriginal concerns synonymous with other 

concerns. 

 

Many counselled us to listen to the wisdom of our veterans. 

They fought for Canada. They reminded us of what might have 

been lost, and my constituents felt Quebec has a much better 

chance to retain their language and culture within Canada rather 

than outside of it. 

 

An interesting point brought up by my constituents was that 

they stated that in the overall scheme of things, it is prudent to 

be aware of what our global position may look like in the very 

near future. 

 

The proposed multilateral agreement on investment is to be 

ratified in May of 1998. This agreement is intended to foster 

additional investment activity while at the same time providing 

stability to, and levelling the playing-field for, investors. But 

along with these benefits, the MAI (multilateral agreement on 

investment) may also have the effect of eroding the sovereignty 

of our governments. Dispute resolution proposals in the 

multilateral agreement on investment could give investors and 

businesses new powers when they move into a province or a 

country. 

 

If this happens, we may have to change our focus from 

linguistic and cultural nationalism to economic nationalism. If 

and when corporations have the power to make decisions over 

governments, you can be sure that decisions will not be made 

on the basis of language or culture, but strictly dollars. We 

caution our governments that we may lose, and stand to lose 

more than Quebec, if the MAI is not carefully negotiated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Calgary Declaration, we recognize, was not a 

blank cheque handed to Ottawa and the premiers. Special 

powers for the provinces are not espoused in the seven 

principles. Neither was anything said that restricted the powers 

of any province to enhance their social, economic, and cultural 

development. 

 

What the Calgary Declaration did present was equality. 

Equality means different things to different people. Equality to 

me means we are treated equally if we are the same. But if we 

are different, then perhaps we should expect some degree of 

difference in the treatment. For instance, we build ramps into 

public buildings and put in wider doors to facilitate access for 

the person in a wheelchair. This is extra cost and differential 

treatment. 

 

We do not begrudge it because democracy means more than 

just majority rule. The measure of a democracy is more than 

just words espousing equality. It is how the minority concerns 

are accommodated and our willingness to ensure their concerns 

are encompassed in the greater scheme of things. 

 

In a just and respectful society, the interests of each individual 

must be thoroughly considered and that individual must have a 

fair influence on the decision making. In any given 

circumstance, people who are the same in those respects  

relevant to how they were treated in those circumstances, 

should receive the same treatment. 

 

People that are relevantly different should be treated differently. 

Benefits or opportunity cannot be denied on the basis of race, 

gender, religion, and ethnic origin. People acknowledge that 

equality is expressed in law while fairness is expressed by 

action. Equality is a goal; fairness is something we must 

constantly strive for. 

 

At the conclusion of the consultation meetings, my Co-Chair 

and I noticed that a limited knowledge of the factual, historical 

background restricted their ability to resolve the questions 

surrounding Canadian unity. As well, it was noticed that the 

language used for the principles was problematic. Not everyone 

interprets the wording the same. Clarification and education 

will be needed before there could be a complete consensus. 

 

In addition, people demanded to know what the outcome of the 

consultation meetings and discussions would be. They 

wondered whether they would be listened to. There was a 

general feeling of uncertainty as to the political agenda. The 

wording of the principles was acceptable and it did not offend, 

but people asked, how are we to put it into practice. 

 

And so there were some recommendations put forward by my 

constituents and, with all the preceding comments in mind, 

constituents made the following recommendations: place a high 

priority on education. More than once we heard that it would be 

beneficial to have to learn all of our heritage languages at a 

young age. 

 

(1645) 

 

Education also addresses the concern of learning historical facts 

that would assist us in our understanding. Elementary prudence 

requires us to be knowledgeable about our decisions. 

Unfortunately we seem to be falling further behind these days 

in our ability to explain to and educate people of our history. It 

is vital that we promote education and communication. 

 

The second recommendation was that high priority should be 

given to promotion of interprovincial travel, especially among 

students. Everyone should be encouraged to visit or share the 

cultural treat that is Canada to further their education. 

 

The third recommendation was that priority should be given to 

communication. If we do not listen, we will not learn. 

Knowledge, understanding, and appreciation are the elements 

that are necessary to resolve problems associated with unity or 

any other problem. 

 

Two weeks ago Saskatchewan became the first province to 

proclaim popular support for the Calgary Declaration. We 

cannot be complacent. We must persevere to resolve irritants 

through continued negotiation. The rights of minority groups 

must continue to be considered and respected. Canada’s success 

as a country and the real possibility that we could cease to be a 

country is a discrepancy we cannot allow to happen. It is our 

job to maintain Canada, united. Thank you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I put forward the following 

motion, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  



December 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

Be it resolved: 

 

That this Assembly applaud the people of the Humboldt 

constituency on their commitment to preserving Canadian 

unity, as exemplified through their insightful comments, 

suggestions, and their determination to resolve the issue in 

a peaceable, thoughtful, and fair manner during the public 

consultation on national unity. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to briefly say 

that I congratulate the hon. member for Humboldt for her 

excellent speech. I think the sentiments expressed in that were 

appreciated by all of us. 

 

I think however, if any of us have any difficulties with it, is that 

while the people of Humboldt may have participated fully in 

this process, and it is indeed appropriate to congratulate them 

for this, the fact is from one end of this province to the other, 

people turned out in large numbers to express their concern 

about their country and their love of Canada. 

 

And the unanimity with which they spoke, that they want this 

country to continue and they want Saskatchewan to be a part of 

it, and they want Quebec to be a part of it, deserves to be 

recognized not only for the people of Humboldt but indeed for 

all of the communities in this province. And I think I may say 

that, from Eastend in the West to Westview in the East, from 

North Portal in the South to Southend in the North, the people 

of Saskatchewan supported this process and support this 

country. And I think they all deserve our congratulations and 

our recognition as well as the people of Humboldt.  

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure as well to stand on behalf of the government 

caucus this afternoon and speak to the motion raised by the hon. 

member from Humboldt. We certainly are very much in 

agreement with this motion, but also I’m here to stand and also 

express our support to the sentiments raised by the hon. member 

from North Battleford, whom we are also very much in 

agreement with . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now there seem to be a fair 

number of members wanting to get into debate here, but it is the 

hon. member for Regina Sherwood who has the floor, and the 

Chair . . . Order. And the Chair is having some difficulty being 

able to hear the hon. member for Sherwood put his remarks to 

the Assembly and I’ll ask all our members to allow the hon. 

member to debate in an uninterrupted manner. 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly are very much in agreement with the hon. 

member from Humboldt in her motion. And we’re also very 

much in favour of the remarks and sentiments expressed by the 

hon. member from North Battleford regarding the participation 

of all our citizens in Saskatchewan in the unity process here in 

November. 

And in this light, I would just like to take a couple of minutes, 

and in my capacity I think as Vice-Chair of the government 

caucus, to add on behalf of all of us, our congratulations to all 

MLAs of this legislature, indeed to all our citizen Co-Chairs 

who, during the first two weeks of November, gave up a lot of 

time and spent a lot of energy holding public consultations on 

the principles of the Calgary Declaration. For this we are all 

thankful of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to maybe make an early welcome to 

people, citizen Co-Chairs who are en route to Regina or who 

are already in Regina for the very important debate tomorrow 

on the resolution of the Calgary accord, and we as government 

members wish to welcome all our citizen Co-Chairs here 

tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take just a couple of minutes, while 

I’m on my feet, to perhaps express some of these sentiments in 

French, and if you’ll permit me, I will go forward with those 

remarks. 

 

M. le Président, je voudrais prendre quelques instants de 

communiquer aux fransaskois et fransaskoises et aux 

francophones et aux francophiles de la Saskatchewan, au nom 

de tous les députés de la coté du gouvernement ici dans 

l’assemblé législatif de la Saskatchewan. 

 

Comme vice-président, du caucus de gouvernement, je voudrais 

exprimer l’importance nos députés placent sur la question de 

l’unité canadien. A notre avis, nous croyons que le Canada doit 

rester le pays que nous connaissons aujourd’hui — un pays 

avec tous ses provinces et térritoires. Aussi, it faut que nous 

devions travailler sincerèment dans ce domaine. 

 

C’est pourquoi, M. le Président, nous sommes complèment 

d’accord avec les sept principes de l’accord de Calgary négocié 

par les sept premiers ministres fédéralistes des provinces du 

Canada en septembre. 

 

Nous croyons que les principes de cet accord réprésent le 

sentiment de la majorité des canadiens et canadiennes dans 

chaque province du notre pays. C’est pourquoi nos députés ont 

travaillés conscieusement et sérieusement en novembre dans les 

réunions publiques et dans le proces de la consultation avec les 

citoyens et les citoyennes de notre province. 

 

Au nom de tous mes collègues du gouvernement, nous 

souhaitons un début serièux et informatif au sujet demain. 

Merci, M. le Président. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1943 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1943 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1944 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1944 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1944 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1944 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1945 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 November Employment Statistics 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1945 

 Debut of Saskatchewan Party 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

 Performance Plant Inc. 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1946 

 Humans Rights Anniversaries 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1946 

 Yellowhead Twinning 

  Jess ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1946 

 Humboldt Youth Awarded Junior Citizen of the Year Award 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 

 Producer-assembled Grain Train in Eston 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Recall of the Legislature 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1947 

 Night Hunting 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1949 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1950 

 Crown Corporations’ Foreign Investments 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1949 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1949 

 Report on Betaseron 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1951 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1951 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1951 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1952 

MOTION TO ESTABLISH A SPECIAL ORDER 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1953 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Night Hunting 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1953 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1955 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1957 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1957 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1958 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1960 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1961 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

 Hepatitis C 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1966 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1966 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1968 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1968 

 Public Consultation on National Unity 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1969 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1971 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1971 

 


