



















































Hansard: April 28, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1151 

 April 28, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I rise on behalf of citizens of the great community of Melville, 

Killaly, and Grayson, who . . . I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition to present on behalf of the residents of the town of 

Kamsack: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased this 

afternoon to introduce to you and to all my colleagues in the 

Assembly, a fine group of 48 students from St. Henry School in 

Melville, Saskatchewan. They’re seated in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’d like to acknowledge their teachers, Garth 

Gleisinger, Charlotte Lovequist, as well as people who have 

been good enough to accompany them here to the city and to 

this legislature to watch proceedings — Kim Herbert and Al 

Shantz. 

 

I would ask all my colleagues in the Assembly to please 

welcome this fine group of students from St. Henry’s. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to 

you and through you to all the members of the legislature, 16 

kindergarten students from Marion McVeety School in Regina 

Lakeview. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 

Reimer, Ms. Mitchell, Mr. Veitenheimer, and Dr. King. I guess 

there was one teacher and the rest are special guests. 

 

But welcome to all of you to the legislature. Let’s all give them 

a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe 

we have with us today a number of members from the 

Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations. And on 

behalf of my colleagues and the Liberal opposition, I would like 

to welcome these members who have joined with us, and to 

remind members here that the arts play an essential role in the 

lives of the people of Saskatchewan. They lend an enjoyable 

variety of expression to the energy and the enthusiasm which 

exists in the people of our province. 

 

So I commend the council on all of your undertakings and I 

wish you all the very best in your endeavours which add so 

much to the richness of our province. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to 

introduce to you a study group from Inner Mongolia who are 

seated right there in the Speaker’s gallery. And I want to say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to members of the 

Assembly, that we welcome the group here wholeheartedly. 

 

In the group we have Mr. Ya Sa Ning, the general manager of 

the YEI Group and chairman of the Board of the Enterprise. If 

you’d stand up as I read your name. I hope I’m pronouncing 

them clearly enough so that you can understand. 

 

Mr. Chaolun Bateer, who is the deputy director of the League of 

Government and Cattle Expert; he is seated up there as well. 

Mr. Wulan Bateer, director of Animal Husbandry, Academy of 

Inner Mongolia and Animal Breeding. Mr. Hao Te, the deputy  

  



1152  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

director of the EC Division of Animal Husbandry Department 

of Inner Mongolia, the interpreter for the delegation. If they 

would stand and be recognized by the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  And also with the group is a friend 

and a member that many of the members opposite will know, an 

excellent cattle producer, Syd Palmer, an executive director of 

the Canadian Livestock Services Ltd. Syd, if you want to stand 

and be recognized as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And two other individuals, Gordon 

Porteous, who is the project development manager of the 

Canadian Livestock Services Ltd. And also, Al Hingston, who 

is a representative with Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

note, sitting among some very distinguished people in the west 

gallery, one Susan Ferley, director extraordinaire of the Globe 

Theatre. And I’m actually amazed to see that she doesn’t have 

more grey hair, having worked with my colleague, the member 

from Regina Sherwood, last year on the production of The 

Dining Room. She really tried her best to make actors out of us 

and it was a wonderful experience. So I ask all members to 

extend a warm welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, seated in the west 

gallery are some special visitors with us here today and I want 

all members to join me in welcoming them here today. But in 

the group, who represent the board of directors of SOCO 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), included in that 

group, Naomie Seib, Dr. Dennis Johnson, Diane Olchowski, 

Mel Watson, and Sherri Cybulski. 

 

I want to say to the members of the board who are with us here 

today, that I’m sure all members will join with me in 

recognizing the work that you do for that organization on behalf 

of the people of the province. And also to say that I look 

forward to your support on a couple of projects at the board 

meeting later on today. Thank you and congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Day of Mourning 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the sad but 

necessary day set aside as a Day of Mourning for those killed or 

injured on the job during the previous year. This is one of those 

solemn days of remembrance, the observation of which each 

year we hope will be the last. 

 

A private members’ Bill in Saskatchewan made Saskatchewan 

the first jurisdiction in Canada to observe a day of mourning.  

Now it is recognized across the entire country. That is 

something for which Mr. Speaker and this Assembly can be 

proud. 

 

We are also proud to have the most progressive occupational 

health and safety legislation in the country and that once again 

we’ve taken the leadership role in modernizing and improving 

that legislation to keep us at the forefront. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, with the best legislation, the most 

diligent safety workers, the most informed workforce in the 

most cooperative workplaces, with all of this, last year there 

were still 23 workers killed on the job. Injuries resulting in lost 

time added another 13,000. 

 

Both of those numbers are down from the previous years. 

Neither is acceptable in a society that values life and family 

over mere productivity. These deaths represent 23 families 

permanently severed and there are 23 accusations against us as 

employers, as educators, as workplace safety committees, and 

as legislators, for failing to exercise our responsibilities. 

 

After the names of those killed are read, we should use our 

moment of silence to remind ourselves that depriving workers 

of the right to healthy and safety workplaces, as some would do, 

is a guarantee that we will repeat this another year. 

 

The Speaker:  The member’s statement has expired and 

statements will continue. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

people around the world are observing a Day of Mourning for 

workers killed and injured on the job. In Canada two people are 

killed on the job every single day. About 1 million workers are 

injured every year. Hazardous work environments cause 5,400 

cancer deaths each year. 

 

Although there has been improvement over the years, these 

statistics are still unacceptable. One death in the workplace is 

one death too many. Workers should not have to risk life and 

limb in order to support their families. Work-related deaths and 

injuries cause tremendous heartache and financial stress on 

families affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stress and concerns of workplace injuries and 

deaths are held by employees and employers alike. 

 

Safer workplaces are everyone’s goal. The observance today 

could truly be seen as a step forward in the right direction if 

government, employers, and employees were seen together in 

the same boat, heading for the same shore line — that safe zone 

being a significant yearly decrease in workplace accidents. 

Let’s not just observe the day; let’s make a difference. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

join the members of this Assembly in remembering those 

Saskatchewan workers that have been injured or killed on the 

job. Mr. Speaker, today we remember those who have been lost  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

and those who struggle every day without the physical 

capabilities to perform the way they used to. Our hearts and 

prayers go out to these individuals. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while we recognize those workers who have 

suffered and died, let’s also remember the families whose lives 

have been turned upside down as well. Let’s remember the 

children who no longer had a mother or father, the husband or 

wife left with no spouse, the mother or father left with no 

children. Injuries and death affect many, many people, whether 

they be families or friends or neighbours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an average of about 30 people are killed while at 

work each year. Thousands more are forced to take time off 

work because of job-related injuries. It should be the goal of 

each of us to do whatever we can to see that the number of 

injuries and deaths decline to zero. To those who have been 

fortunate enough to avoid such tragedies, please take care and 

exercise caution on the job and in the workplace and in all parts 

of your life. As well, let’s all be sure to offer our suggestions 

and help to other countries where the working conditions are far 

less safe than our own here at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important day and I ask all members to 

join me in remembering the workers that have been killed or 

injured across the province and around the world. Thank you. 

 

Federal Election 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, on June 2 Canadian 

voters will once again exercise their democratic right and duty 

and choose who will represent them in the next federal 

government. And while all of us have our strong views on who 

those members should be, each election will hold . . . and 

everyone will look closely to see who they will choose to 

represent them after the next election. 

 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased that our leader, 

Alexa McDonough, chose to kick off her campaign here in 

Saskatchewan, and I’m sure other leaders will . . . the Liberals, 

when they realize what time it is in Saskatchewan, they too will 

come and show up in the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it needs to be said at the outset that what 

promises to be a very spirited campaign among five political 

parties, that those who have put their names forward are people 

who are honourable women and men who deserve our 

admiration, and mark that the system works, and works well. 

 

And I want to say each and every one of them, a special 

congratulations from the people here in the Assembly. We on 

this side welcome the election regardless of the timing and 

regardless of what time our Saskatchewan polls will close on 

June 2. We welcome it because it is the time for the Canadian 

people to register their opinion on Ottawa’s priorities — those 

that have been picked up and those that haven’t. We have some 

suggestions on the latter, but I won’t get into that right now. 

 

That is why I welcome this opportunity and, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased that this race is now under way. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Early Childhood Intervention Week 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 

is Early Childhood Intervention Week. Now I strongly believe 

that parenthood is one of the . . . if not one of the important and 

sometimes difficult jobs in our society. When some children are 

born with developmental impairments such as autism, spina 

bifida, Down’s syndrome, or fetal alcohol syndrome, the 

parents’ or the care-givers’ job can be even more difficult. 

 

Quite likely the most important determinant of a child’s future 

success as an adult depends on their experience in early 

childhood. Studies show that the first three years of a child’s 

life are the most important, and studies also show that when 

early childhood intervention programs are in place children 

thrive in both their future academic, professional, and personal 

lives. 

 

These findings simply affirm what every parent already knows 

— that children need love and attention and constant nurturing 

from birth onward. For these reasons, I strongly support early 

childhood intervention programs, which support and assist 

parents and all care-givers, with developmental impairments, 

with personal life and skills development. 

 

I congratulate all of those who devote their lives to affirming 

the worth of and encouraging the potential of our children. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Students Against Drinking and Driving 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students Against 

Drinking and Driving, or SADD, worked diligently for nearly 

10 years to develop new drinking and driving legislation 

proclaimed last summer. And this past Saturday the 

Government of Saskatchewan was inducted into the Students 

Against Drinking and Driving Hall of Fame at a ceremony held 

in Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly should be very 

humbled to have been so recognized by these admirable young 

people. We should also be especially proud of our collective 

achievement because these changes in our legislation are 

already making a difference in saving lives. 

 

During the first five months the legislation was in place, 

alcohol-related fatalities dropped 30 per cent compared to the 

previous three years. And there’s every indication that the 

figure will continue to decline. 

 

I’m pleased as well that SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) contributes more than 85,000 a year to SADD, and 

that it will be contributing two personal computers, and a laser 

printer to help get the new SADD office up and running. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fine work these young people in SADD are 

doing proves once again that when people come together to  

  



1154  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

solve common problems in a cooperative fashion, they really 

can make a difference. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

University of Regina Researcher 

Receives Cancer Grant 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, because this is Cancer 

Month, I would like to take a moment to acknowledge the 

important research that is occurring at the University of Regina 

to combat this disease. Recently Dr. Lynn Kirkpatrick of the 

department of chemistry at the University of Regina was 

awarded $253,500 in research funding by the National Cancer 

Institute of Canada. She is the first researcher at the U of R 

(University of Regina) to receive such funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the importance of Dr. Kirkpatrick’s work in the 

fight against cancer is reflected in this grant. Funding is limited 

to the most promising projects based on a national competition. 

Receiving this grant indicates that Dr. Kirkpatrick’s work is one 

of the top-ranked projects in Canada. In addition to Dr. 

Kirkpatrick, Drs. Robert Warrington and Wei Xiao of the 

University of Saskatchewan also received funding grants to 

pursue avenues of research for cancer prevention. 

 

The war against cancer is still ongoing, Mr. Speaker, but 

progress is being made. We must continue the fight. Research 

by dedicated individuals like Dr. Kirkpatrick will help us win 

the war. I want to congratulate Drs. Kirkpatrick, Warrington, 

and Xiao for their efforts and the funding they have received. 

They are making a difference in the fight against cancer. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the federal 

NDP (New Democratic Party) leader has said that she intends to 

run the federal campaign on this province’s record. If that is 

really the case, she should take a step back and really take a 

close look at this NDP government’s record with regard to child 

prostitution. 

 

I have been calling on this NDP government to take action for 

over a year on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and this government has 

had well over 365 days to help the hundreds of children being 

exploited every day through the prostitution trade, and still 

nothing is being done by them. I have put forward a private 

members’ Bill to deal with this issue but this government has 

refused to accept it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has passed tougher legislation to fight 

child prostitution, but this government, which is so very proud 

of its record of helping the less fortunate, continues to drag its 

feet. And the people of this province, especially these exploited 

children, have heard enough excuses and political talk. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you waiting for, when every 

second of your delay adds to the severity of the devastating 

effects felt by these children and our society? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, several points in answer to 

the member’s tirade. Mr. Speaker, point number one, the 

member belittles the communities of our province who are at 

work on a daily basis dealing with this issue in their 

communities, Mr. Speaker. Point number two, she would 

suggest that the Bill that she now has before the House would 

present some magical solution to the blight of child prostitution 

on our streets. 

 

Again, I remind members that what that member has proposed 

is two things: to amend our Child and Family Services Act to 

extend the age to 18 — to take in 16- and 17-year-olds which, 

Mr. Speaker, it already does. The second point that she suggests 

as a remedy to child prostitution on the streets, is that the 

Minister of Social Services and the Government of 

Saskatchewan should be in a position to accept gifts and 

donations. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s done. If anyone wishes to 

make a gift or donation to the Crown, they may do that today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when she speaks of a record of a government, she 

might want to talk to some of her Liberal candidates who are 

now running around the province advertising their record, and 

ask, where is the national child benefit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while it is 

obvious that the minister has a problem with my Bill, at least I 

have come up with suggestions to help improve the situation, 

which include expanding the definition of abuse to include 

everyone who abuses children. And that is not included in the 

current provincial legislation. This is giving these children little 

hope when you do not at least do that. 

 

Let’s be honest here, Mr. Speaker; the minister and I know that 

the real reason why this government is refusing to support this 

Bill is because it’s a Liberal solution to a problem that the NDP 

have been trying to sweep under the rug. 

 

So I ask, Mr. Minister, why do you continue politicizing this 

issue? Why do you not take measures to fall in line with the 

Criminal Code amendments that have been put in by the federal 

government April 14 already? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member talks about the 

definition of abuse; she talks about Criminal Code violations. 

The federal House of parliament had opportunity before its 

dissolution to pass legislation in that House, by the Liberal 

government, to make it much simpler to achieve convictions 

against those abusers of our children on the streets, Mr. 

Speaker. What did they do? They’ve dissolved the House of 

Commons before, of course. Early election. 

 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on one hand the member says we should 

hurry up; on the other hand, in the House here the other day, she 

said we should slow down. Mr. Speaker, she said in debate in 

the other House that she wants, in terms of the national child 

benefit, that we should be very patient, that we should go at it 

very slowly. We want to take adequate time, she says, to ensure 

that any program is complete and adequate and efficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it the member’s view that we have lots of time 

to deal with the issue of child poverty in our communities? Is 

that her view? Is that the view of the Liberal Party? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Liberal opposition has brought to the attention of the minister in 

charge of Municipal Government, the financial crisis facing 

more than 100 local governments that we have been in touch 

with over the past few weeks. 

 

We have demonstrated how this government’s $29 million cuts 

to revenue-sharing grants will reduce funding to some of these 

local governments by as much at 95 per cent. As a result, many 

will be forced to dramatically reduce or eliminate some services 

altogether. Many will also have to raise their local mill rates 

and try and adjust to the fact that they’re being starved by this 

government. 

 

Will the minister explain if she has any idea how many 

municipal governments will be forced to raise their local taxes 

this year because of the actions of her government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, municipalities are not institutions; municipalities are 

made of people. The people of this province have indicated to 

us that their preferences in maintaining fiscal integrity are 

money directed towards health care, education, and social 

services. That is what we have done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the course of that, we have reduced funding to municipal 

governments, for the most part by giving them a year’s notice 

of the 25 per cent reduction, and six to eight months notice of 

the change in the health, social assistance, and public health 

levies. Municipalities have had an opportunity to adjust to those 

changes, Mr. Speaker, and there is no crisis in Saskatchewan 

except in the Liberal caucus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister, on her way 

home on the weekend, should check in with some of these local 

governments, whether it’s urban, rural, or whatever it is, and 

she’ll find out if there is a crisis out there in Saskatchewan — 

because she might be lynched. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over 100 municipal governments have been in 

contact with my office to comment on this government’s drastic  

funding cuts. Of that total, 59 say they will definitely have to 

raise their mill rate this year; another 24 say it’s a possibility; 

only 19 say that they will not be forced to raise their local taxes. 

 

Madam Minister, in other words, four out of five local 

governments that have been contacted say they will be forced to 

raise their taxes at the local level because of your actions of 

your government. Furthermore, many of these same local 

governments say they will not be able to participate in phase 2 

of the federal infrastructure program because of the same 

funding cuts. 

 

What do you do . . . What do you intend to do to address the 

serious financial concerns facing our local governments? And 

don’t even attempt to say this is not a serious concern, because 

everyone, including officials in your own department, continue 

to contradict you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, by my reckoning, in this 

fiscal year we will have $23.2 million going in infrastructure 

money to municipalities. We will have $8.5 million in revenue 

sharing. We’ll have $30 million additional in highways; $16.4 

million paid out to rural municipalities in futures. We’ll have 

$17.6 million of tax room at the local level to replace the levies 

which they no longer have to submit to us for health and social 

services. And that’s a total, Mr. Speaker, of over $85 million. 

 

I have been, just in the last four or five days, in five 

communities in Saskatchewan — Prince Albert, Nipawin, 

Outlook, Tisdale, and Swift Current. And I’m pleased to report, 

Mr. Speaker, that rather than being lynched, my health is quite 

good and my limbs are all intact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, more 

than a week ago the Liberal opposition provided the Minister of 

Labour with the latest in a series of examples to demonstrate 

how the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement inflates 

costs by as much as 30 per cent. The minister later confirmed 

that his department is conducting an internal review of the 

CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) so he and 

the minister in charge of the Crown Investments Corporation 

can be advised about the impact of the policy and whether it 

inflates the cost of Crown projects, as our examples indicated. 

When questioned as to whether this report would be released to 

the public, the minister agreed that it was, and I quote, “not a 

bad suggestion.” 

 

Will the minister responsible, today make the commitment to 

make this internal report public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say to the 

member opposite that the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement does nothing more than provide a level  

  



1156  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

playing-field for unionized and non-unionized contractors to bid 

on the same government job in order to give them some equal 

chances, considering the discriminatory legislation passed by 

the Tories in the ’80s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, on more than three occasions 

last year, and with the latest example this year, we 

demonstrated in a contractual way where it inflates the costs of 

these tenders by at least 30 per cent. 

 

Last week the Minister of Labour indicated that he was going to 

be doing an internal report. Last year the Minister of Labour 

said there was an internal report. The Minister of Economic 

Development said then that there wasn’t one. The minister this 

week . . . or last week, promised that there’d be an internal 

report. Will you make that report public or are you afraid of the 

answers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

trouble getting their head around whether they want tax 

increases or tax decreases, whether they want more expending 

on health or less spending on health. I can tell you for sure with 

respect to tendering, that your numbers have no basis in fact. 

They will have no basis in fact in any study. 

 

And I can tell you that if two firms bid fairly on the same terms 

on the same contract, you’re going to get the lowest cost 

contract for the project to be done, and that’s what we believe 

in. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Election Campaign Participation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Premier. Well it’s off and running, Mr. 

Premier. The election campaign has just started and already the 

NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) seem more 

interested in campaigning than in governing the province. 

 

Mr. Premier, taxpayers are paying your members to focus on 

the business of the legislature. Yet the former deputy premier is 

the national campaign Chair; your current Deputy Premier is the 

provincial campaign Chair. Other NDP MLAs have made no 

secret to the fact that they’re going to be campaigning while the 

legislature is in session. 

 

Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying you and your 

members to run the province not to run the national NDP 

campaign. Why are you letting your members off and abandon 

their responsibilities to go off and campaign for the federal 

NDP? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’m not sure why the Conservatives 

would welcome the election call. It’s a little bit like a turkey 

being happy about an early Christmas. 

 

But I want to say to the members opposite that indeed there will 

be a number of NDP MLAs who will help in their constituency 

with the federal campaign. But it will be done, as I indicated 

publicly, by burning the candle at both ends and by doing it 

after they’re done their duty here in the Assembly. That’s clear. 

 

But that doesn’t mean that MLAs from all political parties 

aren’t going to be involved in the federal campaign, as has been 

the tradition right across Canada. So I’m not sure what the 

member opposite is concerned about, but I want to say that the 

election is a very, very important part of the political process 

and MLAs have been involved in political campaigns as long as 

I can remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Premier. 

Mr. Premier, taxpayers are paying your MLAs to attend to the 

business being done in this House, not the business being done 

by Tommy Douglas House. If you’re former deputy premier has 

time to fulfil all his MLA duties and still run the national 

campaign, you have to wonder about the level of responsibility 

he has. 

 

Mr. Premier, taxpayers aren’t paying NDP MLAs to be off 

campaigning. The health system is in a mess; the highway 

system is in a mess; job creation is lagging well behind other 

provinces. Taxpayers want MLAs to deal with these issues and 

stay out of the federal campaign. 

 

Why don’t you, Mr. Premier, show some leadership and ask 

your MLAs to do their job right here in the legislature instead 

of being out campaigning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

Leader of the Third Party very clearly that the Premier doesn’t 

have to tell the MLAs to be here to do their work. I think if you 

count the number of MLAs here today you will find that there’s 

as good a representation as any Monday that we can remember; 

and I might add, much better than the previous administration 

on Monday mornings . . . or Monday afternoons. 

 

But I say to the member opposite, I don’t know why he’s so 

concerned about MLAs being involved in a federal election 

after they’ve done their duty here in the Assembly. They will be 

working as hard as ever to complete the estimates, the Bills, the 

legislation that we need to have done, and they also will be 

working in the federal campaign. I think nothing has changed. 

This is how democracy in Canada has always worked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, maybe 

there’s something to what the Deputy Premier says. With a few 

less NDP MLAs here, maybe the place would work a little bit 

better. We might find . . . In fact after the next provincial 

election, we’re hopeful that there’ll be a whole lot less of you 

people over there, and maybe the province will run a little 

better. 

 

Mr. Premier, Brian Topp and Mark Stobbe have both taken  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

unpaid leaves of absence to go on the campaign. You have to 

wonder how useful their jobs are if they can take six weeks off 

in the middle of session just like that. But at least, but at least 

they have done the right thing by taking an unpaid leave of 

absence. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you ask your former deputy premier, the NDP 

national campaign Chair, to follow this example and take an 

unpaid leave of absence while he’s doing the national 

campaign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that I think he’s a little paranoid about how 

poorly the Tories are going to do. I wouldn’t assume that you’re 

not going to win any seats. I wouldn’t be so negative on day 

one of the campaign to start making excuses already for why 

you’re going to do so poorly. 

 

I expected that comment from the Liberals today but not from 

Charest’s team. I thought you’d be upbeat and optimistic. Here 

you come and start setting out the perimeters of why you lose 

seats in Saskatchewan and why you’re going to lose. That’s a 

bad way to start the campaign. 

 

I say to the member opposite only this. Our members will be 

here in the Assembly to do the work that needs to be done. 

They’ll also be working in their federal constituencies. This is 

how it has always worked. There’s nothing new happening. 

And I say to the member opposite, just bolster yourself up, get 

out there and do your bit, and I’d bet you’d be surprised how 

well you do on election day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Members as Federal Political Candidates 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

Deputy Premier has been reading too many of Alexa 

McDonough’s speeches. He’s confusing on who’s already 

admitting defeat — it’s his party. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you’re not too preoccupied with the federal 

election, then why did you just finish changing the law to 

accommodate two NDP candidates who were breaking the law 

— Gary Lake, your candidate for Souris-Moose Mountain, and 

Dean Smith, your candidate for Cypress are both NDP 

appointees to the district health boards. 

 

The law says you can’t be a district . . . a health board member 

and a federal election candidate at the same time. Or that’s what 

the law used to say until you changed it last week, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, why are you changing provincial laws just to 

accommodate federal NDP candidates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the member 

that there is at least a candidate for another party, namely 

Maurice Vellacott, a candidate for the Reform Party, who is a 

member of the Saskatoon Health Board. And I’ll tell you why  

the regulation was changed, Mr. Speaker. The regulation was 

changed because any citizen of our province or country should 

have the right to seek elected office. If any of those individuals 

are elected in the federal election, they will be required to 

vacate their seat on the health board. 

 

If the member is saying that a citizen — whether on a city 

council, or a school board, or a health board — should not have 

the right to seek office in a federal election, I can only say we 

disagree on this side of the House with the member. We should 

encourage people to participate in the democratic process. The 

regulation was changed to accommodate that. I’m proud of that 

fact, Mr. Speaker, and I support the right of people to seek 

elected office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that 

the Minister of Health answered this because his was the other 

name besides the Premier’s on this particular OC (order in 

council). 

 

Mr. Premier, Dean Smith was nominated on March 10, Gary 

Lake was nominated on March 18. You didn’t change the law 

until last Tuesday, April 22. That means both of those NDP 

candidates were breaking the law for over a month. 

 

So did you enforce the law and ask your hand-picked — 

remember that, hand-picked — NDP health board members to 

resign? No you didn’t. Instead you changed the law to fix it up 

for them. 

 

Mr. Premier, even though you have now changed the law to fix 

up your NDP candidates, both of them were in violation for 

about a month. Will you be asking them to resign their positions 

on the health board or remove them from the health board as 

required by the law before you changed it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe the election 

campaign started yesterday when the writ for the election was 

issued by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime 

Minister. I can only repeat to the member opposite that I believe 

and this government believes that citizens of Saskatchewan 

have the right to seek elected office and should not be penalized 

for doing so. 

 

If they are successful for their parties, whatever party they run 

for, then they should vacate an office — whether it’s a health 

board, school board, city council. But, Mr. Speaker, the rules 

should be consistent for everyone. We should encourage people 

to participate in the democratic process. That’s what we’re 

doing and I’m proud of that fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Lease Surcharges 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There seems to be a 

need, Mr. Speaker, for clarification of many, many questions, 

and the answers to many that have been asked over the last 

month and better. 

  



1158  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago I brought to the attention of this 

House the fact that Saskatchewan residents who lease 

automobiles pay a 20 per cent surcharge, a tax which does not 

exist in B.C. (British Columbia), Manitoba, or Alberta. After 

being questioned about the legitimacy of this tax, the minister 

indicated, it’s time to take a look and determine, and I quote: 

“. . . whether or not we’re going to see the 20 per cent surcharge 

continue to have a life,” 

 

The minister could not provide a reason to explain why this 

surcharge existed other than to say, and I quote, “. . . (it) has 

been around for a long time.” 

 

Has the minister yet determined whether this surcharge will be 

eliminated? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to reassure the member from Melville that, as I pointed 

out on the last occasion that this question was asked of me, that 

what we were doing of course, is re-examining the future of the 

surcharge in this province along with the major review that we 

have as it relates to the auto fund. 

 

As the member knows, the surcharge has been around for a long 

period of time. The surcharge has been there primarily, Mr. 

Member, because the vehicles that were leased were ones that 

were involved by and large in construction sites, and over the 

period of time there was a significant amount of damage that 

occurred to those vehicles. 

 

Today, Mr. Member, as you well know, a large number of our 

population are involved in leasing vehicles on a private basis, 

and as a result of that, SGI is examining in a very prudent 

fashion whether or not we need to continue to have the 

surcharge in place. And as we review the process, we’ll bring 

forward to the member that information in due time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer from the 

hon. minister seems awfully familiar to the one he provided this 

House recently when questioned about whether or not 

Saskatchewan residents will soon be facing an SGI rate hike. 

 

A former federal New Democrat appeared on a CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) radio only days ago to discuss this 

particular issue. Phil Edmondston says, and I quote — this is 

what he said, “Shocking that Saskatchewan continues to have 

such a high surcharge on insurance for leased vehicles in 

Saskatchewan. It continues.” 

 

I agree, Mr. Speaker, it is shocking that this government would 

continue to levy such a charge when none of the other western 

provinces do. Will the minister explain when he’s actually 

going to have some actual answers for the public, or does he 

simply intend on hiding his decisions with respect to 

eliminating this tax and/or increasing SGI rates? Or is he 

waiting until this legislative session is ended? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing that’s 

assured here is that the member has heard my response on every 

occasion that I’ve given it and acknowledges in fact that it is 

consistent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my response to the member from Melville is that we are 

reviewing in detail the kinds of pressure that the auto fund is 

experiencing. And in that review — to the member from 

Melville — the whole issue of surcharges will also be 

examined, as I’ve indicated. 

 

I want to share again though to the House, Mr. Speaker, that I 

have here a leaflet that was circulated by the auto fund from 

Manitoba in June, 1996. And the brochure from Manitoba, Mr. 

Member, says, and it reads here that you’re paying — to their 

Manitoba residents they say — you’re paying the lowest rates 

in Canada, is what they say. But the question is, who is paying 

the lowest rates in Canada, Mr. Member? 

 

The lowest rates in Canada are being paid by Saskatchewan — 

the lowest automobile rates anywhere in the country. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t put out by the Saskatchewan government. It’s 

put out by the Manitoba automobile insurance folks. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite, as we continue to 

examine the auto rates in Saskatchewan and the auto fund in 

Saskatchewan, we’ll bring forward the kinds of conclusions that 

will be necessary as they relate to the surcharge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tabling of Departmental Reports 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well once again in 

looking for some sound answers and reports on what’s being 

going on, I just want to change to a little bit about openness and 

accountability with respect to the government’s recently 

received annual reports from various Crown corporations 

covering the last fiscal year. However, the people of 

Saskatchewan continue to await greater accountability through 

the timely release of departmental reports. 

 

Annual reports that have been released this session date back 

more than one year, in spite of the fact that the NDP indicated 

in its Democratic Reforms for the 1990’s document that, and I 

quote: 

 

“. . . all annual reports of Government of Saskatchewan 

departments, agencies, commissions and (Crowns) . . . be 

made public no later than six months following the close of 

their fiscal year . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain why his government has 

failed to live up to this commitment to table departmental 

reports in a timely fashion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I can tell you one thing, to  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

you and this Assembly, that the reports in this House have been 

tabled in a more timely fashion than they ever have been in this 

House for many, many years. 

 

Just the other day I believe, some of the hon. members were 

complaining about the number of reports that were filed in one 

day. Well I mean, you can’t have it one all ways. 

 

The intention of this government is to fully comply with the 

rules of this Assembly, fully comply with the rules of this 

Assembly. And I think if you go back through the history, 

you’ll see a continued improvement in the tabling of documents 

and it will continue until it’s absolutely perfect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if there is that anything the member opposite could do, he 

might want to cooperate and make sure that the Liberals in this 

House help out with the democratic process we go through by 

asking intelligent questions in this Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  To ask for leave to make a statement of 

importance to the people of Saskatchewan concerning the Day 

of Mourning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 

annual Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 

job. Today we in this Assembly formally observe this important 

day. 

 

The annual Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on 

the job is a solemn time of reflection. In the past year, 29 men 

and women died as a result of workplace accidents in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record the names of those 

men and women that have been lost to their families, friends, 

and colleagues: John Catto, Dennis O’Brien, Robin 

Chaykowski, Robert (Bert) Wildfong, Chris McLeod, Joseph 

Bragg, Edward Dunnison, Troy Stadnyk, John Iverson, 

Laurence Thompson, Milford Baldwin, George Boardman, Roy 

Wright, Ken Shatilla, Cliff Dyck, Norman Short, Eric 

Smedegaard, Breton Thomas, Wally Kost, Karen Rodenbush, 

James Schneider, Peter Katernick, Wayne Pruden, Douglas 

Gross, Kevin Misfeldt, Raymond Richier, Kim Hughes, George 

Temple, Harold Hemmerich. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I think it appropriate also to 

remember the seven men, women, and children who lost their 

lives in farming accidents in 1996. 

 

And whether farmers, factory, or office workers, today their  

families in Saskatchewan are grieving for the loss of a loved 

one, and we grieve with them. 

 

On this Day of Mourning, we also remember all those who have 

been seriously injured or have attained illness at work. And we 

remember the men and women left with the permanent 

disability as a result of hazardous conditions or accidents at 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot undo what has happened. We cannot go 

back and prevent the accidents that have taken such a heavy 

toll, but we can renew our determination to create safe and 

healthy workplaces for all. 

 

As elected members of this Assembly, we are responsible for 

the legislative framework to achieve that. It is up to each of us 

to support the ongoing education and promotion of workplace 

safety, to support the enforcement of health and safety rules and 

regulations, and to remain firm in our resolve that even one 

death in the workplace is too many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not some arcane or academic point. For 

working people it is a matter of life and death. Mr. Speaker, I 

now ask that all members of this Assembly rise in their places 

and observe a moment’s silence. 

 

The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 

 

The Speaker:  Members may be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51  The Arts Board Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave, 

prior to second reading, to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to introduce to you and through you to all members in 

the legislature this afternoon, a number of distinguished guests, 

but first a gentleman who is no stranger to many of you, but 

who is most importantly someone who has been a key public 

servant in the early years of the first Saskatchewan Arts Board, 

Dr. William Riddell. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Among other honours and accolades, 

Dr. Riddell has been made a member of the Order of Canada, 

the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board Lifetime Award for Excellence in the Arts. 

 

Dr. Riddell was Chair of the Saskatchewan Arts Board and the  

  



1160  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

longest serving Chair in the history of the board, serving from 

1950 to 1964. Dr. Riddell likes to quip that after appointing him 

the government must have forgotten about him; how else to 

explain his longevity in that position. I can tell this Hon. House 

that Dr. Riddell indeed was an excellent Chair and we are 

especially honoured to have him join with us in the second 

reading of the new Saskatchewan Arts Board Act. 

 

It is also my pleasure to introduce the following individuals 

who are well-known for their work in the arts community and 

who have brought honour to Saskatchewan through their great 

artwork and service to our communities: Dr. Howard 

Leyton-Brown, former director of the Conservatory of Music, 

University of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Dr. Howard Leyton-Brown’s service 

to Saskatchewan music and Saskatchewan education has been 

recognized in numerous honours, including induction into the 

Order of Canada, Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board Lifetime Award for Excellence in the 

Arts. Dr. Howard Leyton-Brown is here today representing the 

former minister’s Advisory Committee on the Status of the 

Artist. 

 

As well, we have with us Mr. Joe Fafard, visual artist. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Among other work, his cows are now 

internationally renowned and whose sculptural works are found 

throughout the world — for instance, in the lobby of the Hong 

Kong Bank Building and on the front lawns of the MacKenzie 

Art Gallery. Mr. Fafard, I am informed, will be representing 

Canada at the Jeux de la francophonie this coming year in 

Africa. 

 

Mr. Wilf Perreault, a professional visual artist. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Perreault lives and works in 

Regina. His paintings are found in collections throughout 

Saskatchewan: the Mendel, the MacKenzie, Saskatchewan Arts 

Board permanent collection. And Canada: the Canada Council 

Collection, the Edmonton Galleries, to name some. 

 

As well, this artist’s works can be found in private collections 

in the United States and England. In 1989 he represented 

Canada at the Jeux de la francophonie in Morocco and was 

awarded the silver medal. 

 

We have with us as well, Mr. Victor Cicansky. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  He is a well-known Saskatchewan 

visual artist whose appealing ceramic works appear in 

exhibitions and collections around the world; a former member 

of the University of Regina visual arts department, recipient of  

the Victoria and Albert Award for Ceramics Sculpture in 

London, England and the Kingsley Annual Award for Sculpture 

in Sacramento, California. 

 

Also, Mr. Cal Abrahamson, former executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  A member of the Order of Canada and 

former executive director of the Saskatchewan Community 

Theatre Incorporated; well-known across Canada for his 

dedication to community theatre. 

 

As previously acknowledged by a colleague in the House, Ms. 

Susan Ferley, artistic director and representative of the Globe 

Theatre. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Susan recently announced that she 

will be leaving the Globe Theatre after eight very successful 

years at the helm. We hope that Ms. Ferley will continue to 

keep Saskatchewan close to her heart as she pursues her 

professional career. 

 

I’m also pleased to introduce, and in the interest of time I’ll just 

do them quickly, and ask my colleagues to acknowledge 

everyone at the conclusion: 

 

Cheryl Kloppenberg, current Chair of the board of directors of 

the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Other members present today 

include the Vice-Chair, Mr. Paul Rezansoff, who is also 

representing the single arts agency working group; Ms. Gursh 

Madhur, Ms. Sheila Petty, Mr. Larry Warwaruk, and Ms. 

Barbara Terfloth, who is also president of CARFAC 

Saskatchewan, the Canadian Artists Representation. 

 

Ms. Valerie Creighton, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board, representing the single arts agency working group. 

 

Mr. Ken Sagal, president of the Saskatchewan Council of 

Cultural Organizations board of directors; and Ms. Martha 

Zacharias, member of the board of directors. Ms. Mary Mahon 

Jones, general manager of the Saskatchewan Council of 

Cultural Organizations, also representing the single arts agency 

working group. 

 

Mr. Brian Gladwell, president of the Saskatchewan Arts 

Alliance. Arts Alliance representatives also present include: Ms. 

Margaret Fry of the Saskatchewan Cultural Exchange Society; 

and Mr. Pierre L’Heriterr, the Association des artistes de la 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bob Boyer, first nations artist, representing SIFC, the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, and member of the 

former arts strategy task force. 

 

Dennis Garreck, the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils, or OSAC. 

 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

Mr. Fred Barker, current president and representative of the 

Saskatchewan Music Educators Association. 

 

Ms. Carol Gay Bell, artistic director of Saskatchewan Express. 

 

Mr. Rob King, president of the Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Industry Association. 

 

Ms. Terry Lynn Klassen, president of the Saskatchewan 

Registered Music Teachers Association. 

 

Ms. Lola Mae Crawley, president of the Saskatchewan 

Orchestral Association. 

 

Ms. Lindy McIntyre, representing New Dance Horizons. 

 

Dr. Mel Weisbart, president of the Regina Symphony 

Orchestra. 

 

Ms. Brenda Niskala, representing the Saskatchewan Publishers 

Group. 

 

Joanne Messer, president of the MacKenzie Art Gallery. 

 

Mr. J.P. Ellson, president of the Saskatchewan Recording 

Industry Association and chairman of the board of the directors 

of the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. Also present from the 

recording industry is Marian Donnelly, executive director. 

 

Ms. Tracy Pfeifer, president of Dance Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Jayden Stephens, Chair of the board of directors for 

Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan Festival in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Michael Toppings, representing the Saskatchewan Arts 

Alliance. 

 

Ms. Lois Webb, vice-president of the Saskatchewan Music 

Festivals Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Holly Wildeman, representing the Saskatchewan Band 

Association. 

 

Mr. Rob Zerr, president of the Organization of Saskatchewan 

Arts Councils. 

 

Ms. Catherine Hanson, representing the Saskatchewan Drama 

Association. 

 

Ms. Jan Delage, Chair of the former arts strategy task force. 

 

Mr. Patrick Close, representing the former arts strategy task 

force implementation management committee. And also from 

that committee is Mr. Bill Klebeck and Mr. Peter Sametz. 

 

So you can see from the group that is here that the interest in 

the arts and cultural community of this province is very 

diversified, is alive and well as represented by the interests of 

all these individuals who have taken the time to join us for 

second reading today. 

 

And I’d like to ask all my colleagues to welcome them to the 

House. And I also want to extend at the same time an invitation 

to any member who has time in their schedule this afternoon to 

join us later after second reading for a tea in room 218. 

 

Please join me in welcoming these distinguished guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 51 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 51, 

The Arts Board Act, 1997 introduces an enabling framework 

for bringing Saskatchewan’s family of the arts together within a 

renewed and revitalized Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

Adoption of this legislation will take the arts community along 

a productive road towards unification of arts funding and 

programing support within one agency. It will create an 

updated, effective, and efficient governance model for the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. It will encourage celebration of the 

artistic endeavours of the professional and avocational arts as 

well as the arts of aboriginal peoples and ethnic communities. 

 

Created by an order in council of the Government of 

Saskatchewan in 1948 and established by provincial legislation 

in 1949, the Saskatchewan Arts Board is the oldest arts support 

agency in North America. It has served as a model for many 

such arts agencies in other jurisdictions. 

 

The Arts Board Act has served Saskatchewan citizens well for 

50 years. In preparation for the future, this Bill proposes to 

revitalize the Arts Board through an updated mandate and 

purpose, renewed principles, and new enabling provisions in 

keeping with the present times. 

 

The Bill is framed in clear language. The proposed legislation 

affirms and strengthens Saskatchewan’s historical commitment 

to arm’s-length decision making in funding the arts. 

 

It provides a mandate to the Saskatchewan Arts Board to 

establish community advisory processes by which the arts 

communities can be involved in operational and program policy 

development. 

 

The proposed legislation also empowers the board to hire its 

own executive director. It provides for the appointment of no 

less than one-third of the board of directors directly from 

nominations presented by the professional and avocational arts 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation brings to completion years of 

consultations and examination regarding the future of arts 

funding in Saskatchewan, a process begun formally in 1989. 

 

This Bill is being brought forward by our government in 

response to recommendations of the Saskatchewan arts strategy  

  



1162  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

task force of 1990, the arts strategy task force implementation 

management committee of 1993, the ad hoc cultural 

restructuring committee, 1993; and most recently through 

proposed amendments provided by the single arts agency 

working group in 1996. 

 

Our government established the single arts agency working 

group, comprised of one representative from each of the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board; the Saskatchewan Council of 

Cultural Organizations, known as SCCO; the 

community-elected arts transition team; the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations; the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan Municipal Government. 

 

After consultations with the arts community, and after 

reviewing the evolution of arts funding and relevant legislation 

and policies from around the world, the single arts agency 

working group presented its final report to government in 1996. 

The working group considered and compared the philosophical 

foundations of the single arts agency concept with that of the 

philosophy under which the 1949 legislation established the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. It came to the conclusion that the 

underlying philosophy of that innovative Act of 1949 had not 

changed. Given the extensive nature of the proposed 

amendment submitted, our government resolved to repeal The 

Arts Board Act and put forward in its place The Arts Board Act, 

1997. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, believes in strengthening the 

community and in collaborative and cooperative action. The 

Arts Board Act, 1997 requires the board of directors of the 

single arts agency to be representative of the community it 

serves. 

 

Moreover the board will be required to establish processes not 

only to obtain arts community input on operational and program 

policies, but also to establish adjudication processes which 

involve assessment by qualified persons from the professional 

and avocational arts communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s commitment to cooperation and 

community is self- evident in this Bill. The Act establishes a 

community-based nominations process for appointments to the 

board of directors — a first for Saskatchewan arts community. 

 

The Arts Board Act, 1997 will confirm the Arts Board’s 

accountability to the government and the people of 

Saskatchewan. It will strengthen the arts community and make 

it an integral part of the decision-making process. 

 

This legislation proposes further that the new Saskatchewan 

Arts Board supports public access to and participation in the 

arts, fosters excellence in the arts, encourages quality and 

creative expression and management of the arts, and promotes 

public appreciation and understanding of the arts. 

 

In carrying out its mandate and fulfilling its purposes, the Arts 

Board will be expected to adhere to the following principles: 

access to and participation in the arts as well as innovation and 

excellence in the arts; respect for aboriginal traditions and 

protocols governing the use of traditional names, stories, songs,  

and other art forms; and respect for the cultural diversity of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With a view to maximizing access and ensuring that access is 

available to the people of Saskatchewan, this legislation 

encourages the renewed Arts Board to take advantage of 

partnership opportunities through working with universities, the 

private sector, and the aboriginal community. 

 

This legislation, in bringing together responsibility for all 

artistic endeavour within one agency, encourages the 

development of a critical mass of activity in the arts in order to 

strengthen the arts for the benefit of this and future generations 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

This Bill mandates the board to facilitate public access to and 

participation in the arts, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s rural and urban citizens will be the first 

beneficiaries of the work of our artists as they celebrate and 

give artistic expression to our unique Saskatchewan culture. 

 

This legislation also pioneers provisions for equity investments 

in arts enterprises through support for potentially profitable arts 

projects as, for example, the emerging world of new media may 

make possible. 

 

This Bill also authorizes the new Arts Board to develop a 

provincial arts endowment fund. The provisions in the Bill for 

equity investment and the new endowment fund will encourage 

increased private support for the arts, and will thus enable 

increased self-reliance in the arts. 

 

In order to implement this legislation, much transitional work 

has yet to be done through cooperation with the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board and other directly affected stakeholders. We will 

work very closely with the Arts Board and all affected 

stakeholders to rationalize funding for the arts and to develop 

regulations for the nominations process and equity investments. 

 

While it is government’s role to establish through legislation the 

mandate for an agency, to determine its governing principles, 

structure, and accountability, it is clearly the role of the new 

Saskatchewan Arts Board to manage its own affairs within the 

mandate provided for in this Bill. 

 

In order to bring clarity of definition to the roles and 

responsibilities of both the government and the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board in the years to come, it is my department’s intention 

to work closely with the Arts Board to develop a mutually 

accepted protocol agreement which would clearly define the 

respective roles of government and the Arts Board. 

 

It is our government’s intention to proclaim the Bill after early 

completion of the regulations called for in the legislation and 

after satisfactory progress toward the rationalization of funding 

and the development of the protocol agreement. 

 

Taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, will be better served by an integrated 

funding agency supporting the comprehensive range of 

excellent arts activities which have won for Saskatchewan not 

only many prestigious awards but, more importantly, a  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

respected place in both the Canadian and the international 

community. 

 

Through this proposed Bill, Saskatchewan will once again be at 

the forefront of developing new models for supporting the arts 

in Canada. Promoting Saskatchewan’s artistic excellence, 

cooperation, public access and participation, and strengthening 

community, equity, cultural affirmation and accountability are 

valued principles of operation for our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill lays the foundation for the future cultural well-being 

of Saskatchewan, ensuring that all our citizens have access to 

the best the arts have to give us and ensuring that 

Saskatchewan’s cultural life remains in a position of strength as 

we head into the new millennium. The result will be enhanced 

quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of this Bill, 

Bill No. 51, The Arts Board Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have this opportunity to speak to Bill No. 51, An Act 

respecting the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

Saskatchewan has an extremely rich cultural history, and the 

long-standing tradition of the Saskatchewan Arts Board has set 

an example for the rest of North America. However, during 

these times of fiscal restraint the Arts Board, along with similar 

organizations across Canada, have faced incredible challenges 

while they have watched their funding gradually slip away. 

 

People who are not truly aware of the value of the arts often 

question the need to provide government funding for arts 

organizations. Many of these people are simply not aware of the 

incredible contributions that the arts community makes to 

Canadian society. Therefore many of these same people simply 

cannot appreciate the role that artists play in our society, both 

culturally and economically. 

 

For people who do need to know what impact that cultural 

industries have on our economy, the statistics are staggering. 

They’re overwhelming. The contributions of the arts 

community in Saskatchewan and across Canada cannot be 

ignored. In fact the federal Liberal government estimates that 

the cultural sector in Canada contributes approximately $29 

billion to the economy every year, and that the cultural sector 

employs over 900,000 people. 

 

Now these are just figures that relate directly to the bottom line, 

but we cannot ignore the other offerings that the cultural 

community makes to Canada. The wide range of artistic 

mediums that are being cultivated here in Saskatchewan all 

have the potential to stimulate creative and critical thought in 

our society. 

 

The success of Saskatchewan artists is plainly evident. Our 

province has produced world-renowned writers, songwriters, 

musicians, filmmakers, visual artists, painters, sculptors, and 

the list goes on and on. All of these artists help portray unique  

facets of Saskatchewan’s communities to the rest of the world. 

 

The thriving aboriginal artistry that is originating in our 

province is one great example of unique Saskatchewan 

perspectives being communicated through art forms to the rest 

of the world. One of the changes proposed within Bill 51 sets 

out new guidelines regarding aboriginal traditions and the use 

of names, stories, songs, and other art forms. 

 

The aboriginal communities throughout the province have an 

extremely rich and diverse history of traditions and customs that 

are often communicated from one generation to another through 

dance, sculptures, paintings, stories, and other art. Some of 

these colourful and vibrant exhibits were on display at the 

recent SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) powwow 

held in Regina. Recognizing this special flavour of 

Saskatchewan’s art community will hopefully help preserve 

some of these important traditions and customs for future 

generations. 

 

Saskatchewan also has a burgeoning film industry. The 

small- and large-scale film productions being crafted here are 

bringing Saskatchewan critical acclaim. 

 

There is also some very exciting work being done in other 

aspects of the visual arts. The variety of theatre music festivals 

held throughout the province every year and the thousands of 

people who flock to soak up this dramatic tradition are a 

testimony to the success of the arts industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Even Prince Edward has lent his name as a patron to Regina’s 

Globe Theatre. Just a few years ago he was in the city and 

proudly accepted this honour. 

 

(1445) 

 

It would take me hours to give a detailed description of the 

various levels of Saskatchewan’s art community and their 

commercial and critical successes. But I do think that it is a 

shame that more people are not aware of the wide variety of 

artistic events, exhibitions, performances, and displays that are 

so accessible in their own communities. 

 

As for the artists themselves, while many welcome the benefits 

of commercial success, it is even more . . . it is often even more 

important for them to preserve the integrity of their creations. 

 

My understanding is that this new legislation may open up new 

avenues of funding for the Saskatchewan Arts Board by 

encouraging more partnerships with private industry on artistic 

projects. Bill 51 will also allow the Saskatchewan Arts Board 

the power to invest in equity on projects, rather than just a 

straight grant. 

 

I do realize that the future of the Arts Board is somewhat 

dependent on accessing new resources of funding, but I do 

question how these changes could potentially impact the 

integrity of the artists’ work. 

 

This Act also leaves much to the discretion of the minister by 

way of regulations concerning exactly what circumstances the  

  



1164  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

arts boards can invest in certain projects. And I am gravely 

concerned that the minister did not feel fit to include some of 

this criteria within the Act itself. People who do not appreciate 

the full impact of the artistic community on Saskatchewan 

society often raise questions about accountability for the 

distribution and allocation of arts funding. I believe that a more 

open and accountable legislative process concerning this Bill 

could also give the Arts Board even more credibility in the eyes 

of the public. So I do have concerns about this major portion of 

the legislation being left to be prescribed in regulations. 

 

The executive of the Arts Board has held consultations 

throughout Saskatchewan on drafting this legislation during the 

past year, and therefore the government has had ample time to 

consider what laws should be implemented concerning future 

equity investments of the Arts Board. I find that leaving this 

particular section out of this Bill to be a glaring omission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, overall it is my sincere hope that the legislative 

reforms proposed within Bill 51 will help to cultivate and foster 

new growth in Saskatchewan’s art community. But at this time I 

am still gathering more input from some of the groups who will 

be directly impacted by these reforms, and therefore I move 

adjournment of this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 28 — The Family 

Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

members of this Assembly know, I have a great interest in the 

well-being of our children in our province and throughout the 

country. 

 

I believe that all legislation involving our children must be 

thoughtful and fully promote their well-being. Children depend 

on the adults — all adults — legislators, and parents of this 

province to assure their safety, their emotional, psychological, 

spiritual, and material well-being. And it is in my intent to do 

everything in my power to ensure that responsibility is met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many very serious issues involving 

children in Saskatchewan. There’s the growing problem of child 

prostitution that I have been so strongly urging the members 

opposite to address. There are issues surrounding child poverty 

which continue to plague Saskatchewan today more than ever. 

These are problems that the government must do everything in 

its power to address, and address quickly. 

 

We must also recognize that all children in Saskatchewan 

benefit from a strong and stable family because families give 

children a strong and solid foundation for the rest of their lives. 

 We must recognize that all policies of government must reflect 

support for those families and those children of those families. 

Well-functioning families are central in ensuring stable and 

orderly societies. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the sad truth is that currently many families 

are coming apart at the seams. Husband and wives cannot 

always make their unions work, and as a result divorce is a 

reality in our society, and so is the break-up of common-law 

relationships. 

 

As I’ve said previously, some predictors say that by the turn of 

the century, fully one in two marriages will end in divorce. That 

is as astonishing number. And we know there will be children 

involved in many of those cases. One would hope and pray that 

when marriages or other unions involving children do end, 

separation is as amicable as possible and is not fraught with 

bitterness, harming individuals and children unnecessarily. 

 

But once again, Mr. Speaker, reality tells us something quite 

different. All too often it is the case that couples are bitter and 

resentful and that is why divorce becomes imminent. And that 

bitterness can intensify after the separation if our laws 

surrounding divorce are lacking in effective directions leading 

to orderly resolutions and satisfaction surrounding custody. 

 

And so in many circumstances, this has led to children being 

used as bargaining chips in this game of bitterness and 

maliciousness. This is a tragic situation which we must work 

towards alleviating. Just because adults cannot work out their 

differences in a civil and civilized manner, that doesn’t mean 

that they should be allowed to use their children to wreak 

revenge on their ex-spouse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the overall intent of this legislation, as 

far as it goes, is good. Like the federal legislation that it mirrors, 

it does introduce some consistency in divorce settlements, in 

particular the level of child support paid by the non-custodial 

parent. The federal Act dealt with children of married couples, 

while this Act provides the same provisions for children born 

by non-married parents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the guidelines set out by this legislation will, I 

believe, introduce more fairness into the system as it relates to 

different cases. As my colleague from North Battleford stated in 

this House when he spoke to Bill 28: 

 

Nothing can enrage a non-custodial parent more than 

learning that another parent in similar financial 

circumstances is paying far less in support payments. 

 

And that’s been possible in our system, Mr. Speaker. Under the 

system as it has existed, judges could and did make decisions 

that were all over the map. Such inconsistency was not fair and 

it was not just. There has got to be consistency from case to 

case, and that’s the point behind the financial guidelines that 

will be set up through this legislation. 

 

However the legislation also recognizes that circumstances are 

not always the same from case to case, and it recognizes that 

over time, circumstances do change. The legislation will allow  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

judges to override the guidelines in certain special 

circumstances, and that is important, Mr. Speaker. While 

consistency is a must in our system, we must recognize as well 

that the financial situations of families do change over time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to focus now on an issue that we’ve heard a 

lot about since the introduction of the amendments to the 

federal Act and then to this Act. And we heard about them last 

year as well when we were debating The Family Maintenance 

Act, when legislation was passed denying a driver’s licence to 

those parents who failed to live up to their financial 

responsibilities to their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, beyond simple financial matters involving care for 

children, we must also deal with the whole issue of access. 

Many divorced parents have contacted me about this issue. 

They say that it’s all too common that custodial parents are 

making it very difficult for non-custodial parents to maintain 

access and contact with their kids. This is what I mean when I 

speak of the bitterness of parents jeopardizing the well-being of 

their children. 

 

Common sense tells us that any child will be better off with the 

stability of two good and loving parents. If this cannot be 

provided in one household, we must ensure that both divorced 

parents see the value of giving their children the benefit of two 

parents through equitable visitation and custody agreements. 

And we must ensure that these agreements are enforced on both 

parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since becoming an MLA, I’ve heard many stories 

told by non-custodial parents who are responsible and do take 

responsibility for their children. They are up to date with their 

child support payments, and they go out of their way to make 

sure that their children enjoy a happy, stable life even though 

their parents are no longer together. 

 

However quite often, these loving and responsible parents have 

their rights ignored by our system. Custody arrangements and 

visitation rights are sometimes ignored or denied by custodial 

parents, and there is precious little in our present system that’s 

there to help these parents out. In these situations, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not just the non-custodial parents who are hurt, it’s the 

children who are robbed of the company of one of their parents 

because our system doesn’t do enough to enforce joint custody 

arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in doing consultations regarding Bill No. 28 for 

the past couple of months, I’ve come to see how our system can 

be extremely unfair to non-custodial parents. While this 

legislation quite rightly addresses the problem of non-payment 

of child support, it doesn’t look at the other side of the issue. 

 

Yes, non-custodial parents do have responsibilities to their 

children, and we do everything in our power to make sure that 

they live up to those responsibilities. But what about the 

responsibilities of the parents . . . the parent who does have 

custody? What, in this law or any other law, compels them to 

allow reasonable and consistent access to their children? 

 

I’m told, Mr. Speaker, that the present system just does not  

protect parents enough when it comes to accessing their 

children. That’s why I think it’s important that any law that is 

passed in this House regarding parental responsibility must look 

at both parents. I believe our federal counterparts have seen this 

as a problem and have set up a joint committee to look at issues 

pertaining to custody and access. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the financial needs of the 

children of divorce. However, we must consider as well, their 

emotional needs. And that emotional need is not met when their 

parents fight for custody in the courtroom and then continue 

that fight for years after with one denying adequate access to 

the other. And our laws have to effect meaningful steps to 

address this problem for the sake of the children. 

 

If the non-custodial parent fails to return his or her children in 

the time prescribed in the Queen’s Bench order, they should be 

charged under the Criminal Code and, in theory, maybe even 

jailed. 

 

However, the issues of access . . . this issue of access is not 

covered by the Criminal Code. If a custodial parent decides to 

deny access to the custodial parent for whatever reason, despite 

what the court sets out as the custody arrangements, the parent 

has . . . the parent who has denied his or her right to access must 

hire a lawyer, go to court, and make a civil court application. 

This is a ludicrous inequity that our system, both at the federal 

and provincial level, has got to deal with quickly. 

 

We’ve got to figure out a system where our children cannot be 

used as pawns. We need a system that is fair to both parents, 

and in turn, fair to the children. We need a system that makes 

sense to both sides. Then and only then may we try to avoid 

some of the bitterness and the fighting that can and does do 

more emotional harm to our children than anything else. 

 

While this Bill addresses one side of the equation, Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t feel it adequately addresses issues on the other. And 

until we address both of these issues adequately through more 

comprehensive legislation, inequity will continue and the 

well-being of our children will continue to be endangered. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make a few comments as well on this Bill that’s before 

the Assembly, and some of the comments I will be making will 

have already been made by the members. But I think it’s 

important and it’s imperative that they are certainly brought to 

the forefront and continue to be an area of discussion that we 

look at in the future with and not . . . they’re not necessarily met 

in this legislation. 

 

One of the particular points that I really want to dwell on for a 

moment was just mentioned by the member from Humboldt, 

and that’s the fact of access by both parents. I think it’s a 

travesty, Mr. Speaker, that we have made light, if you will, of 

responsibility for the actions we take, especially when it comes 

to marriage. 

 

It seems to be we’ve reached a point in our civilized democracy  

  



1166  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

whereby we find it easier for people to take action or begin 

actions or get involved in processes whereby they make a 

commitment but in the very near future find that, well maybe 

we made a mistake or maybe we don’t feel we’ve got a 

responsibility to the partner we’ve chosen or what have you . . . 

Because our laws have become a lot more lax. We’ve basically 

said, it’s really not all that bad for parents to separate. We’re 

going to create a more easily . . . easier process whereby parents 

can find it easier to walk away from a marital agreement. 

 

And in fact in our society we don’t even have marital 

agreements any more. We find that many couples find it just as 

easy to cohabitate rather than enter a legalized agreement 

because they’ve come to the point of saying, well why take the 

time to officially recognize our partnership when down the road 

maybe it’s just as easy to annul this partnership and not have to 

go through the legal process of divorce or what have you. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that answers a lot of the questions we 

have out there, especially when it comes to children who have 

been conceived and have been brought into this world by a 

couple, and their responsibilities. 

 

And when I look at this piece of legislation and I recognize 

some of the things it’s trying to clarify, one of the concerns I do 

have and we’ve talked about at length with different individuals 

. . . I have a couple circumstances that I want to raise with the 

Minister of Justice when we get into Justice estimates. 

 

One of the big questions is the fact that certain partners feel that 

even though they have gone through a legal battle if you will, 

and in some cases a very messy divorce process, and the courts 

have awarded, if you will, maintenance — and in most cases 

it’s the husband usually ends up with the biggest cost when it 

comes to maintenance and looking after children — even 

though the courts have awarded, okay this is the responsibility 

of the husband, this is the responsibility of the wife, and in 

many cases that may be having custody of the children and then 

allowing the father access, we find that a lot of times the father 

is the one . . . even though the courts have given, awarded, the 

financial responsibility and the courts make sure that that 

husband is held responsible to that financial commitment to that 

divorce settlement. 

 

On the other hand a father may find that he is losing, time and 

time again, access to his children, because the wife can choose 

whether or not to give access, or to make sure the child is ready 

for the father to come and visit on a special occasion. And what 

I’ve found as I’ve talked to individuals who have found 

themselves in this process, I find, Mr. Speaker, even though the 

court has awarded it, there is no legal bounds, if you will, that 

enforces access. 

 

The enforcement of the financial obligation is there, but as the 

member from Humboldt mentioned, if you want access you are 

forced — and this is just . . . it really boggles my mind that we 

would have a process like this — you are then forced to take 

civil action against your former spouse in order to see your 

children, even if your children are begging to see you. 

 

Well what does that do, Mr. Speaker? All it does is puts more 

money in the hands of the legal community that’s out there 

defending or fighting for the rights, so-called rights, if you will, 

of individuals. 

 

And I think that’s ludicrous. It would seem to me if the courts 

can award an agreement or process whereby a financial 

contribution is taken care of, and if they’ve offered access, then 

there’s no reason why that access ruling should not be followed 

up as well. 

 

And so I think it’s . . . I think the member from Regina Centre 

talked about getting rid of the lawyers. Well I’m not exactly 

sure if we can afford to do all of that, but maybe there’s many 

people in our society who would feel that way, based on some 

of the comments, and some coming from members opposite, 

and certainly some of the problems that people face and that 

come across our desks. 

 

I think as I understand, this Act in making a number of changes 

is trying to clarify and regulate the process of instituting child 

support in cases of divorce, and the central changes that judges 

would be tied to a set of tables that set out the amount of 

support that a child requires according to the family’s income 

level and region. 

 

I think, if you will, as well, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

North Battleford touched on some objections that spring to 

mind about this system. And for example, does this tie the 

hands of judges so that they cannot recognize special 

circumstances in a particular family? We must recognize that 

every family situation is different, and different circumstances 

arise. And these are some concerns that I think need to be 

raised, we need to address and get clarification from the 

minister, when we have the opportunity of debating this Bill in 

Committee of the Whole, whenever that opportunity may come. 

 

However, as both the minister and the Liberal critic have 

pointed out, these sorts of objections they say are balanced off 

by the bitter device of time-consuming, expensive process 

involved in setting child support from one case to another. 

Further, I note, as the minister noted, judges in Canada have 

already been using these tables for some time as a rough 

guideline in making their decisions. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of fairness, if these tables 

are to be used at all by the judicial system, then there use should 

be mandatory and universal. The benefits of doing this have 

already been mentioned — by minimizing the time that couples 

seeking divorce spend haggling over issues, we also reduce the 

bitterness and disharmony that this process engenders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think — I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 

the circumstances that this legislation is trying to deal with, it is 

very imperative . . . and I’ve chatted with couples who have 

gone through divorce. I’ve chatted with couples who have sat 

down at the kitchen table and while they finally, basically 

acknowledged that they really didn’t see a lot of reasons why 

they should stay together, even though they had real love for 

their children, but felt there was too many differences in their  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

personalities that maybe they had to separate just to try and save 

some of the love, and show their children they still cared for 

them. 

 

And they would come to amicable agreements as to how to 

settle up and how to look after the children, in custody and what 

have you. It seemed every time they finally went to a lawyer to 

seek some guidance and legalize what they had come to as an 

agreement that they could live by, and show some 

understanding with, they ended up before the courts, even 

though that wasn’t their intention originally. And as a result, it 

put them at loggerheads and the children are caught in between. 

 

And as one parent mentioned to me, when you phone and 

you’re asking if it’s possible to see your children on the 

weekend and have the opportunity to spend a day with your 

family, and all of a sudden you’re informed, no, the children 

won’t be available — and you can hear the children in the 

background saying, but we want to see daddy, or we want to see 

whichever one of the partners — it’s heart-rending. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the time is coming when instead of always 

looking at ways of making divorces amicable, maybe it’s time, 

Mr. Speaker, we started looking at ways in which we can get 

couples to start sitting down long before they’ve reached that 

process and look at their responsibility to their children and to 

each other, and realize, and realize that working together, in the 

long run, is still the best benefit and the best example. And we 

will certainly enhance our society, rather than encouraging 

separations and divorces and then having to make . . . having to 

create legislation that makes the process less dirtier than it 

already is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there are certainly some circumstances 

that this Bill is trying to address. We would look forward to 

addressing some of the concerns we have with the minister 

when we get into Committee of the Whole. And I just wanted to 

add those comments to the record before we move through 

second reading on this Bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Is the minister standing to close debate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

 

The Speaker:  The minister is standing to close debate. And 

it’s my duty to warn all members that he wishes to exercise his 

right to close debate. Once he has spoken, then that prohibits all 

other members from entering into debate. And if any other 

member wishes to enter the debate, they must do so now. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted the 

opportunity to speak briefly to Bill 28 and emphasis my support 

for what the member from Humboldt and the member from 

Moosomin has said. I think it’s incumbent on this House, when 

we’re dealing with this subject, that we look at both sides of the 

issue. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have to do all we can to ensure that the 

money that is owed in child support is paid out on time and in 

full. And we have to ensure that the amounts that are paid are 

fair to all sides. In particular, we have to make sure that the  

amount is enough to allow the custodial parent to raise the 

children in the best lifestyle that is possible, taking into account 

the incomes of both parents. 

 

The advent of guidelines in this regard is positive in that it will 

introduce some predictability and consistency in the amounts 

judges set in child support. And hopefully it will remove some 

of the adversarial relationships that play out in many of the 

cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a wife and as a mother, I can’t imagine using 

my child as a tool to extract vengeance from my partner. 

Happily I have not been faced with the prospect of divorce or 

separation and I think my children have benefited from the 

stable home. But the constitution of the World Health 

Organization recognizes the advantage of a two-parent, 

functional home. It says, and I quote: 

 

Healthy development of the child is of basic importance. 

The ability to live harmoniously in a changing total 

environment is essential to such development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very well aware of the many dedicated and 

loving parents in our province that are forced to raise their 

children alone through no fault of their own. And I’m not 

suggesting for even a moment that they are incapable of 

providing less loving or less stable homes. However, I also 

submit that, wherever possible, it’s better to see children raised 

in a two-parent home with both a mother and father providing 

guidance, love, and support for their children. 

 

However, I know that not all children are fortunate enough to 

grow up in a stable and loving, two-parent home. Divorce and 

separation are even more common today than ever before. 

Statistics tell us that we’re moving toward a divorce rate that 

could be as high as 50 per cent in the next few years. We can 

only estimate what the separation rate is among common-law 

relationships. 

 

Many children now find themselves in situations that see their 

parents living in separate homes, if not in different towns or 

provinces. While nothing can make such a situation ideal, we 

have to ensure that the children of these unions are brought up 

in as stable environment as is possible. That means encouraging 

both parents to keep in mind the welfare of their children first, 

last, and always. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just like the member from Humboldt, I too have 

been contacted by many parents when it comes to the laws 

governing children’s support and child custody. And a great 

many of the people who have contacted me have told me horror 

stories. They have told me about being denied access to their 

children even though it is their legal right. They tell me of the 

spiteful behaviour some custodial parents have towards their 

ex-spouses, and they tell me of the psychological harm this 

behaviour has on their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as we can set out financial amounts and 

guidelines that take away any of the doubt about financial 

responsibility, I believe our legislation must treat just as 

seriously the whole issue of shared or joint custody and  

  



1168  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

visitation rights. Is it fair that one parent can deny access to the 

other against the orders of a judge? Is it fair if the non-custodial 

parent fails to return the child in time, he or she can be charged 

under the Criminal Code, but on the other hand if the custodial 

parent does not live up to the letter of the judge’s order, little 

can be done. 

 

In these cases, non-custodial parents who are not granted their 

rightful time with their children must go to court to have the 

order enforced. I don’t understand this. It’s an unfairness that’s 

in the law that I would hope governments at both levels will be 

dealing with. It’s not good enough to enforce financial aspects 

of separation orders; we must be able to enforce custodial 

arrangements as well. And as much as possible, we should 

encourage equal time be spent with both parents to aid their 

growth and development. 

 

Our children should never, ever be used as bargaining chips. 

They should never be used as tools by one parent to hurt the 

other. And they should never be subjected to this kind of 

behaviour. It just isn’t acceptable. And it’s most certainly not 

right. Anything we can lay down in legislation to avoid this 

situation should be done. 

 

(1515) 

 

Human nature, being what it is, will not make all custody 

arrangements go smoothly with the stroke of a pen. But we 

have to take the first step in ensuring that the law treats both 

parents equally. We have to make sure that both parents know 

what their responsibilities are underneath the law. We can’t 

have a system which allows one parent to get away with failing 

to live up to his or her responsibilities when we go after the 

other under the Criminal Code. It’s inequitable, Mr. Speaker, 

and in the end it’s the children who are hurt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the government opposite and the federal 

government to look at this subject when dealing with separation 

agreements and custody arrangements. Up to this point, I don’t 

believe this has been a priority for any level of government. I 

urge the Justice minister to listen to parents who want nothing 

more than to provide as much love and nurturing as possible to 

their children. 

 

Broken homes should not mean broken hearts, Mr. Speaker, and 

our system must avoid this. We must allow our children to grow 

up knowing two parents whenever and wherever possible. The 

kids, Mr. Speaker, must always be our first priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has offered to the people of this 

province a commitment to address some of the very real 

concerns of access and shared parenting. We’ll be taking his 

word for this, and his commitment to heart, on behalf of the 

non-custodial parents. We’re counting on the minister to 

recognize that there are two sides to every story and we’re 

waiting to hear what he has to say to us today. 

 

The Speaker:  Once again, I must advise all members of the 

House that the minister wishes to exercise his right to close 

debate, and once he’s recognized, all other hon. members will 

be prohibited from entering debate. If any member wishes to  

enter debate, then he or she must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 

to talk about The Family Maintenance Amendment Act again, 

and in that context, talk about some of the concepts of parental 

responsibility and shared parenting. Because I know, and I 

know from listening to my colleagues opposite, that there are 

many concerns around the financial aspects of the break-up of 

relationships that also play out into the lives of children and 

cause a great deal of distress for children. 

 

And I think what I want to specifically say today — and I will 

expand on it when we get into committee and respond to 

questions — is that the issues of custody and access, or the 

issues of parental responsibility as it relates to shared parenting 

— if we can use some less loaded words — are at the forefront 

of the next area of discussion of family law. 

 

And I guess what I would like to say is that we in 

Saskatchewan, thanks to the changes to The Children’s Law 

Act in 1990, have had some of the most progressive remedies 

and processes for use in dealing with custody and access issues. 

But somehow some of these remedies have not been used. For 

example, we have some of the abilities to get orders to make up 

time if access has been refused, or we can get orders for costs if 

somebody is out money when they go to exercise access and 

they’re refused. We also have the traditional contempt orders. 

 

Unfortunately some of these processes haven’t been used as 

well as they should have. So what we are doing, and one of the 

places that we received some information about this which was 

of assistance, was last year the Children’s Advocate pointed out 

that about a quarter of the cases that they were dealing with in 

their office related to custody and access issues. 

 

So coming out of that, and also out of our concern in the 

Department of Justice, we’ve set up an inter-agency working 

group on custody and access issues. This was done about a year 

ago. And this committee is chaired by people within the 

Department of Justice. It also includes people from the 

Department of Health, Department of Social Services, 

Department of Education, and the Children’s Advocate office. 

 

They are working on a discussion paper for Saskatchewan, the 

people in Saskatchewan. And we anticipate that this will be out 

next month or maybe by June, where we can get into a more 

detailed discussion of these issues of parental responsibility and 

shared parenting. 

 

And it’s clearly our government’s commitment and my 

commitment that this issue is not going to just go away. We 

need to figure out some of the ways that we can do this. We’ll 

look at other jurisdictions that have attempted to add some more 

penalties. We’ll look at why some of the things that we have, 

which are better than most of the places in Canada, aren’t being 

used as often. We’ll also sit down with some of the parents — 

and many times it’s the fathers who are somehow cut out of 

their children’s lives — and find out why they end up not 

having the ability to exercise the access that they should. 

 

While this is going on in Saskatchewan, and I think the member  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

from Humboldt alluded to this, the Federal-Provincial 

Territorial Family Law Committee — which is a committee of 

the various departments of Justice officials across the country, 

set up about 14 years ago — has been working on a number of 

priority issues. In 1990 and ’91 they were given a mandate to 

deal with three priority items. They were: child-support 

guidelines, custody and access issues, and spousal support. 

 

The intense effort that’s gone on across the country is now all 

coming together on May 1 this year, as it relates to the 

child-support guidelines. But the work as it relates to custody 

and access issues or the parental responsibility — 

shared-parenting issues — is ongoing and we anticipate that, on 

a national basis, there will be now more discussion and 

hopefully within the year some kind of a paper and further 

discussion at that level. 

 

So that’s also coming, but that’s one part where we as 

Saskatchewan are part of a national discussion. 

 

The other thing is that I should say, in 1995 in Saskatchewan in 

the Department of Justice, there was a recognition that there 

were some difficulties as it related to exercising access, and at 

that time there were some changes made to the procedures used. 

And what happened was, supervised access was introduced as a 

service of the family law division of the Department of Justice. 

At the same time, parent education classes were increased. 

 

And I guess what I would say is, there are a whole multitude of 

solutions to this problem and what we need to do is make sure 

that we’re doing all of the things that we can to assist children 

live full lives, with the contribution and support of both their 

parents and all of their family. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1977 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister first to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with 

me Department of Justice officials, Betty Ann Pottruff, who’s 

the director of policy planning and evaluation; and Susan 

Amrud, who’s the director of legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understand that 

what we are doing today in introducing the guidelines is 

something that has been facilitated by the federal government 

and the intention is that all provinces will be introducing 

parallel guidelines. I wonder if the minister would tell us how 

this links into national policy and what he understands to be 

going on in the other nine provinces and the two territories. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d be pleased to answer that for you. 

The situation . . . And if you want I can go through each and 

every province and sort of explain it. But I think practically, 

what I would say is that this legislation comes forward as a 

result of a federal-provincial-territorial working group. And the 

goal obviously is to have all of this legislation in place by May 

1, 1997 when the federal changes to the Income Tax Act take 

place and the guidelines are all brought into place. 

 

And what I would say is that the guidelines are basically going 

to be brought in as discussed, except for the province of 

Quebec, and they have a slightly different understanding of how 

they’re going to do that. But practically, the guidelines will be 

in effect everywhere on May 1. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Mr. Chairman. First of all, pardon me, I’d 

like to welcome our two officials, Ms. Amrud and Ms. Pottruff, 

to the legislature this afternoon. 

 

And I’d like to ask the minister next: my understanding is that 

part of the underlying philosophy of the guidelines is that rather 

than there being a set cost as to how much it costs to raise a 

child in Canada, and how much it costs in Toronto versus 

Regina, that the underlying thought now in the guidelines is that 

the cost of raising a child is basically dependent on the income 

of the parents — the funds available in the family. 

 

And related to that, I understand that the thinking now is that 

there isn’t really a difference in terms of Toronto versus Regina 

— that the difference is income available. So I wonder if you 

could tell us, will our guidelines look much different in terms of 

the actual tables? Will they look much different than the tables 

which will be introduced in other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  They will be the same tables because 

we’re adopting the federal regulations. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So — pardon me — you’re saying that even in 

terms of the dollars and cents, if the non-custodial parent earns 

X number of dollars, the order will be at the same figure 

whether Newfoundland or Ontario or Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer is, the federal 

government has set up tables for the whole country. And those 

tables are province specific. So there is a different table for 

Ontario than Saskatchewan, and a different table in 

Newfoundland, for example. So we will be using the tables that 

relate to Saskatchewan and are set out in the federal regulations. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But am I correct if, from what I have seen, that 

the differences from province to province are quite slight; that 

in fact our figures do not look much different from the figures 

for other provinces. Although as the minister has said there, the 

federal government has introduced different tables for different 

provinces, but as I understood and from what I have seen, those 

figures in fact will not vary by much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m not sure what your definition of 

slight is, but I think we probably agree. And I think the biggest 

difference relates to the tax rates in the province and that 

practically, otherwise the rates are fairly similar. 

  



1170  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Now on . . . of course I’m aware that the 

deductibility in terms of income tax is not retroactive. But 

notwithstanding that fact, the anticipation is that there will be a 

number of applications for variation of maintenance as a result 

of the new guidelines from either the custodial or non-custodial 

parent. Because of course as we have been discussing in this 

House, up until now the orders have tended to be all over the 

map up until now, and now we’re trying to make them more 

standard. 

 

I’d like to ask the minister if the province is anticipating a flood 

of applications before our courts for variation of child support; 

and if so, what mechanisms have been put in place, both in 

terms of the courts and obviously the related services of legal 

aid, etc. in order to deal with this anticipated new demand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well it’s our estimate that there are 

approximately 12,000 cases were there could be some activity. 

We anticipate that maybe 50 per cent of those will undergo 

some review, and we have been working quite diligently at this 

because we knew it was coming; although the delay in the 

federal legislation and the regulations did put a bit of a, I guess, 

a scare into whether we would be ready. But we are ready. And 

I guess what I would like to do is explain to you what the 

implementation process is going to be. 

 

The first thing is that there will be public education and 

communications which includes what we’re doing here right 

now. Practically, there is a 800 number line on the telephone, 

— I guess it’s an 888 line probably, since the 800 numbers are 

gone — on the provincial implementation of the rules. There’s a 

similar one from the federal side of federal guidelines and 

implementation. The lawyer referral service of the law society 

has been enhanced so that clients can access family lawyers to 

get advice. 

 

There’s going to be parent education programs across the 

province. And basically these sessions will be set up to show 

clients how to use and understand the guidelines and see 

whether or not it’s necessary for them to go into some 

amendment. Also we’ll be distributing pamphlets, brochures, 

and videos about these things. And there have been kits 

prepared which have all of the forms which allow people to 

actually prepare their own application for amendment if that’s 

necessary. 

 

At the same time we’ve also been doing training. We’ve been 

training the lawyers in this procedure. We also have quite a 

number of mediators and Justice staff who are receiving 

training and information so that they’re ready to answer 

questions if they work, for example, in a court-house across the 

province or . . . so that’s another part. Legal Aid we know has 

quite a number of these clients as their clients, so we’re going to 

be having some additional funds available to meet any 

increased load that this would cause. 

 

We’re also enhancing the court staff services so that the volume 

of cases will be met with some more people available. As well, 

we’re adding another person in the enforcement staff as it  

relates to registration and enforcement of these various orders. 

 

At the same time we’ll also be continuing to evaluate how these 

changes take place and make sure that if there are particular 

problems, so that people are frustrated or aren’t getting the 

information that they need, we’ll be able to respond and change 

the information or provide more services as necessary. 

 

We also have an inter-departmental committee which is 

coordinating the work so that any problems that arise between 

provincial administration of this and the federal rules, well that 

will be dealt with as well. The other thing that I have done is I 

have a letter that is going out to all of the lawyers and mediators 

in the province, setting out as much information as we have 

about the whole process. 

 

And we think that we’re ready, but we know that sometimes 

you can’t anticipate all of the needs and so we’re quite willing 

to assist you if things should arise that you hear about before we 

do. And we’ll gladly try to help respond to any questions that 

you get as well. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’m interested in your figure of perhaps 6,000 

orders. There will be applications for variation. And I want to 

know how that figure relates to the number of maintenance 

orders which are typically placed in effect in Saskatchewan in 

an average year. And whether . . . You’ve mentioned many of 

the services you’re putting in place to deal with this influx, but 

what about the court system itself? Is there any concern that the 

court system itself will have difficulty dealing with applications 

for variation on a timely basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’ll give you some more figures so 

you can write them down if you want. We think that there . . . 

well we know that there are approximately 12,000 orders, 

support orders and agreements right now which affect about 

30,000 children. So it’s a significant number of Saskatchewan 

children that are affected by these orders or agreements. 

 

And when we estimate that there’ll be 6,000 where there is 

some change, well some of these may be changes by agreement 

where it will not involve much time in the court. I’ve met with 

the Chief Justice of the Court of Queen’s Bench and he has 

been monitoring fairly carefully what’s happening within the 

court. We think that we’re ready — we know that we’ve got the 

bar onside. If in fact we are in a situation where we need more 

assistance, well then I think we’ll be able to work with the 

various parts of the system to respond. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that a 

generation ago in fact only a small number of child support 

orders were honoured, and through various measures that have 

already been put in place in terms of enforcement, that that 

figure is much higher now. I wonder if you could indicate in 

percentage terms where we are at now in terms of the honouring 

of child support orders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you are correct, that before 

we ended up as a society — I think I should put it like that — 

but with the government leading the way, to enforce support 

orders, I think approximately 25 per cent of the orders and  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

agreements were met. I am pleased to say that we’re now up 

close, about 85 per cent. So it’s a substantial increase and I 

think it’s a very positive thing for the whole community. 

 

Once again it’s parental responsibility that is being assisted, but 

also I think it’s making sure that children are the main 

beneficiaries of this and that they have as much assistance from, 

usually the non-custodial parent. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, while I definitely applaud the 

improved enforcement measures we have in this province to 

enforce payment, it seems to me that the first step in the process 

obviously is putting in place a sensible and reasonable order to 

begin with. And while I realize that the guidelines are an 

attempt to make that happen — so that it is a standardized order 

and that it has some basis in reality — I think one of the 

problems in enforcement we’ve had in times past is that the 

father has, frankly, disappeared. He’s ignored court proceedings 

and the end result is that a quite an unrealistic order has been 

put in place. 

 

And this has created, I think, unnecessary hardship on our 

maintenance enforcement office and on the courts because they 

are . . . our maintenance enforcement is charged with the 

responsibility of enforcing an order which really just isn’t 

realistic. 

 

Now does the . . . do the new guidelines address the situation 

where the non-custodial parent has just flown the coop? And we 

need some good information on that person’s income in order 

to, say, make sure that the order we’re putting into effect is a 

reasonable, sensible one, and one that should be enforced. So, 

as I say, we don’t burden our maintenance enforcement office 

with trying to enforce orders that are unrealistic, albeit they 

were put in place in the first place because the parent wasn’t 

cooperating properly with the process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you’ve almost answered your 

own question in a way. But I think practically, the way the 

legislation is set up is that if some . . . an applicant is applying 

for child support and the respondent has disappeared or left the 

province, they could file information as to what the skills or the 

abilities of that person are to make income and then a judge can 

make an award based on the estimate of the income at that 

point. 

 

If in fact the fellow has an order against him which turns out to 

be beyond the ability to pay, well there’s nothing preventing 

that respondent — usually the man — to come back to this 

court or to another court in Canada, I suppose, depending on 

where he lives, and present the situation as to income and get 

the order adjusted. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I think I’m satisfied. I think my 

colleagues may well have some other issues they wish to ask 

you and your officials. But I would like just in conclusion, 

personally, to say that I appreciate your concluding comments 

in second reading this afternoon and the undertaking that you 

have given this House and the province that your department 

will look at the issue of enforcement of access and co-parenting 

agreements. 

 

While the Liberal opposition certainly understands that the Bill 

before the House today deals with child support when we’re not 

talking about custody and access, none the less the issue of 

access — whether it should or not — just is bound up with the 

issue of child support. And I know that, you know, lawyers and 

the experts say that they’re separate issues, but inevitably the 

two just do get mixed up in a family dispute. 

 

And I personally applaud and the Liberal opposition applauds 

the fact that we have as a province and as a society made 

enormous strides in the enforcement of child support payments. 

That’s certainly a positive, positive step and the guidelines are a 

further positive step. 

 

But I think that it is none the less important that we as a society 

and yourselves as a government make the point that the parents, 

presumably the fathers in most cases, who must meet their 

obligations and their responsibilities to pay child support, that 

also the state will be vigilant about their rights — namely their 

right of course to have a relationship with their children. And 

that we as a society consider that the non-custodial parent’s 

right to a relationship to his or her children is just as important 

an issue as the responsibility of that parent to pay child support. 

And I appreciate the minister’s statement in that regard this 

afternoon. 

 

I’d also like to say that while we realize that this may be an area 

that will be occupied by the federal government, pending action 

by the federal government in that regard, I would certainly 

encourage the minister to consider whether a violation of a 

custody access order under our Children’s Law Act could 

become the subject of a provincial offence. 

 

And I agree that this might be superseded by action from the 

federal government, but until the federal government clearly 

occupies the field, I think there is room for we as a province to 

say that violations of custody access orders under the provincial 

Children’s Law Act can be the subject of an offence and 

therefore chargeable by the province rather than, as my 

colleagues have pointed out this afternoon, the only remedy 

presently available is for the access parent to spend more 

money hiring a lawyer and charging civil contempt, and with 

uncertain results other than that the access parent will incur a 

large legal bill. 

 

(1545) 

 

So I thank the minister for his statement in that regard today. I 

am certainly satisfied that the guidelines are a step forward in 

the development of family law in this province and in this 

nation, and I wholeheartedly support them. But as we force 

non-custodial parents to own up to their obligations and 

responsibilities, let us also as a province say we honour their 

rights and we respect their rights and we will enforce their 

rights. And even more important, we will enforce the rights of 

the children of Saskatchewan: one, to receive the support 

necessary for their upbringing; two, to as far as it possible, 

enforce their right to a good relationship with both of their 

natural parents. Thank you to you and to your officials. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to  

  



1172  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

your officials, a couple of the questions that I alluded to when I 

was speaking in . . . I guess the one thing I would like to have a 

bit of an idea — if you can give us a general idea — of what 

type of tables are we talking of here, and some examples of how 

this chart that you’re talking of and bringing it in line with 

federal regulations, how it will work and how does it recognize 

varying family situations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I am happy to answer that question. I 

actually have some copies of the tables as it relates to 

Saskatchewan, which I would ask that you give to the member 

from Moosomin, and the member from North Battleford a copy 

as well. 

 

Basically the guidelines have been in public discussion for a 

couple of years at least, maybe longer, and what was done was 

an attempt to try to figure out the appropriate amounts. And I 

know that if you really want to know a lot about this, I could 

probably get you about 10 inches of single-spaced paper trying 

to explain all of the different theories about how one does this. 

 

I think in the final analysis the Federal-Provincial-Territorial 

Family Law Working Group Committee came up with some 

proposals which they then presented to the ministers and the 

federal minister, and it’s on that basis that we proceeded. 

 

I think practically, all of the education and information that I 

talked about in response to a previous question relates to, how 

do these guidelines affect existing orders and how do you figure 

out in your own unique situation how they apply to you. 

 

I think the other thing I should say is that the legislation is set 

up so that in those situations that aren’t sort of an average 

situation, then the court is given the power to make the 

appropriate adjustments. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe, Mr. Minister, 

you had indicated to the member from North Battleford that 

when the federal government sends charts out, the charts have 

been adjusted for each province. There’s been some, if you will, 

fluctuations to recognize the different circumstances that affect 

provinces. 

 

I’m wondering as well, Mr. Minister, in regards to these charts 

as far as maintenance, if the charts or the suggestions of 

maintenance take into consideration different circumstances that 

families may face. Like for example say there’s a handicapped 

child involved or a child that would require more attention than 

say a normal, well, healthy child that can basically look after 

themselves, does this chart take that into consideration? 

 

As well, does the chart as well address circumstances that will 

arise in child rearing? And I think of a couple of cases that have 

come across my desk where maintenance or settlement 

regarding maintenance was addressed and then as they — the 

unfortunate part is the children were younger — as the children 

became a little older and were at a place where they would like 

to have become involved in activities, whether through school 

or outside of school such as say piano lessons, which can 

become fairly costly, or involved in sporting activities. Does  

the chart address circumstances like that, where children move 

through different processes as they get a little older and become 

involved in more activities? 

 

And I know the concerns that were raised with me by the 

custodial parent was the original awarding of custody and of 

certainly financial support, as the children became older and 

four and five years later, certainly didn’t quite meet the 

requirements or the needs. And then the custodial parent had to 

say to the child, well I’m sorry, I can’t get you into the hockey 

program because I just don’t have enough money to go around, 

or piano lessons. 

 

So there’s two different questions here, and I’m wondering, Mr. 

Minister, what this chart does to address those types of 

circumstances. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the way it works is that the 

chart is the base, and if there are special expenses that may 

relate to certain activities or needs of a child, then those would 

be argued and a judge could make an order over and above the 

guidelines. And as far as the changing needs of children as they 

grow older, or sometimes some of the needs are reduced as they 

grow older, then it is possible to apply to amend the order to 

take into account those increased or decreased expenses. 

 

And so I think practically the tools are there to do this and 

basically the judge is given the final say. The guidelines are 

there as the base. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, this chart that you sent over to us, is 

this just part of the chart, just an example? Because I note the 

numbers you’re quoting that we have on the chart here are . . . 

we’re talking of people with substantial incomes when I see 

from 49 to 70,000. It would seem to me that someone making 

$49,395, this doesn’t seem to be a substantially high awardation 

for the maintenance of a child. And I understand just from some 

of the circumstances I’ve run into with regards to individuals 

who have talked to me, who are probably making maybe a third 

less than what this number is here, they’ve still been awarded 

even a higher amount than this. 

 

And so I guess the question would arise, well this is a chart and 

it’s a standard chart . . . I think you just made a comment a 

moment ago that judges still can take a look at and possibly 

award even a little higher than the chart. Or is this a chart that 

will be stringently adhered to based on the ability of a custodial 

parent to pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well what I did do is I had a few pages 

related to different incomes. So I think if you want to look for 

the lower incomes, if you talk to the member from North 

Battleford, I think he has the lower income. I have some of the 

higher incomes here. 

 

But I think what you should note is that these are the charts 

effective May 1, and so that they will be less than what your 

neighbours or friends talk about in their awards because these 

do not have any of the income tax included. These are the 

after-tax payments that are set out in the guidelines. 

 

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does the legislation make 

allowance for situations where the custodial parent’s financial 

resources are greater than the non-custodial parent’s, or does it 

require that both parents contribute equally regardless of their 

ability to pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

when the guidelines were set up there’s an assumption that both 

parents will contribute. And so if in fact the custodial parent has 

more assets, that won’t necessarily reduce the payment. But I 

think, you know, practically, that is something that maybe could 

be argued if there’s special expenses; that a custodial parent that 

has more income than the non-custodial parent there may be 

some argument there that when the special expense issues arise 

that that could be a factor. But the guidelines themselves are set 

up on an average family with both parents contributing. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, under clause 4 of the current Bill, 

the new sections 3(4) through 3(6) provide a number of broad 

exceptions to the guidelines, as do several other sections. And 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, in view of these clauses, one has 

to ask why are we bothering with the legislation at all? Maybe 

you could just explain this a little clearer to me, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This wording that we have in our Bill is 

consistent with the federal Act and consistent across the 

country. Basically, what it does do is take into account the fact 

that the parties may enter into agreements relating to 

matrimonial property, which would therefore mean that the 

guidelines wouldn’t apply because they’ve made some other 

arrangements, as it relates to the family farm, for example, or to 

some other larger asset. 

 

And it also relates to the fact that parties can still enter into 

consent orders that are different than the guidelines if they so 

wish. 

 

Mr. Toth:  And in view of that last comment, Mr. Minister, 

where you talked about different guidelines, if judges are still 

able to make their own judgement, how does this differ from 

the current situation where income charts are already used — 

this legislation versus where we’re at today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think our Court of Appeal in 

Saskatchewan set out some of the rules around this and 

basically said that it wasn’t possible for a judge to abdicate their 

responsibility to make a decision by just following the 

guideline. And so what it is is that they’re of use to a judge as 

presumptions as to what an average family might need, and 

they’re used in that way as guidelines. 

 

What happens now after this legislation is in place, is that 

there’s a . . . well basically the law sets out what the guidelines 

are. Up until this point, in Saskatchewan, we know that many of 

our judges have actually carefully reviewed the guidelines and 

have made many decisions using the guidelines for advice. 

 

Mr. Toth:  One further question that I have on this, Mr. 

Minister. Clause 10 of the current Bill enhances the Crown’s 

ability to make regulations with respect to maintenance  

payments. And I’m wondering, why were these powers spelled 

out in this way? It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that it 

would give or increase the danger of the intent of the Bill being 

changed through regulation. And maybe I’m misunderstanding 

that clause, but I’d like a clarification on this. 

 

It would seem to me that we would want to know that the Bill is 

setting out guidelines that cannot be changed through 

regulation. And is this just a wording that may not really be 

reflecting this? And maybe you could clarify that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think once again this is a result of 

the federal-provincial territorial working group and the 

suggestions around the legislation. So this kind of a clause is in 

every piece of legislation, including the federal legislation, so 

that if there are some adjustments that need to be made, they 

can be made under the existing legislation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  A further question to that. You mentioned . . . I 

think you made a comment, just as you were ending your 

comments, about the fact that it could be done through 

legislation. I think through legislation, Mr. Minister, that would 

be the appropriate way as that’s more public and there’s open 

debate on it. 

 

But if I understand correctly, we’re talking of regulations, 

regulatory change. Now if the regulations can be changed 

without it . . . not really being a public discussion or debate on 

it. So it would seem to me if it’s legislation, then I would 

certainly agree with you on it. 

 

If it’s left and the wording leaves it open just to be done through 

regulation, Mr. Minister, then regulations can be changed quite 

easily, and especially regulations . . . when the regulatory 

changes come, an order in council just allows that process or 

that change to take effect. And therefore most people really 

don’t know until they have to deal with it down the road. 

Whereas through legislation there is a public consultation, a 

public process to address that. 

 

So maybe you could just clarify that for me, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the way I would clarify it is to say 

that we specifically have intended that this part will be able to 

be changed by regulation because it’s anticipated that the 

amounts will be updated every two to three years by the federal 

government in consultation with the provinces and the 

territories. And it’s not our intention that we would come back 

to the legislature for a change in the legislation but that we’d 

have that ability in the regulatory powers set out in the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Then I have to ask one further question. When 

you’re talking about regulations, you’ve made the comment 

about you’re leaving it with regulatory powers so that if the 

federal government changes it we don’t have to go through a 

process of always having to introduce legislation, which I guess 

I can certainly see the reason for it. And if it has to go through 

legislation, then it slows the process down. 

 

(1600) 

  



1174  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

The concern I have, Mr. Minister, is that someone might use the 

regulations to make a change outside of say changes coming 

down through federal regulations and maybe use it as a means 

of adjusting payments. And I think we need to be clear that that 

is not the intent. If I understand you correctly, that’s not your 

intent. 

 

The reason for the regulatory change is to make sure that you’re 

in a process of being able to change based on federal regulatory 

changes, rather than just someone at a whim, down the road, 

provincially starting to change through regulation and change 

the whole intent of the legislation. That’s the concern I have, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that I would respond by 

saying that this ability to change is something that we require in 

Saskatchewan and that it wouldn’t only be triggered by a 

change by the federal government. 

 

For example, we know that Quebec now is setting up their own 

scheme and guidelines under the federal, and complementary to, 

the federal legislation. So they’re not using the guidelines 

exactly. 

 

It may be that after a year or two or three of working with the 

guidelines as set out in the federal regulations that we would 

want to make them more Saskatchewan-specific type of 

regulation. That power to do that is included in this clause. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So then based on those comments, Mr. Minister, 

what you’re allowing even through the regulatory changes is 

certainly if there’s areas you feel that are not really being 

addressed, you’re getting a lot of issues or concerns being 

raised that the chart is not really meeting the need, then this 

process certainly allows for some changes that could, if you 

will, put some more meat or make sure that specific 

circumstances are certainly being addressed. Is that what you 

would suggest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s correct. And I think, 

practically, we know that this type of legislation cannot be 

changed without much consultation with people. And so that 

practically any change that would move away from the scheme 

that we have now would involve much consultation with the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. And 

welcome, Mr. Minister, to your officials. I am pleased to take 

part in this discussion because I have a deep concern over this 

Bill because it’s surrounding our children and their needs. 

 

The member from North Battleford talked about shared 

parenting and access and the fact that this Bill is actually talking 

about support. But we’re talking about one child, and both of 

these problems involve the children, and I don’t think we can 

look at one without the other. We think that children are 

affected by everything. 

 

I was waiting patiently — or impatiently — today to listen to 

the statement that you were to make surrounding what could be 

done about access. And I guess I can say that I was  

disappointed because all I heard discussed was papers and 

discussion in the future and what’s going to be happening later 

on. And what we’re talking about is children right now and 

parents who are being deprived of each other, the need that they 

have. 

 

And I think we were worried about — rightfully so — about 

money. But at the same time we’re forgetting about the love 

and the support and the other part of life that makes it important 

for children to become real citizens in this province. 

 

And I guess I’m hoping that during this next little discussion 

I’m going to be able to get from you what you think and feel; 

how you feel you can actually make a difference in your 

position as minister in this province to the children of our 

province so that we do have the parents involved. 

 

Mr. Minister, The Children’s Law Act of Saskatchewan states 

that children have a right to be parented by both parents. Why 

does the province of Saskatchewan enforce the custody under 

the Criminal Code and yet we don’t enforce access? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I have a little bit of difficulty 

because it’s . . . as you stated in your preamble, this is not 

related to this legislation that we’re dealing with in committee 

now. But I do understand your concern that it relates to 

children. And so I guess practically, what I would say is that 

under The Children’s Law Act in 1990, changes were made to 

that Act to add some more remedies to non-custodial parents to 

enforce access. 

 

And those remedies, which aren’t available all across Canada 

— we actually have more progressive legislation in this area 

than in many places — include getting an order to make up 

time. I mean get a specific order that says, lookit, if I can’t have 

time now for whatever reason, whether it’s youth . . . you know, 

the custodial parent thinks the child is sick or the custodial 

parent just is having a bad day and doesn’t want to allow the 

access, you can get an order sort of replacing that time. That’s 

something that we have now. 

 

We also have the ability under that legislation as it relates to a 

judge making order for costs. You know a good example in 

Saskatchewan is if somebody drives from Estevan all the way 

up to North Battleford and then is told, well, you can’t have 

access; he drives back and then has to go back again three days 

later or a week later. Well those kinds of costs, it’s possible to 

apply to the court and get a judge to order that they be 

reimbursed from the parent who has refused access. 

 

And so what I’m talking about here, these are civil remedies. 

Another civil remedy, a remedy outside an offence, is the 

contempt. And if a person is in contempt of an access order, 

ultimately a judge can order somebody to go to jail if they are in 

contempt of a court order. And those powers are there in The 

Children’s Law Act now. 

 

I know that you have some specific concerns about some orders 

that relate to creating a provincial offence — like a crime — 

and we have not gone that far yet. But what I guess I’m saying 

and what undertaking I’m giving to you is that we are  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

examining that. 

 

We know in Manitoba that they have a law like that now, but 

it’s . . . there are number of problems with it and we are wanting 

to, in consultation with them and other places that have tried 

this kind of thing that you’re suggesting, that we know exactly 

what we’re doing before we get involved in trying to 

criminalize custodial parents who refuse access to non-custodial 

parents. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that there . . . 

I can see why you don’t want to jump right in and that there 

might be problems involved that you don’t know what the 

answers are yet, but in the meantime are we better off not doing 

anything and waiting to make sure that it’s perfect? Life isn’t 

perfect, and I’m just wondering if we couldn’t be helping some 

of these parents and children even more by acting on some of 

the suggestions or works that are done in places like Ontario. I 

understand that they are doing . . . they’ve done some changes 

to their enforcement Act, or their access Act, right now. 

 

I know you gave me a couple of examples of what can be done 

by going through the judges and so on, but are we actually 

enforcing it? Like how many parents are actually able to do it? 

Can they afford to do it? The time frame is so long and every 

time . . . The months tick by and these children are growing up, 

and in the meantime, they have been denied access to their 

parents. 

 

I’m just wondering what are you actually doing to enforce what 

can be done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I would first like to comment on 

your comment on Ontario. Ontario tried to put into the 

provisions of their Act what we put in 1990 in Saskatchewan 

and they were defeated. So they don’t even have the powers that 

we have as it relates to enforcement of access. So I think that 

that’s one thing that you should keep in mind. 

 

I think practically what we have done in Saskatchewan is we 

did come forward with The Children’s Law Act changes in 

1990 which expanded some of the provisions. We don’t totally 

understand why some of the provisions aren’t being used — the 

ones about make-up time, about costs, and some of these orders. 

 

And so part of the whole discussion around the child-support 

guidelines and the education . . . Because we know that lawyers, 

mediators, whoever is involved in these cases get the questions 

about custody and access and child support, child maintenance; 

they all come together. We are increasing our education on 

these other remedies to make sure that people will actually use 

some of the things that we already have in force. 

 

The other thing is that in 1995 we brought in court supervised 

access as a service of the family law division of the Department 

of Justice. And that’s something that can be ordered by a judge 

which allows for supervised access. And this is done by 

contracting non-government agencies who provide this kind of 

assistance. At the same time, we’re also increasing the parent 

education component of the whole family law division because 

we know that this is an area that is of some concern. 

 

And so I think, practically, it’s not accurate to say that we’re 

not doing anything. It’s something that is of great concern. We 

actually have legislation that’s I think somewhat ahead of most 

of the other provinces in Canada. We’re willing to take another 

look at this. 

 

In fact we have been in the process of a year — last year — of 

looking at custody and access issues because we know from 

two, three, four years ago, at least, that once you start talking 

about the guidelines as it relates to support, it does raise 

questions about custody and access. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. And I do know 

that you’re sincere and I do know that you’re working on it. But 

I also think that we have an opportunity right now to be 

working on something that can really make a difference. And I 

just hate waiting when we’ve got children involved. 

 

You said you didn’t fully understand why some of the 

provisions aren’t being used, and I’m wondering what you’re 

doing to help understand — like what kind of steps are you 

taking right now to realize, to understand why people aren’t 

using these provisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m having a little bit of difficulty in 

following the line of questioning that you’re going at because 

you’re really talking about the Children’s Law Act and possible 

more amendments to that legislation. And what we’re talking 

about today is really, you know, the child maintenance, or the 

Family Maintenance Amendment Act. And so it’s a bit difficult 

to go way off into another track where we know . . . And it’s 

our policy in the Department of Justice to consult widely in the 

community before we make any proposals about changes in 

legislation. 

 

And as I said before, it’s our intention to come out into the 

community with a discussion paper within the next couple of 

months to look at these issues as the next step in dealing with 

the children and access. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I realize that we’re on different 

Acts, but at the same time in discussions prior to today, I had 

understood that we were going to be able to have some concrete 

advice as to when we’re going to be able to open up the other 

Act, or actually make a difference to the custody and the access 

part of it. So that’s why I’m trying to get an idea, so we can talk 

to the parents in this province about what’s happening to the 

ones that are trying to get access. 

 

We talked about court supervised access . . . And I think you 

understand that it’s something that non-custodial parents feel is 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Derogatory. 

 

Ms. Draude:  It’s derogatory. They just don’t . . . It doesn’t 

feel good to feel like you have to have the court watching you. I 

think it’s something that there are many, many parents, 

especially fathers, out there that are really upset about the  

  



1176  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

whole idea and they’d like to get an idea of what and when your 

government is going to try and change it. 

 

Did I hear you say that within the next couple of months that 

there would be a discussion paper that would be available for us 

to look at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s correct. We’ve been working 

on this for about a year. And as you can understand, the child 

support guidelines in the federal . . . and the Act that we’re 

actually talking about today, this is the result of many years of 

hard work by people like the officials that are with me today as 

well as many legislators and lawyers and everything else. And 

so you can’t make changes in this area just without considering 

all of the consequences. 

 

I think, practically, that what . . . You know the type of 

questions that you’re asking today would be much better suited 

to the time of estimates because then we can go wide ranging 

over all of Justice policy and how we spend our time and effort 

in changing the law. 

 

But practically, today we’re dealing with The Family 

Maintenance Amendment Act, and that’s basically legislation 

that’s trying to coordinate this with the federal legislation which 

comes into effect later this week. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d just like to continue a bit with the questioning 

regarding access and enforcement. 

 

I guess the enforcement — that is really the responsibility of the 

provincial government, for access, to ensure that access is in 

fact being given when the courts have already deemed that a 

certain time for access or a time period for access has been 

awarded by the courts. And so I think what my colleague and I 

are trying to get at here is why in the provincial system are the 

courts not taking more aggressive measures to ensure that 

access awards that have been given are being met with, without 

the non-custodial parent having to go back to the courts to get 

an award for access all over again? 

 

So that’s what we understand is happening. If in fact you have a 

different suggestion about this or explanation for it, I would 

appreciate it. But we do have parents out there that are saying 

this is what’s happening. They are basically trying to access 

their children as has been outlined by the courts, and when they 

go to do that the custodial parent has got every reason 

sometimes for not allowing the visitation by the father, or the 

mother, in whatever case. 

 

So if you could just tell me what the provincial minister here is 

doing to ensure that access is awarded in fact, possibly through 

punishing the custodial parents if they are not giving over 

access to a child as they have been instructed to do. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chairman, I move we report progress. 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

The Chair: — I would ask first that the minister introduce his 

official, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Okay. With me once again today, Mr. 

Chair, is Drew Johnston, who is head of the health planning and 

policy development branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d 

like to welcome Mr. Johnston this afternoon. And now we have 

an opportunity, Mr. Minister, to continue our conversation that 

we’ve tried on many, many, many occasions, including this 

afternoon. 

 

I would like to just begin by making very brief comments and 

then asking for the minister’s views. First is, Mr. Minister, that 

you’ve chosen to introduce a Bill and bring before this House 

the new Psychologists Act which contravenes the official 

position of the Saskatchewan Psychological Association, whose 

mandate is the protection of the public through regulating this 

practice of psychology. 

 

It comes as some surprise to people in that organization, 

primarily because they are the only — and have been the only 

— professional body to regulate the practice of psychology in 

Saskatchewan. And SPA (Saskatchewan Psychological 

Association) is not only nationally known, it is internationally 

known and recognized as an outstanding professional regulatory 

body for psychology in our province. And it really doesn’t 

understand why its input has been — how they feel — virtually 

ignored. And I would like your explanation, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I thank the member for the question, 

Mr. Chair. And as I’m sure the member . . . as I know the 

member knows, Mr. Chair, there are three organizations in the 

province that have people that practise in the field of 

psychology — the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists Association, and the 

Saskatchewan psychologists association. And the member is 

correct that the third organization does not support all aspects of 

the legislation. But the other two organizations do support the 

legislation. So two out of three support the legislation. 

 

And I think the member also knows that in fact there has been a 

lot of dialogue between the officials and also some politicians 

and the SPA. There’s been a lot of discussion. In fact this 

matter has been going on for many years. 

 

There are some aspects of the legislation that the SPA would 

support and there are some aspects of it that the SPA would 

strongly oppose. And unfortunately we’re unable to come to a 

situation where the SPA supports all aspects of the legislation. 

And I think that is unfortunate. However the disagreement does 

not mean there’s been no consultation. It means that there’s 

been some consultation but unfortunately an inability to get a 

complete consensus on all issues. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well I do agree in part with what you’ve  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

said, Mr. Minister. I know that there have been consultations 

and that’s not really what I’m referring to here. I know that 

people have not only had opportunities for input, they have 

been in good faith participating in what they felt was going to 

result in a collaborative effort. 

 

I do want to make one comment before I proceed, and that is 

that SPA is the only and has been the only professional 

regulatory body in the province of Saskatchewan. PSS 

(Psychological Society of Saskatchewan) is not a regulatory 

body, nor is the educational psychologists’ group. SPA is 

separate and apart from these two groups in that aspect. 

 

And as I had commented with you earlier this afternoon, this 

group has not only done outstanding work, their work and their 

standard for regulation is something which has been recognized 

nationally and even further. They’ve done a tremendous amount 

of work and they most certainly did enter into all of these 

discussions in good faith. 

 

If I may, and I’m going to take the liberty of doing this, just for 

the sake of conversation this afternoon, if I may — and I don’t 

think I’m putting words into their mouths given the amounts of 

communications that I’ve had with people — they have felt that 

they made extraordinary concession, that there was movement 

being made to some agreement between the three different 

bodies to which you referred. 

 

They have felt also, however, that when that was being reached, 

that this Act was put before the Assembly and that the progress 

that had been made virtually dissipated. And that has left them 

most frustrated, because they see this as very, very important 

legislation. 

 

And I most certainly concur with you, as they would, that this 

has been a long time coming; that everyone of them agrees that 

every psychologist in this province should be registered; that 

they agree that there should be a way of ensuring a certain 

minimum standard in the province of Saskatchewan; that the 

profession should want to and will be responsible for policing 

itself. So there’s no disagreement on those things at all, but 

there most certainly is a feeling of, let’s say alienation that they 

have expressed because of some of the process that they have 

experienced in the deliberations on this. 

 

And I’ll give you an opportunity to respond, and then I’ll ask 

some more specific questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Chair, the member is certainly 

correct that the SPA is the only regulatory body and the only 

body that’s had experience with regulation. That is one of the 

problems we’re trying to resolve, in the sense that we want the 

others to be regulated as well. And I know the member 

indicates agreement with that. 

 

And I appreciate what the member is saying, that there have 

been compromises and good faith discussions with the SPA, the 

doctoral level psychologists. There has been some compromise 

on their part; there’s been some compromise on the part of other 

people too. Discussions have actually continued up until fairly 

recently, because there is an agreement between the three  

organizations on a House amendment related to section 23. 

 

And as I said before, the discussions surrounding the legislation 

have actually gone on for close to two decades. And so one 

would be a bit optimistic if one thought that there definitely 

would be agreement on all aspects by the three groups. That 

unfortunately hasn’t been our experience. But nevertheless, 

there’s been compromise by the SPA, compromise by others, in 

terms of designating educational credentials after the word, 

psychologist. 

 

And nobody regrets more than I do, I can assure the member, 

that there isn’t complete agreement by all members of the 

profession on all aspects of the legislation. But I have every 

hope and faith that people will continue to operate in good faith. 

And under the transitional council of the legislation, if people 

cooperate and work together, I think that any outstanding 

concerns that there are can definitely be resolved. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I most certainly hope so too. And I guess 

in part the reason I raise this with you in this forum is because 

in our conversation over the last part of the afternoon, there are 

many people who believe that they were negotiating in good 

faith and they no longer believe that that might be possible 

simply because they feel somewhat misled in the process. They 

really did believe that there was some agreement being reached 

as all three professional groups and that that was thwarted in 

some way. 

 

Just for the sake of no further outbursts by the member of 

Regina South — no, I don’t have a conflict of interest here 

because this is regarding registration for people who are not 

already registered; and so I don’t have a conflict of interest. 

 

Indeed, if I may, I’d like your comment on one thing. You 

probably read in the newspaper, as I did this weekend, 

comments that were made by some who took out a very 

substantial ad in large print. And I think you should have an 

opportunity to respond to that, Mr. Minister, even if our points 

of view differ. I think it’s important for that to be on the public 

record. 

 

In that publication of the ad or the notice if you will, it stated 

that Saskatchewan goes from one of the highest standards of 

psychological practices in Canada to the lowest. And I would 

appreciate your comments on that. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well thank you and I welcome the 

opportunity to comment on that. The new Psychologists Act 

does not lower standards or make public protection more 

difficult, as is claimed in the advertisement. In fact the new Act 

simply recognizes the current standard and improves public 

protection. 

 

At the present time our health and education services, 

particularly outside of Saskatoon and Regina, rely extensively 

on master’s prepared psychologists to serve the public. These 

psychologists, I think it’s very important to know, have never 

been regulated, which meant that employers could hire anyone  

  



1178  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

as a psychologist. And if a member of the public had a concern 

regarding the psychologist’s conduct or competence, there has 

been no regulatory process for resolving the issue. 

 

The new Act will regulate all psychologists in the province and 

not just a portion of them. It will also better protect the public 

by requiring at least a master’s degree in psychology to practice 

— something that doesn’t exist now — and restrict practice to 

the person’s area of expertise. 

 

The new Act also allows for the professional body to set 

standards of practice for those psychologists practising 

independently. Again, providing better protection to the public. 

 

The new Act allows master’s prepared psychologists to 

continue to use the title psychologist, which is the title they now 

use in the forums that I’ve referred to, and have used that title 

for decades. This is also the case in several other provinces, 

such as Quebec and Alberta. 

 

It is unfortunate that not all psychologists support the new Act, 

but I believe that the Act, by regulating all people who purport 

to practise psychology, will provide better protection for the 

public. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well the one thing with which all people 

involved in PSS and the educational psychologists society, as 

well as SPA, would agree with you, sir, that we’re all better off 

having everyone registered. There’s never been one statement 

ever in 30-odd years since the first Act was brought in that 

would not agree with that statement. That’s not what people are 

concerned about. It’s the impression that is left with the public 

and, as well, the kinds of standards that they see perhaps 

changing, given what high standard there’s been in the province 

before. 

 

You alluded to both Alberta, which by the way has always had 

amongst lowest standards, and Quebec, which is changing 

theirs. And I’m surprised that where there is a province with the 

largest number of master’s level psychologists in the country, 

which is Quebec, that they are now doing much of what we 

discussed earlier. They’re doing things to try to . . . and they’re 

just now going through serious discussion on this. They have 

problems with the massive number of people they have who 

have the least training to be doing the serious jobs that they’re 

doing, and they’re now looking into what they can do to raise 

the level of training for their master’s level psychologists in the 

province of Quebec. 

 

So it’s an interesting kind of thing that the two provinces you 

cite as examples making it okay for us to lower our standards 

are the two provinces, one of which we would not want to 

emulate — next door — which I’ll tell you about in a future 

question that I’ll be posing, and the province of Quebec, which 

is now recognizing their own problems. 

 

Now I just want to reiterate for the record — and I did this in 

second reading — I have worked with extraordinarily talented 

people who have been trained at the master’s level, who have 

acquired over years of experience, a great deal of expertise in 

their field of endeavour. There is no question that we have  

many people doing terrific jobs at the practice of psychology in 

this province who have master’s degrees. 

 

And I think where the difficulty comes in is when you’re 

talking about a regulated body and how do we differentiate 

between them. We’re not talking about differentiating on the 

basis of competency. We’re not talking about differentiating on 

the basis of experience. We’re talking about how do we 

differentiate between people in a particular field, and often we 

do that on the basis of training. 

 

As you know, the average number of years for receiving 

doctoral level training in our province would be six. The 

average level of training for a master’s degree would be two — 

three if you’re including a thesis for some. And it’s important 

for there to be some way of recognizing a differentiation. And 

that’s really what a lot of people have raised here. 

 

If I may I’m going to . . . And I know that you received this 

letter because I think all members of the Legislative Assembly 

did so. You can confer with Mr. Johnston on this; I’m sure he’s 

had to respond. This is from Patricia Witzel, who’s a registered 

psychologist in Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. And I’ll just quote 

from the two different parts, one which kind of emphasizes 

what I started off with this afternoon in discussion, and then 

becomes a little bit more specific. And I’ll just start in . . . it’s 

halfway down through the first paragraph: 

 

It is my opinion that the effort made by the Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association in this regard has been largely 

ignored and that responses by government officials to our 

concerns have been inadequate. This pertains not only to 

our requests regarding content and wording of the Act but 

also to our request that we be consulted with and listened 

to in the development of the legislation. 

 

Further, despite many reassurances to the contrary, 

legislation is essentially being forced upon SPA. 

 

And now the second last paragraph: 

 

Numerous issues surround this legislation. The most 

central of these is protection of the public through ethical, 

competent practice. Intrinsic to protection of the public are, 

one, a supervision requirement for practitioners with less 

than doctoral level training; and two, title distinction 

between master’s and doctoral level practitioners. Master’s 

level training is not sufficient for carrying out independent 

unsupervised practice. Such practice must be carried out 

under the supervision of a practitioner with doctoral level 

training in order to provide adequate protection to the 

public and a minimally acceptable standard of care by most 

North American standards. 

 

The Act must incorporate two-tiered registration (in other 

words different scopes of practice) with title distinction, 

thus clearly communicating to the public a difference in 

skill level between the two types of practitioners. 

 

Now we did talk about the fact that there are people who have 

extraordinary skill in a particular part of psychology in which  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

they’ve practised for many, many years. And I would hazard to 

guess that those people are so recognizable in this province for 

the outstanding work they’ve done that anybody, regardless of 

their training, would be able to say, you have a problem with 

adults of childhood sexual abuse, that’s the person you should 

send them to. Okay. 

 

The problem becomes, when do we differentiate that that 

individual can do that kind of work versus going into clinical 

diagnostic work, okay. Who decides now — which would have 

been different before — to practice independently, but decides 

not to just work in that particular field, but to be able to go 

beyond what has been done before with no supervision at all. 

 

And what you’ll find, Mr. Minister, is that in provinces like 

Ontario, doctoral level psychologists continue to be supervised. 

And people who feel very strongly about their profession, the 

protection of the public, and ensuring that they continue to grow 

in their own field of endeavour, they continue to get supervision 

on an ongoing basis. 

 

Why is it that we wouldn’t want to require this, at this stage, 

where regardless of whether people have experience and are 

competent and so forth, that we wouldn’t want to build in that 

kind of assurance for the people of our province. It’s done, and 

I would hazard to guess, as standard practice, even amongst 

people who are practising in this province today at a doctoral 

level, that they meet with one another for supervision. 

 

And I’m wondering why it is this isn’t a legitimate concern that 

has been raised by Dr. Witzel in terms of supervision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think Dr. Witzel’s concerns are 

legitimate, in fact, and the . . . Let me say that there is room 

within the Act for the transitional council and ultimately the 

governing body to have different standards for different 

practices. So that I agree with the member that what it will want 

to do is decide what the person is fit to do professionally, get 

looking at their educational attainments and their experience. 

And one person may be qualified to do a certain range of 

activities and another person may do another range of activities 

or go beyond and do both the original range and other things. 

 

So the legislation certainly contemplates that there will be 

different rules for different people. And that’s not unusual in 

professional legislation. 

 

I want to say that I do disagree however with the statement that 

has been made by some of the doctoral level psychologists that 

the master’s level people they’re said to have two years of 

training. In fact my understanding is that to get a master’s 

degree in psychology they probably have had five or six years 

of university. And after they get their master’s they begin to get 

some experience in their field. And these are not people that 

don’t have any qualifications. They do have master’s degrees in 

psychology. 

 

Now in answer to the question, well why should people not be 

supervised and so on, well as the member knows, anyone can 

hang up a shingle right now and start a counselling service. And 

they’re not supervised by anybody, they’re not licensed,  

and they’re not regulated. And that of course is what we both 

agree we need to change. 

 

In terms of what people should be allowed to do with the 

education they have and the experience they have, that should 

be determined within the profession itself. In terms of situations 

where they should be supervised or not supervised, that also 

should be determined within the profession, because that is 

what self-government of a profession is all about. And I 

suppose it’s a point of contention that that government will now 

involve not only people with doctorate degrees in psychology, 

but it will now involve people that have master’s degrees or 

educational psychology degrees. 

 

But that is the whole purpose of the legislation — to bring 

everybody into one tent to try to regulate the practice of 

psychology. And our view is that people should act 

cooperatively, and that if they do act cooperatively, that they 

will come up with rules that address Dr. Witzel’s concerns that 

are I think, very legitimate concerns, very legitimate concerns. 

And they do have to be addressed. But I guess I’m saying there 

isn’t just one way to address them. They can certainly be 

addressed within the framework of the legislation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well I appreciate your comments. I want 

you to know that I’ve never heard from anyone a question 

raised about the motivation for this Act. The concerns that are 

being raised are regarding the process and the content, not at all 

about the motivation. 

 

The comment that I would like to make regarding the years of 

training — I mean if what we want to do is include 

undergraduate training rather than just the specific years for the 

master’s degree, then we can change the six years for the Ph.D. 

level to thirteen and than we can change the master’s to six. I 

mean if that makes anybody feel any better. 

 

But I don’t think it accomplishes anything except that there is a 

differentiation based on years of training and that years of 

training has to mean something or people wouldn’t bother doing 

it at all. Why would any of us ever bother if we could 

accomplish in one year what it may take us four years to do 

otherwise? I mean it doesn’t make any sense. 

 

You would have received as well a memorandum from Agnes 

Sawchyn, and this is the one . . . this went to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly. If I may, I’d like to just cite a couple of 

things from this memorandum. 

 

Agnes Sawchyn states that she has been of course in 

communication with the Association of State and Provincial 

Psychology Boards, otherwise referred to as ASPPB, on issues 

of registration and licensing of psychologists. And this is an 

alliance between both American and Canadian psychology 

regulatory bodies. We’ve always been a very proud member, 

the SPA in Saskatchewan, of this particular organization. And 

the mandate of this association is to foster and maintain 

licensure and certification standards to ensure the protection of 

the public. 

 

(1645) 

  



1180  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

 

I’m going to give you a direct quote, and this is the following 

statement that Dr. Sawchyn states: 

 

It is ASPPB’s position that the training provided in 

master’s degree programs is insufficient to adequately 

protect the public’s interest and that while many 

jurisdictions credential master’s level providers, almost all 

require that their services be supervised by a psychologist 

licensed at the doctoral level. 

 

Now you may comment on that if you wish, because it really is 

a quote from a large organization throughout North America. 

But what I’m really quite interested in is this. She also includes 

some other facts in her memorandum, and I’d like your 

comments, please, on the fact that if this new Psychologists Act 

is implemented without amendments, Saskatchewan will not be 

able to participate in the ASPPB agreement of reciprocity. And 

there are other provinces that can currently do this, Ontario and 

Manitoba being the two provinces. Alberta, until it cleans up its 

act and raises its standards, most certainly could not. We, at this 

stage, most certainly can. And I’m wondering how you feel 

about the fact that once this passes, and if it passes unamended, 

we won’t be able to any more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think that, I think that that assumes 

that the governing body under the legislation will not come up 

with appropriate rules. But I have every confidence that people 

cooperating with one another can come up with rules that would 

satisfy that body. 

 

But I want to say also to the member, and the member may be 

aware of this, that I’ve received . . . I realize that some members 

of the Saskatchewan psychologists association do not support 

the legislation. I respect their views but I don’t always agree 

with them. But I want to say, the legislation is supported by 

some doctorate level psychologists who have indicated their 

support for it, by many MA psychologists, of course, but also 

by the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists Association, school 

divisions in — these are public school divisions — in Moose 

Jaw, Regina, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Northern Lights; 

catholic school divisions in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon; and also the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, the Moose 

Jaw Health District, the Saskatoon Health District, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, the Registered 

Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan, the 

departments of Social Services, Justice, and Education. 

 

Well I guess the point I’m making is, there may be some 

organization that doesn’t support the legislation; there are many 

organizations that do. 

 

But what I would like to do is to say to all of the psychologists 

— whether they’re doctorate trained, at master’s level or 

educational psychologists — let’s work together and cooperate 

and within the professional organization come up with 

standards that both regulate people and, if possible, meet the 

requirements of the organization the member refers to. 

 

And there’s nothing in the legislation that says that the 

governing body can’t talk about issues like the supervision  

that’s required and what people are qualified to do. And if 

people work together in good faith and cooperate, they can 

come up with appropriate rules. I think there’s some suspicion 

that perhaps they won’t. But I think they can. And that’s why I 

don’t think there’s a problem in the legislation in that regard. I 

think it can be dealt with, notwithstanding the legislation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Well I’ll just make a brief comment on 

your comments and then I’ll go back to my question. 

 

The bodies that you cited, whether they’re health districts or the 

Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, the educational 

psychologists association, and so forth, none are regulatory 

bodies. None ever have been regulatory bodies. There’s only 

one organization that has been a professional, regulatory body 

for the field of psychology in the province of Saskatchewan and 

that one regulatory body in the province of Saskatchewan for 

psychology is the Saskatchewan Psychological Association. 

 

So I think that if we’re talking about what group has invested 

time, effort, money, research, and so forth into this very issue 

that we’re talking about — and that is licensing and registration 

for the protection of the public — it is only one group out of 

those, and that is the Saskatchewan Psychological Association. 

 

Going back to the Association of State and Provincial 

Psychology Boards, I’m wondering if it concerns you that we 

may in fact not be able to any further participate in an 

agreement on reciprocity. That was my specific question. 

 

And I have another that actually goes along with it that perhaps 

you could answer at the same time. Because you would have 

been sent the same letter that I was from the Association of 

State and Provincial Psychology Boards, where it’s quite clear 

what their statement is. I mean it’s about as unequivocal as you 

can get. 

 

And I’m wondering if you can tell me, Mr. Minister, along with 

responding to my previous question, what exact steps did your 

department take to examine the implications of the proposed 

changes to The Psychologists Act and what that would have on 

the overall reputation as far as our province is concerned. 

Because we’ve always had such high, high standards for 

certification and licensing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member that yes of 

course, if anyone is opposed to the legislation, whether it’s a 

doctorate psychologist or a body external to the province such 

as the member has referred to, that certainly is of concern to me 

and the government. But this exercise, like every policy 

decision, is a matter of balancing different interests. And many 

of the local organizations within the province strongly support 

the legislation. They see it as serving the public interest. And 

while I would be concerned if some international body says 

they don’t like the legislation that we want to pass here in 

Saskatchewan, I’m also concerned if we have a situation within 

the province where we have people able to practice psychology 

without being licensed or regulated and without any rules to 

protect the public. 

 

I believe that if people cooperate and work together within the  

  



April 28, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

new professional organization, there is a good possibility that 

they can meet the standards that the organization the member 

has referred to may set. I want to say also that we did examine 

the Agreement on Internal Trade that the provinces are parties 

to which, as I understand it, tries to say that the provinces will 

respect one another’s rules in terms of qualifications of people 

and mobility. 

 

And we believe that the legislation that we propose is more 

consistent with what most of the provinces are doing than the 

legislation we have today, which restricts regulation just to the 

doctorate level. So we think that what we’re doing is consistent 

with what most of the provinces do. We understand that not 

everybody can support it or will support it; but we believe that 

as a result of balancing all the interests of all the people that 

work in psychology and the people that employ them, that there 

is a pretty good consensus that this is the way to go, even 

though not everybody can agree with all aspects of it. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’ll go 

back to my initial question of two times ago and that is 

regarding . . . and just so you know, the Association of State 

and Provincial Psychology Boards have not taken a stand of 

disagreeing with this legislation, okay? It’s not their position to 

either agree or disagree with our legislation in Saskatchewan. 

 

What they did was to simply make a very specific statement 

regarding . . . And they are the representative body of virtually 

all provincial and state psychology boards throughout United 

States and Canada. That’s who I was citing here. And they have 

made an unequivocal statement which in fact supports the stand 

taken by the Saskatchewan Psychological Association. It’s not a 

stand against your legislation; it is in support of the standards 

that have always been held by SPA and continue to be held by 

SPA. 

 

And I think what it does is give credence to the concerns that 

they’ve raised, since this is the major regulatory body to whom 

all people go as far as the data from the examination for 

professional practice in psychology, the EPPP — which any 

lucky person who has had to go through will know how really 

wonderful those examinations are. 

 

So I’m still curious as to how your government feels, and your 

department feels, about the fact that we now qualify, according 

to this body. This association thinks that we have great 

standards in the province of Saskatchewan. Once this legislation 

passes, if it is unchanged, we won’t even qualify to be part of 

their agreement of reciprocity. Now that was my question. 

 

And my second question was, what exact steps did the 

department take in looking at, not simply the implications of 

this in Saskatchewan on psychologists, but what implications it 

has as a province and the profession of psychology, and how we 

are perceived in the nation and in North America. 

 

Because I can tell you now that all one has to do is read in the 

field of psychology to know how our standards are held in high 

esteem now. And I think that it stands to reason that the group 

that has been perceived as the regulatory body to date for the  

profession of psychology in this province does not now want to 

compromise its standards. 

 

So I’m most interested in, first of all, if you have concerns 

about the fact that we would now, if the legislation stays the 

same, we would not be part of the agreement of reciprocity that 

we are now a part of. Okay? If that concerns you in any way. 

 

And secondly, what steps were taken to look at this in a broader 

context, not just in its narrow framework. Because it’s simple 

by comparison if we’re looking at what implications does it 

have for us in our reputation as providers of psychology to the 

public in the whole context of North America. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ve tried to answer the member. I’ve 

said that if the member says that this international body says 

that we won’t be able to be part of the reciprocity agreement 

that they promote, then of course that is of concern to me. 

 

However, there are other things that are of concern to me, 

which include the fact that we have people practising 

psychology in the province of Saskatchewan who are not 

licensed or regulated. And this legislation is necessary because 

it says that all people who practise psychology will be licensed 

and regulated. 

 

And so balancing those concerns, I believe that it is in the 

public interest, for the protection of the public, a good thing to 

proceed with this legislation. And that’s what we propose to do. 

 

It’s unfortunate if there are some people from outside our 

province that, notwithstanding the fact that our legislation will 

be consistent with most other provinces, find that this 

legislation is somehow wanting from their point of view or our 

ability to participate in the reciprocity agreement. But from my 

point of view, it’s important to license and regulate people that 

want to call themselves psychologists. 

 

And if we get right down to the issue, I think I’d also have to 

say that everybody agrees that everybody should be regulated 

and this argument is really over whether people should be able 

to call themselves psychologists if they don’t have a doctorate. 

That’s what it boils down to. And we think they should be able 

to; some think they shouldn’t be able to. But I think really once 

we agree that everybody needs to be regulated, the dispute 

really is over what we call psychologists. 

 

And frankly I think there’s a little bit too much excitement over 

what really is not that important, that important an issue, if we 

have a cooperative relationship within the governing body that 

makes sure that whoever calls himself or herself a psychologist 

has the reasonable qualifications to do that job which such a 

body would license them to do. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I guess it sounds like it’s one person 

reiterating what they’ve already said to another person 

reiterating what they’ve already said. There is no question that 

we all want everybody registered. There never has been a 

question. There isn’t a question now. That is not the question, 

okay. We don’t have a concern there. We can just all agree to 

agree for a change. 

  



1182  Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 1997 

 

The question that I raised was about standards. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. It now being the hour of 5 o’clock, 

this committee will stand recessed until 7 p.m. later this same 

day. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1151 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1151 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1151 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1151 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1151 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1152 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Day of Mourning 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1152 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1152 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1152 

 Federal Election 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1153 

 Early Childhood Intervention Week 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

 Students Against Drinking and Driving 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

 University of Regina Researcher Receives Cancer Grant 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1159 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Child Prostitution 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1155 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1155 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

 Federal Election Campaign Participation 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1156 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1156 

 Health Board Members as Federal Political Candidates 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1157 

 Auto Lease Surcharges 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1157 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1158 

 Tabling of Departmental Reports 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1158 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1158 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 51  The Arts Board Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1159, 1161 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1163 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1164 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1165 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1167 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1168 



 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 28  The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1977 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1169 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1169 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1171 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1174 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1176 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1176 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1176 

 


