



















































Hansard: April 03, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 545 

 April 3, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I rise today to present petitions 

from people from Dysart in the main. And I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

the property of taxpayers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens 

throughout the province. Their concern revolves around the 

government’s refusal to commission an independent study to 

review the effects of gambling expansion policy on the social 

fabric of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads . . . the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

These petitions are signed by people from Fulda and Humboldt, 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of people from the Englefeld, 

Watson area concerned about the social devastation caused by 

the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) gambling policy. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of the gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has on our province and the people who 

live here. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions from citizens . . . (inaudible) . . . The prayer for relief, 

Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes, including car thefts, as well as crimes of violence,  

and the charge of attempted murder of a police officer; 

such task force to be comprised of representatives of the 

RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to rise 

on behalf of citizens of this province who petition this 

Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people are from Melville, Killaly, Duff, Ituna, and 

Balgonie, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of people throughout Saskatchewan 

that were affected by big game damage. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, hay bales, shrubs and 

trees, which are being destroyed by the overpopulation of 

deer and other big game, including elimination of the $500 

deductible; and to take control measures to prevent the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game from causing 

this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

People that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Glenbain area, Hazenmore, and the Vanguard area. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 



546  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Petitions to reverse the municipal revenue-sharing 

reduction; 

 

To establish a task force to aid the fight against youth 

crime; 

 

To change the Saskatchewan big game damage 

compensation program; and 

 

To urge the government to commission an independent 

study to review the social impact of gambling. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next move the first reading of a Bill, the trade 

union amendment Act, repealing successor rights. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to give notice that I shall on day 23 ask the government the 

following questions: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Environment and 

Resource Management: how much funding did each 

regional park in Saskatchewan receive from the provincial 

government for the fiscal year 1996-97? 

 

And I also give notice that on day 23 I will be asking the 

government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Environment and 

Resource Management: how much funding will each 

regional park in Saskatchewan receive from the provincial 

government for the fiscal year ’97-98? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day 23 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) how much revenue was 

collected under the victims’ fund as defined in The Victims 

of Crime Act in fiscal 1995-96; (2) of the revenue collected 

for the victims’ fund, how much of that fund was spent on 

compensation for victims of crime; (3) once compensation 

for victims of crime was withdrawn from the victim’s fund 

for the ’95-96 fiscal year, how was the remainder of the 

revenue of that fund allocated? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, today I would like to 

introduce to you and through you, two people who represent the 

Al Ritchie Health Action Centre which officially opened this 

morning here in Regina. 

 

We have in your gallery today, Rhonda Rosenberg — and I’d 

ask Rhonda to stand — president of the Al Ritchie Community 

Association and Diane Lemon — I ask Diane to stand also — 

who is the supervisor of the health centre. 

 

And this morning I was very happy, Mr. Speaker, along with 

the member from Regina Victoria, to take part in the official  

opening of the centre and meet some of the people who have 

worked to bring it all together. 

 

The goals and services of the Al Ritchie Health Centre are 

really excellent examples of community involvement, increased 

emphasis on wellness, and better coordination. And I really 

have to congratulate these individuals for the work they’re 

doing both in the community and as health care professionals, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know all the members would like to join me in that and I’d ask 

the House to join me in welcoming Ms. Rosenberg and Ms. 

Lemon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

for me to make an introduction this afternoon on behalf of my 

colleague, the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 

 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a group of very fine 

young people. They are the Beechy and Kyle Scouts — so 

they’ve travelled a long way to be with us today. They’re 

accompanied by their Scout leaders, Keith Andrews from 

Beechy, and George Akister from Kyle. They’re also 

accompanied by a chaperon, Jim Powers. I understand that they 

are going to spend some time with us here and then have a tour 

of the building, and I look forward to meeting with them later 

on for conversation and drinks. So I ask all members to join me 

in extending a warm welcome to this group of fine young 

people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to introduce to you and members of the Assembly today 

seated in the west gallery, constituents and friends of mine, Ray 

and Jackie Sedley, and their two young sons, Steven and Brian. 

 

Ray is an employee with Saskatchewan Property Management. 

Rarely does he ever get a day off but today he has a day off, and 

Jackie is a home day care operator in Yorkton, and their two 

sons got a week off from school. So they’re here to observe the 

proceedings of the legislature, and ask all members of the 

Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

a few people in the chambers. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’d ask them to stand, is Mr. Steven Cady, president of SSC 

Marketing of California. During his visit to Saskatchewan, 

Steven is meeting with a number of private companies. 

 

Some of Steven’s successes include Slim Fast Foods, Sweet’n 

Low, Sudafed, Healthy Choice; and also has been working 

successfully with groups like ConAgra, Sara Lee, Faberge and 

Revlon. And accompanying Mr. Cady and showing him to 

Saskatchewan is a former member of the Legislative Chamber  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

from Bengough-Milestone, Mr. David Lange. 

 

Mr. Lange was from the Mossbank area, currently resides in 

Vancouver. And I’ll be meeting later today with David and 

Steven. And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join 

with me in giving them a warm welcome to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 

if I just might take the liberty of introducing a couple of more 

people. In the west gallery sits Peter Volk, for SPI Marketing 

Group. And accompanying Peter . . . or sitting beside Peter is 

Frank Hart from KMPG, and Jim Morris, the CEO (chief 

executive officer) of SPI. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Shaunavon Woman Makes Impact with Canada’s 

National Women’s Hockey Team 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, everyone in the 

Assembly will be well aware that hockey has become our 

country’s national sport and also that Saskatchewan hockey 

athletes play an integral part of building that sport. And since 

international competition began, Canada has shown the rest of 

the world that we have, if not the best, some of the best athletes 

in that sport. 

 

Well today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that in the Toronto 

Globe and Mail recognition has been given to one of those 

hockey players from Saskatchewan. The headline of the story is 

“Passion for hockey drives teen to top women’s player.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud and pleased to stand here today and 

recognize the achievement of our national women’s hockey 

team competing in the world championship, particularly Hayley 

Wickenheiser who was raised in the Shaunavon area and now 

makes her home in Calgary. 

 

Ms. Wickenheiser, like many Saskatchewan hockey players, 

began her hockey career playing in the backyard pond, learning 

the basic skills of puck handling before moving to organized 

minor sports in Shaunavon. 

 

Since joining the national team at the age of 15 in 1994, Mr. 

Speaker, Wickenheiser has proven herself to be one of the 

world’s best female hockey players. In 1995 she was named the 

Pacific Rim championship’s most outstanding forward. 

 

I want to extend my congratulations to all members of the 

national women’s hockey team and to the family of Hayley 

Wickenheiser. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this 

demonstrates that our country’s dedication to hockey excellence 

is in good hands, and wish the best to the women’s hockey team 

as they approach the national championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Code of Ethical Conduct 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the first 

order of business for this or any Assembly is the maintenance of 

public confidence in our elected officials. For it is on this 

foundation that the whole process of democratic government 

rests, here and everywhere. This public confidence, as we all 

know, has been sadly shaken in the last few years. 

 

In 1994, this Assembly took a first step in restoring public 

confidence through the adoption of the Code of Ethical Conduct 

for elected members. Later this day I will be moving first 

reading of a Bill, the integrity of members Act, which attempts 

to provide a mechanism by which the Code of Ethical Conduct, 

already adopted by this Assembly, may be enforced and also to 

provide some teeth to that code. 

 

I am hopeful that all members of the Assembly will adopt this 

Bill unanimously. And I am pleased, on behalf of our caucus, to 

note that the hon. member for Saskatoon Greystone has agreed 

to second this Bill, as she has done more than any other member 

of this House to place this matter on the public agenda. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Al Ritchie Health Action Centre 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I was fortunate today to 

have attended the official opening by the Regina Health District 

of the Al Ritchie Health Action Centre, located in my 

constituency. The goal of the centre is to work with community 

members to provide programs that meet the expressed health 

needs of area residents. The centre aims to improve access to 

Regina Health District services. 

 

This is no small task. There are many people who will only try 

to obtain health services when health conditions reach a critical 

point for them. Yet we all know an ounce of prevention is worth 

a pound of cure. 

 

The centre will provide health assessment, screening, education, 

and outreach services. It will provide an important bridge 

between area residents and our health care system. The centre is 

guided by a steering committee including a representative of the 

Regina Health District, members of the community, and service 

providers. As always, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can 

be counted upon to volunteer their time to serve their 

community. 

 

I ask you and the other members of this Assembly to join me in 

thanking these volunteers for their commitment to improving 

the quality of health enjoyed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Heroic Rescue of Accident Victim 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

time to honour those involved in a life-saving effort this week. 

On April 1 a terrible accident almost claimed the life of a young  



548  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

exchange student. The 14-year-old was trying to push free a car 

when he was knocked over by a semi which ended up 

jack-knifing and pinning him under the front axle. 

 

When workers first arrived there was a feeling of despair as the 

young man lay submerged in a ditch full of icy water. To make 

matters worse, a winter storm was battering the area. But rescue 

workers persevered and for almost two hours they battled the 

terrible blizzard conditions. Some of the rescue workers were 

suffering from frostbite, but they refused to give up. 

 

Finally a tow truck arrived on the scene and the workers were 

able to pull the 14-year-old free. The young man is now 

recovering in the hospital. 

 

All those involved in this life-saving effort, from the bystanders 

who initially held the teen’s head above water, to the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), the fire-fighters and the 

paramedics, to the back hoe and tow truck operators, a heartfelt 

thank you for your dedication in saving this young man’s life. 

 

I can only imagine how difficult it was for everyone at the 

scene of this accident as they struggled to save the young 

teenager. But their dedication and hard work paid off in a big 

way. 

 

This is just another example of Saskatchewan people pulling 

together in a crisis and beating the odds. I’m proud to be part of 

a province that has such wonderful people and I’m sure the 

other members will join me in thanking each and every one of 

you for your commitment to saving this young man’s life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

my colleague in commending the heroics of Tuesday’s event. 

This event grabbed both the local and the national headlines. I 

mention it once more because I believe we should recognize the 

heroism of the people involved in the rescue and the strong will 

to live of a young man. 

 

I am referring to the accident and near tragedy that took place 

just west of Regina. We are all familiar with the story. A 

14-year-old boy was the victim of a bizarre traffic accident 

during the terrible and unpredicted blizzard that struck the 

province. He was pinned under a semi-trailer and lay for nearly 

two hours with a broken leg and freezing water up to his neck. 

 

Members of the RCMP, Regina fire-fighters, paramedics from 

Regina emergency services, and passers-by worked to free him. 

He was finally freed and taken to hospital where he is now 

apparently in stable condition. 

 

The rescuers deserve our gratitude and thanks, because as we 

who live in this province know, we are all one ice-slick away 

from a similar crisis. It is good to know that rescue is possible 

regardless of the conditions. 

 

And the boy, a visitor from Hong Kong, deserves our 

admiration for staying calm and, frankly, for staying alive while 

the work to free him was taking place. We can all imagine how 

we would act in a similar situation. 

Saskatchewan challenges us in many ways, Mr. Speaker, and 

fortunately, Saskatchewan people are always up to those 

challenges. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fund-raising Event Held in the North 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to bring to 

the attention of the House a fund-raising effort in northern 

Saskatchewan. Over the past few years my office has received 

numerous requests for donations for school trips and sporting 

events. Since there was no money allocated to MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) offices for sponsorships of such 

events, I approached the mayors of my constituency to see if 

they would take part in the best-of-three hockey game 

fund-raising series against the chiefs of our regions. 

 

The objectives of the games was threefold: one, we would 

promote fitness and unity amongst our people; second, we 

would fund raise for minor hockey associations and community 

groups in our region; and third, we would show another side of 

our northern leaders. 

 

Both groups agreed and as a result, three games were held. 

Buffalo River and Dillon hosted the first game; the northern 

village of Beauval hosted the second game; and the final was 

held in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan. 

 

First game the mayors won with much help from their MLA. 

The second game was won by the chiefs with much help from 

their grand chief. And the final game was held, again in 

Meadow Lake, and the tribal council chiefs won that game and 

won the series. 

 

To make a long story short, the chiefs were led by Vice-Chief 

Isadore Campbell, Chief Archie Campbell, and band councillor 

Morris Iron, while the mayors countered with Mayor Bobby 

Woods of Buffalo Narrows, Mayor Joe Daigneault, Beauval, 

Mayor John L. Mongrant of Turnor Lake, Councillor Cliff 

Coombs and Mayor Henry LaPlante of Michel Village. 

 

These games were a tremendous success and a total of $4,200 

was raised for 11 community groups, and I ask the members of 

the Assembly to applaud the significant efforts of the mayors 

and chiefs and the corporate sponsors that made all this 

possible. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cooperative Dairy Industry Celebrates 

100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cooperative 

philosophy has been used throughout history in numerous 

societies to overcome many injustices and inequalities, both 

social and economic. Until 1844, Mr. Speaker, much of that 

cooperation was informal. 

 



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

It wasn’t until the incorporation of the first cooperative at 

Rochdale, England and the principles that its founders 

established, that formal cooperative organizations began to 

grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ideals and principles that many cooperatives 

follow today resulted from the first co-op at Rochdale. One of 

these cooperative enterprises has been in dairy producing which 

is celebrating its 100th anniversary this year. 

 

In addition to the celebration marking the 100 years of dairy 

producing in Saskatchewan, the merger of Dairy Producers and 

Agrifoods International in 1996 created the largest dairy 

cooperative in Canada. This merger will increase the 

competitiveness and security of the co-op within the dairy 

industry while at the same time ensuring that dairy cooperatives 

continue to flourish. The cooperative sector has played an 

important role in developing Saskatchewan’s economy in the 

past and will play an integral part in farther developments in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it is appropriate that all members of 

this Assembly honour the accomplishment of our cooperative 

dairy industry for 100 years of commitment and success it has 

given to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Legislative Building Security 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. According to the media 

reports, there was an unfortunate incident in this building 

yesterday when the Minister of Justice was apparently accosted 

by a citizen. The reports we received indicate that the minister’s 

reaction was instantaneous in demanding beefed-up security for 

the Assembly and for elected officials. 

 

Earlier this year when 72 citizens in Regina had their cars stolen 

in a single day, the minister’s reaction was to say that car theft 

was not a common problem. He has still not responded to the 

many petitions filed in this House by members of the Liberal 

opposition from citizens all over the province demanding some 

action. 

 

Members of the public are concerned that the Minister of 

Justice is giving a higher priority to the safety of elected 

officials over members of the general public. I would ask him 

what reassurance he has today that safety of the general public 

is at least as high a priority as that of elected officials? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As a member of the Board of Internal Economy, I 

would be pleased to respond to this issue with respect to the 

security of the building and this legislature. And I want to begin 

by saying that, Mr. Speaker, all of us realize that this legislature 

is a public building. It houses an institution that has been in 

place for hundreds of years — the British parliamentary system  

of which we are all part. We also understand that this building 

is a building owned by the people of Saskatchewan — this is 

their legislature. So quite clearly we are well aware of the fact 

that access to the general public has to and will take place. 

 

With respect to security, I think it’s fair to say that members of 

all sides of this House have been asked to submit 

recommendations, suggestions, and ideas as to how we can 

ensure public safety and safety for all members of this 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are discussions that are ongoing — they 

have taken place, and they will continue to take place to ensure 

that the public, as well as members of this legislature, are 

adequately protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I asked a question for the 

Minister of Justice; instead the minister responsible for the 

Water Corporation provided us with a watered-down answer. I 

do request . . . will all members, will all members agree that 

security in this building is a serious issue? The public wants to 

know that security for the general public is at least as important 

an issue for the Minister of Justice as security for himself. And 

that is what he is ducking, that is what he has not dealt with, 

and I ask him if he will now respond to the concerns that have 

been brought before this House rather than just saying that it is 

not a common problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

member that this . . . as it is a public building and security 

within this building is a responsibility of all of ours. I would 

want to say if the member has concerns he may be concerned 

with respect to the security of members of the Liberal Party 

within his caucus. The reports I get is in fact that there is a great 

deal of insecurity in there and dispute happening. But that’s 

another issue. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as the member of this legislature 

representing our caucus in the Board of Internal Economy, 

security certainly is an issue, as it is within this building, 

outside of this building, all throughout this province. It’s a 

collective role that we all share. And I want to say on behalf of 

the government that we will do our best to work with members 

of the third party and the opposition to ensure that the adequate 

procedures and measures are in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teaching Licence Revocations 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, delegates 

attending this week’s Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

spring council in Saskatoon are debating whether the public has 

the right to know when a convicted sexual abuser has been 

barred from teaching. A media report this morning indicated 

that when a teacher’s certificate is revoked, the Minister of 

Education decides if the public will be told. 



550  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, teachers in the Humboldt area want public 

disclosure whenever a teacher is barred because of child sexual 

abuse. They feel that this measure would ensure the public that 

the teaching professionals do not tolerate, condone, or support 

this crime. 

 

So will the Minister of Education please explain why this is not 

presently the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  For the member’s edification, Mr. 

Speaker, I think what I need to do is review the process for 

cancelling or suspending a teacher’s licence in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At present, the Government of Saskatchewan, through the 

Minister of Education, regulates teacher certification. But under 

The Teachers’ Federation Act, the STF (Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation) has the responsibility to investigate 

situations involving teachers’ misconduct or incompetence. 

Once a teacher has been found guilty of sexual misconduct and 

the STF has investigated that misconduct, they then make a 

recommendation to the minister to cancel the teacher’s licence. 

 

The STF discipline process has served the province extremely 

well over the last several decades. And I can tell you that the 

role of the minister is to ensure that teachers who have a 

cancelled licence no longer teach in Saskatchewan or any other 

jurisdiction across the country. 

 

I can tell you this as well: the Department of Justice now has a 

procedure in place where they can notify the public of people 

who are dangerous sexual offenders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, when a teacher has been charged and 

convicted of child sexual abuse, it is incumbent that the people 

of Saskatchewan know. It is simply not acceptable that teachers 

who are convicted of this offence have the ability to move from 

province to province and continue teaching. Nor is it acceptable 

that convicted teachers can move from the public system to 

reserve schools because a registry is not readily available to 

everyone in the province. In addition, it is bad enough that the 

children are being sexually abused, but the good name of the 

teaching profession should not also be abused. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under pressure from our caucus, this government 

enacted legislation so that people are notified when dangerous 

offenders have been released from prison. So does the minister 

not agree that the same rules should apply when a convicted 

sexual abuser has been barred from teaching? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the member did 

not hear the answer to her first question. She was obviously 

reading and preparing for her second question. 

 

The Minister of Education, upon recommendation from the  

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, when a person has been 

found guilty of sexual misconduct, cancels the teacher’s licence. 

The minister or the department then notifies every other 

provincial and territorial jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member of this, and the public: 

any teacher found guilty of gross sexual misconduct, upon 

recommendation from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 

has their licence cancelled. They can’t teach anywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Short-line Railways 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities raised concerns yesterday about this 

government’s lack of action in addressing the future of 

short-line railways in this province. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture says companies are willing to work 

with unions. However, according to yesterday’s edition of the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, at least one union has already rejected 

changes to existing contracts. The Moose Jaw-Outlook 

Transportation Council also expressed concerns about successor 

rights and suggested the present labour policies of this 

government are preventing interested groups from looking at 

our short-lines. 

 

Because of the watered-down answers, Mr. Speaker, and the 

deflection of responsibilities over there, I will ask either/or to 

answer this question. Will the Minister of Agriculture or 

Minister of Transportation explain what they are doing to 

address these obvious roadblocks that are standing in the way of 

groups wanting to operate a short-line rail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say first of all, workers 

are talking with short-line operators, and short-line operators 

are talking with workers, and they will come to an agreement 

and we will have short-line railways in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But it surprises me, Mr. Speaker, that the member would attack 

workers when he should be attacking the Liberals in Ottawa 

who passed the transportation Bill to begin with. This is what 

the problem is, is the railways are allowed to abandon track. 

The federal government allows the railways to abandon track 

much easier today than they could in the past. There was not a 

word from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, not a word. But 

they would rather attack workers. This government does not 

believe in that concept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is just 

not listening. If he had’ve been, he’d know we were also 

lobbying the federal government. But the responsibility is not 

just with the federal government. 



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

We have indicated in a letter to the federal Minister of 

Agriculture that he must work with this government — and I 

reiterate work with this government — to address growing 

concerns relating to the abandonment of branch lines. We also 

believe there is an onus on this government to talk with the 

railways, because once railways are abandoned, they fall under 

the jurisdiction of the provincial government — I repeat, the 

provincial government. Obviously, Mr. Minister, planning must 

take place now. 

 

Will the minister explain what leadership role his government is 

taking and what plans are being developed to provide solutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for his 

second question, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say that this 

government joined with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) in instituting a short-line rail 

conference, was held in the province just a few weeks ago — 

very successful short-line conference. 

 

Within the Department of Highways, there is a short-line unit, 

Mr. Speaker. We have people that specialize in the development 

of short-line. They will go into a particular area and help that 

area decide whether a short-line is viable or not. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, also in a balance between the 

companies, the proponents of short-line railroads and workers. 

And we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. We do not 

believe in the Devine approach which has been now accepted 

by the Liberals, where you try to divide and conquer — you 

know, you have workers against business and you have rural 

against urban, and the division continues. 

 

We believe in a balance, Mr. Speaker — workers and business 

working together to accomplish what needs to be accomplished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Court Case 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, now that you’ve admitted there’s a good 

chance you’re going to lose the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) lawsuit and that you do set aside lawsuit contingency 

funds to deal with this sort of situation, it begs the question: 

where are you hiding this contingency fund? Where are you 

hiding hundreds of millions of dollars? In fact it must be really 

hidden, Madam Minister, because you haven’t even bothered to 

give us advance knowledge. 

 

Madam Minister, do you have a contingency fund set aside in 

case you lose the GRIP case? And how much is it and where are 

you hiding it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member  

opposite, what I have said is that in certain cases such as the 

farm fuel rebate program, there is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  And the GRIP. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Not about GRIP at all. There is an 

internal decision made as to whether or not there should be an 

addition of funding put right into the budget — not hidden 

anywhere, right there in the budget — for the farm fuel rebate 

program, in case the program has to be changed. But what the 

members opposite know full well is the GRIP issue is before the 

courts and nobody on this side of the House is in a position to 

comment on the GRIP issue. 

 

Short-line Railways 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Transportation as well. Mr. 

Speaker, we read the papers as well, but we particularly took an 

interest in the news release that the minister released on rail line 

abandonment and we’re very happy that he is concerned about 

this problem. We do think though, that after listening to the 

questions from the two sides and the blame-throwing that goes 

back and forth, that both the Liberals and the NDP are wrong in 

this matter. They need to take a look at what farmers’ concerns 

are. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, your concerns are unfortunately 

not enough, and they’re not going to keep the rail lines open. 

Farmers don’t need concern, Mr. Speaker; what they need is 

action. They need you, Mr. Minister, to remove your successor 

rights. And the successor rights legislation is your legislation, 

provincial legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, we would ask you, will you take the steps today? 

Will you clear the tracks for short-line railroads by releasing 

and removing your successor rights legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the attack, Mr. Speaker, on 

workers by the third party is understandable, because we’re 

very used to that. It surprised me coming from the Liberals a 

few minutes ago. 

 

But I want to say, this government believes in a balance 

between a business and working people. And there is 

discussions going on between workers and between short-line 

proponents, and this will continue and there will be agreement. 

We are not going to take the stand of your previous boss, the 

Mr. Devine government, that said, you know, minimum wage, 

we’re not . . . I don’t think we need to support workers there; 

occupational safety regulations, well I don’t think we need 

those either; Trade Union Act, I don’t think we need those. 

 

We support the balance between workers and business, and 

cooperation, not division — rural against urban, native against 

white. We’re not going to get into that talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

question for the Minister of Transportation. Mr. Minister,  



552  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

what’s better — a job with the short-line or no job at all? And 

that’s what we’re faced with in this situation. 

 

The people at the Moose Jaw-Outlook Transportation Council 

say that successor rights is a roadblock to what needs to be 

done. SARM says it’s a roadblock to what needs to be done. 

The short-line railroad company, Railtex, says it’s a roadblock 

to what needs to be done. Yet you continue to do nothing except 

blame the federal government or anybody else you can point a 

finger at. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s time for you to put your NDP ideology aside 

and do something that will help farmers instead of your union 

leader buddies, and friends. Just before question period, Mr. 

Speaker, you will recall that I gave notice that the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) caucus will be introducing 

legislation to repeal this destructive successor rights legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you wake up, smell the coffee, and support 

this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member 

opposite. And I wish the member would have joined with 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, which happens to have a Conservative 

government, and Manitoba, who happens to have a 

Conservative government as well, who approached the federal 

government, and in fact approached the Standing Committee on 

Transportation, the Senate committee, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course there is . . . I don’t know if the member doesn’t believe 

that there are Conservatives in the Senate, but I think there are. 

And you know what the Senate Committee on Transportation 

said to us? No, we’ll allow the railways to continue to abandon 

rail lines as they please. 

 

There was no support from the third party. There was no 

support from the official opposition when we were attempting 

to have the federal government take a second look at Bill C-14, 

Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a little hypocritical to come with some 

of the questions he is today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cabinet Ministers’ Travel 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

what the following places have in common: China, Hong Kong, 

Israel, Germany, the Czech Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, London, 

Cologne, Dublin, Brussels, Amsterdam, Zürich, Mexico, 

Zimbabwe, Kenya, and South Africa. Mr. Speaker, these are all 

locations that have been visited by the NDP cabinet ministers in 

the past few months at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while our caucus understands that travel is 

necessary, we’re also concerned on behalf of the taxpayers of 

the province of Saskatchewan as to the reasons for these trips. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people are asking and wondering whether or 

not many of these trips are necessary. My question is to the 

minister with the most air miles, the Deputy Premier. 

 

Mr. Minister, don’t you think ministers should be required to  

release a report each time they take an international trip, 

outlining the costs of the trip and exactly what was 

accomplished in terms of new contracts and new trade 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that trade is very, very important. Since 1991, 

trade and exports from this province have increased over 50 per 

cent, and it’s one of the fastest, it’s one of the fastest growth 

areas in job creation in the province, is that area of export. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that it’s difficult to keep 

up with the opposition as to whether they think trade missions 

are good or whether they’re bad. I have here a headline, 

“Romanow . . .” and I quote, “Romanow urged to participate.” 

This is a Team Canada where the then leader and I quote: 

“Lynda Haverstock says Prime Minister Chrétien has invited 

the Premier from Saskatchewan . . .” and basically she says he 

should go — it’s an important part of his job. 

 

Then I’ve got one here from the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, and this is on February 28 where she says, 

on February 28, we shouldn’t do trade missions. And then later 

on August 11, she said, we should go on trade missions. 

 

And the Conservatives are the same way. When in government, 

they flew all over the world. They could never be here in the 

House because they were so busy travelling. 

 

I want to say to you, trade is important and it’s increasing every 

day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I earlier 

indicated, we certainly are not opposed to trips abroad. We 

certainly recognize the benefits. But we also are concerned with 

the number of trips. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The Chair is having difficulty 

being able to hear the hon. member from Moosomin put his 

question. And I’ll ask for the cooperation of all members of the 

House to allow the — order — to allow for the question to be 

heard and to be properly considered according to the rules of 

the House. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 

trips, however, that are questionable — like the Deputy 

Premier’s recent African safari. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very little news came out of this trip. I don’t recall 

any specific announcements regarding contracts or real benefit 

to the province. A few reporters you did talk to decided there 

was no real news and largely ignored it. And the one news 

conference that was scheduled was cancelled after the African 

official didn’t show up. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell us exactly what did you accomplish 

on the trip, the Indian link, and the trade mission of doom? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, if I had time I would 

go through this whole file, but here’s one headline: 

“Saskatchewan trade mission heads to Africa.” And it quotes 

Flexi-coil, saying that Africa is a very, very important part of 

their trade. Half of the air seeders that go to Australia come 

from Saskatchewan, from Flexi-coil. 

 

They say that South Africa is a very important new market. 

They were on the trip. They agree that it’s a great place to go. 

 

Brandt Industries. I have a letter here from Dave Fletcher of 

Brandt Industries. It says, “Just a note to thank you for what 

appears to be some very significant interest in our products in 

Zimbabwe.” Zimbabwe of course being in Africa. The member 

would appreciate that Brandt Industries was much involved in 

that trade mission. 

 

And finally, “Schulte’s sales expanding to South African 

market,” says Jim Carnago. Recently announced his 

participating in the recent trade mission sponsored by the STEP 

(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) has already 

paid off in selling farm equipment into South Africa. 

 

So I say to you, I’m not sure what the member wants from trade 

missions, but if it’s sales and contracts, here they are. Look at 

them. Try to read the newspaper, or get someone to read them 

to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

La Loche Hospital 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An insurance 

policy was recently renewed for the La Loche hospital, if one 

can call a number of old ATCO trailers pushed together a 

hospital. The insurance policy is based on cash value, not 

replacement value as would normally be the case, because the 

building is so old, so run down, that insuring this makeshift 

hospital for replacement cost was out of the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if anything, this points out the fact that people of 

La Loche and area have done without an appropriate health care 

facility for too long. We continue to hear this government point 

fingers at Ottawa yet what we have here is an issue that is under 

provincial jurisdiction; a provincial responsibility; a situation 

this provincial government and the provincial Minister of 

Health would like to continue to sweep under the carpet; but an 

issue that this provincial government can no longer run from. 

 

Will the minister explain when the people of this area can 

expect action from this government to address their substandard 

health care facility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As the member will know, Mr. Speaker, 

actually we have been taking some action in this regard. We 

created a West Side Facility Planning Committee — as the 

member knows because the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse, where the 

member is from, is on that committee — to look into the 

situation of the health care facilities in the North. 

That committee, as the member knows, Mr. Speaker, has 

recommended that the facility in La Loche should be replaced. 

We will be making an announcement within the near future 

with respect to some of the items in that planning committee 

report. I think the member should be optimistic about some 

changes. 

 

As the member knows, we’ve built a new health centre in La 

Ronge in the North. We’re building a new health centre with 

the cooperation of the first nations and the federal government 

on the Chicken Reserve. And in due course, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to take action on the west side as well, and I join with the 

member in looking forward to replacing that facility in due 

course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In due course — 

it’s been 17 years since we’ve had those ATCO trailers. Due 

course means quick course in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health often speaks about the 

threat of the two-tiered health care system yet that’s exactly 

what we have in this province. There’s a dramatic difference in 

the level of health care offered between urban and rural citizens 

and against . . . and between rural and northern people. As each 

day passes and this government does nothing to address this 

injustice, they simply feed the cynicism that our northern 

people have about this government. 

 

We continue to hear the Minister of Health talk about how his 

government is moving to improve health care in the North but 

there is no action. Will the Minister of Health make a 

commitment in this House today to address the concerns of our 

northern people? Will he make a commitment on behalf of this 

government to build a new hospital in La Loche — yes or no — 

and when? Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say, as the member 

should know, that in the budget of this government delivered on 

March 20 there was a substantial increase to the budget of the 

northern health services branch, because we are doing more, 

Mr. Speaker, to spend money on health care in the North and 

providing more services than we ever have before. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that is contrary to what the 

leader of the member’s party says. Because as has often been 

said, to the denial of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Liberal Party in this province is on record as saying we 

should cut hundreds of millions of dollars out of the health care 

budget. 

 

And I want to point out to the member, Mr. Speaker, that in 

today’s issue of the Star-Phoenix, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party has this to say, he says — he’s referring to a budget of the 

commerce students, and it says: 

 

But Melenchuk applauded the fiscal conservatism of the 

budget. “I like it better than the provincial budget,” he said. 

 



554  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

And I have this to say to the member from Athabasca. We’re 

increasing health care spending in the North. Your leader says 

not to. Where do you stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 215 — The Cabinet Travel Accountability Act 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 215, 

The Cabinet Travel Accountability Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 212 — The Integrity of Members 

of the Legislative Assembly Act 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, that Bill No. 212, entitled 

The Integrity of Members Act` be introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the 

members to make a statement of a personal nature, brief 

statement, if I may. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Birthday Wishes to the Clerk 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the Premier 

and the Government House Leader and the caucus Chair and 

my colleagues for not having consulted with them about this 

statement. Sometimes things happen so rapidly that the normal 

channels of communication fail us. My apologies as well to the 

opposition members for not informing them beforehand about 

this important matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all try hard to separate our political and 

personal lives. We try, although not always successfully, to 

leave our political obligations outside our homes as we try to 

fulfil our obligations as family members. 

 

By the same token, we try to leave personal matters at the door 

of this Chamber. We must be able to make our contribution to 

debate on public policy unimpeded by personal considerations. 

When significant personal events happen to anyone in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, it is then incumbent upon us to 

recognize this. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I must inform the Assembly that 

today is Gwenn Ronyk’s birthday. And I would ask all  

members to join with me in wishing our Clerk a very happy 

day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the hon. member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers on his feet? 

 

Mr. Langford:  Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

welcome the reeve from the RM (rural municipality) of 

Buckland, which is located just on the north side of P.A. (Prince 

Albert). 

 

He met with the minister from SARM this morning and will be 

meeting with the Minister of Highways right after question 

period here. So I’d like to ask all members to welcome the 

reeve. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 1 amends The 

Northern Municipalities Act. As many of us know, The 

Northern Municipalities Act is the major statute setting out the 

powers and responsibilities of northern towns and villages. Last 

year we introduced amendments that responded to evolving 

local government needs, particularly with respect to assessment 

and taxation processes. Administrative issues are also 

considered on a regular basis, and many times are brought to 

our attention by local municipal administrations and department 

staff. I will briefly touch on a few highlights of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the changes reflect a recognition of 

certain duplication and overlap between local authorities. Three 

amendments in this Bill will resolve some overlap in 

jurisdiction between northern municipalities and health district 

boards. Clarification of their roles will help locally elected 

officials fulfil their respective mandates. 

 

Proclamation of the three amendments will be delayed until a 

northern health district is established and able to assume these 

responsibilities. 

 

Another amendment provides municipalities with the authority 

to pass bylaws regulating bicycle safety and operation. Such  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

authority allows local bylaws to be fashioned according to local 

conditions. Concern particularly for the safety of our children 

lies at the heart of this amendment. 

 

Last year we made amendments affecting assessment and 

taxation. Concurrently with other municipal legislation, we 

have identified some fine-tuning that is required to this northern 

municipal legislation. Issues such as mailing certain notices by 

ordinary rather than by registered mail; clarifying responsibility 

as to who is responsible for the cost of a transcript in an 

assessment appeal; confirmation of the exact date upon which 

an appeal period runs — these are some of the minor 

amendments in this Bill. 

 

A key issue in respect of reassessment and which is included in 

this Bill, as in the rural and urban Bills, is the introduction of an 

extended phase-in period for tax increases resulting from 

reassessment, from three years to six years. 

 

Although this may not be widely used in the North, its inclusion 

here illustrates that we are supportive of municipal governments 

in the North and believe that they should enjoy the same 

decision-making powers that their southern counterparts enjoy. 

 

These amendments should be supported by all members of the 

legislature. They are in the best interests of northern 

municipalities, their municipal councils, and ultimately all 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 1. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my 

pleasure to stand up and express my concerns and questions on 

behalf of the people of the Athabasca constituency on Bill No. 

1, The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The Bill before us changes the law regarding the operation of 

northern municipalities in the area of property assessment rules 

and public health matters. First allow me to address the issue of 

property assessment rules. 

 

Although on the surface this Bill may appear to be 

non-controversial, it is important for the government to consult 

extensively with those people to which this Bill will apply. 

 

To this point, despite what the government might say, adequate 

consultation has not been conducted on the Bill. Nor has it been 

conducted with respect to tax reassessment — especially tax 

reassessment. We have been talking to northern administrators 

and mayors. These people have several serious questions about 

tax reassessment. We will continue to consult and bring forward 

the concerns of northern administrators and others whom this 

Bill will impact. 

 

(l430) 

 

But it is also essential that the government hold public meetings 

in the North. It is essential that it consult with northern 

administrators and, Mr. Minister, it is essential that it consult 

with stakeholders in the mining sector and forestry industries to 

determine what affect tax reassessment will have on land leases. 

Until the government engages in such consultations, we do not 

understand the Bill, Madam Minister. 

 

Any time the government changes property assessment rules in 

northern communities, given that there is a minimal tax base, 

then the value of property is substantially lower than that in 

rural Saskatchewan. As well there is relatively no real estate 

market and unemployment is staggering. The government 

simply continued to scratch the surface, neglecting the real 

problems plaguing northern Saskatchewan. 

 

There is a possibility that a tax shift will occur and that the 

appeal process will get bogged down. If this happens people’s 

frustrations and the blame will be placed on municipal mayors 

and councils, not on the minister and her colleagues. 

 

The government has very little foresight into the impacts of tax 

reassessment in Saskatchewan, let alone northern 

Saskatchewan. This is reflected in the fact that today the 

government must amend a legislation to allow for a six- rather 

than three-year adjustment period. Although the lengthened 

adjustment period to six years is welcome, the government did 

not get this legislation right in the first place and it has cost 

some unnecessary burden. This excessive increase in property 

tax bills is magnified by the government’s constant financial 

offloading onto the municipalities. 

 

Moreover, we have concerns regarding the repercussions of this 

Bill on the mining sector. What impact will tax reassessment 

have on the lease payments paid by mining companies? Will 

these payments increase or decrease? 

 

The people of the North need answers to such questions. And 

lease payments are put into the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 

Account. Then this money is redistributed amongst northern 

communities to be used for capital projects. 

 

So as you can see, Madam Minister, these are not trivial 

questions which should be taken lightly by your government. 

 

The government has also failed to address the fact that there is 

virtually no real estate market in the North. Until this happens 

how can northern property be accurately assessed? Property in 

Stony Rapids simply cannot be compared to property in Regina, 

or even rural Saskatchewan, to determine its true value. Nor has 

the government addressed the low tax base in the North. What 

impact will this have on property reassessment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the questions that need to be answered. 

These are the questions which, had the government engaged in 

more meaningful consultation, might have been answered. 

More consultation needs to be done. And since the government 

continually neglects the concerns of the North, it is incumbent 

on the official opposition to ensure that these questions and 

concerns are raised. 

 



556  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

However, Madam Minister, as I stated earlier, it is the 

government’s responsibility to conduct meaningful consultation 

with all the people who will be affected by tax reassessment and 

The Northern Municipalities Act before this Bill can be passed. 

 

Next, allow me to briefly address the section of the Bill that will 

transfer authority over many public health matters which are 

currently being controlled by municipal councils and eventually 

onto health district boards. 

 

The Bill proposes to transfer authority from, amongst others, 

appointing health officers, pasteurizing milk, slaughterhouses, 

inspecting and regulating dairies, fish packing and processing 

plants, and managing and operating hospitals, from municipal 

councils, which are entirely elected, to district health boards 

which, as we all know, are not. 

 

We are concerned that in transferring these authorities, less 

money will be given to the municipal council and given to the 

health districts, which will resolve in a decrease in service and 

control for northern municipalities. 

 

Before this Bill can be passed, it is essential that this 

government finally realize that life in the North is a lot different 

from life in Regina, and even life in rural southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

People in the North face unique challenges. Any legislation the 

government introduces should reflect that uniqueness. We 

believe it is essential to consult extensively with those people in 

the North whom this Bill will affect. Therefore, until these 

people can be consulted and all the questions which I’ve raised 

today are answered, we will not be supporting this Bill. 

 

Until such a time, I move adjournment of this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  Before proceeding, I do want to remind all 

hon. members that rule 28 of our rules do require that members 

direct their debate to the Speaker and not directly to members 

within the Assembly. And I’ll simply remind all members and 

ask themselves to conduct themselves accordingly when 

participating in debate in the House. 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Rural Municipality 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2 amends The 

Rural Municipality Act, 1989. This Bill adjusts and improves 

upon amendments that were introduced last year. Many of those 

changes were made in response to evolving local government 

needs and changes made at that time to assessment and taxation 

processes. 

 

Every year a number of administrative issues are also brought 

to our attention by local municipal administrations and 

department staff. These amendments contain changes to a few  

administrative practices in keeping with our ongoing efforts to 

maintain up-to-date legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will briefly touch on a few highlights of this Bill. 

Some of the changes proposed here reflect a recognition of 

certain duplication and overlap between local authorities. Just 

as in the urban municipality amending legislation, three 

amendments in the Bill will resolve some overlap in jurisdiction 

between rural municipalities and health district boards. 

Clarification of roles will help these important locally elected 

officials achieve efficiencies and effectively deliver appropriate 

services. 

 

One area of shifted responsibility is with regard to waste 

disposal. RMs have relied on public health legislation to make 

many bylaws governing waste disposal. With the new Public 

Health Act that authority has been removed. An amendment to 

this Act ensures continuing authority for RMs to develop 

bylaws respecting waste disposal. 

 

Another amendment provides municipalities with the authority 

to pass bylaws regulating bicycle safety and operation. Such 

bylaws should be welcomed by everyone who sees safety — 

particularly of children — as a major concern. The prevention 

of head injuries is ultimately a goal of this amendment. Again 

this authority is being introduced into all three of our municipal 

Acts. 

 

Last year we made amendments affecting assessment and 

taxation. We have since identified some fine-tuning that is 

required. Issues such as mailing certain notices by ordinary 

rather than registered mail; clarifying responsibility as to who is 

responsible for the cost of a transcript in an assessment appeal; 

confirmation of the exact date upon which an appeal period 

runs — these are typical of the minor nature of a number of the 

amendments in this Bill. 

 

Another issue in respect of reassessment which is included in 

this Bill, is the introduction of the extended phase-in period for 

tax increases resulting from the reassessment from three years 

to six years. This amendment was announced by the Premier at 

the 1997 SUMA convention. Although it responds to a request 

from the cities of Regina and Saskatoon and their business 

communities; it may not be something that many RMs will use. 

 

Before moving forward with this change, we did consult with 

SARM. Sinclair Harrison, president of SARM, has since noted 

that this change is not one that the RMs requested and he 

suggested it could be rather complex for those who choose to 

implement the longer phase-in. I don’t disagree. However, the 

tool will be there and rural councils can decide locally whether 

it’s an appropriate action for them or not. We also continually 

strive to keep our municipal legislation parallel wherever it 

makes sense to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I believe I’ve provided an adequate 

outline of this legislation and only add that these amendments 

should be supported by all members of the legislature. They are 

in the best interests of municipalities and all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 2. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 

opportunity to speak to Bill No. 2, The Rural Municipality 

Amendment Act. And upon reviewing Bill No. 2, I find that it 

does make many changes that were necessary to facilitate the 

reassessment process. 

 

Actually, I believe that this Bill is sort of a band-aid for many 

of the minister’s mistakes relating to the entire reassessment 

process. These proposed amendments to The Rural 

Municipality Act will finally give the rural municipalities and 

the school boards the tools that they need to properly adjust 

their mill rate factors for specific property classes. 

 

But I view some of the other changes proposed within this Bill 

as admissions that the government has made many mistakes in 

this reassessment process. While this Bill will now allow local 

governments the option of extending the reassessment phase-in 

period from three to six years, the government should have 

implemented a reasonable phase-in period for these extensive 

changes in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s really tragic that the minister and her officials 

did not listen to suggestions and concerns that local 

governments raised about the reassessment phase when the 

program was first being drafted. The resulting mess and 

confusion is testimony that the reassessment process was 

rammed through without enough careful planning and 

calculations. 

 

The average Saskatchewan property owner finds the assessment 

calculations complicated enough already. But this government 

has now bungled up the issue even further because the program 

was not properly planned. Even the explanatory notes on this 

Bill outline the minister admits that she has made a grave error 

in reassessment. The explanatory notes relating to clause 330.2 

state: 

 

Upon re-examination of the impacts that reassessment will 

have on some specific economic sectors, it has been 

recently determined that some of the shifts are more 

dramatic than originally anticipated. 

 

No kidding. Just let’s have a look at this whole process. The 

provision that allows for the addition of the agricultural 

property factor to be included in the reassessment process is 

long overdue. But once again, why was it not thought out 

thoroughly beforehand, before it was implemented? 

 

This lack of planning and lack of accountability and lack of 

leadership and a refusal to accept input on the reassessment 

process are all symptoms of a total botching of the NDP 

government’s handling of this whole reassessment process. 

 

Because of this ineptitude, Mr. Speaker, RMs who had already 

sent out their assessment notices will now have to issue new 

notices in order to make the adjustments for the ag property 

factor. 

Once again, this means that local governments are shouldering 

the costs for the minister’s mistakes. The government’s lack of 

foresight on the reassessment issue and the continual 

downloading of funding cuts to local governments is now 

triggering some bitter mill rate fighting between neighbouring 

RMs. 

 

This government’s failure to provide adequate funding is pitting 

community against community, Mr. Speaker, and school boards 

unfortunately are caught in the middle of this chaos. It is 

extremely unfair that the funding for our children’s education 

has now been placed at the heart of the reassessment debacle. 

Local school boards are fending off criticism and risking further 

ill will while planning out their future mill rate adjustments. 

 

Aside from the amendments pertaining to assessments, this Bill 

contains changes to laws governing waste collection in 

municipalities. And there are many housekeeping sections that 

municipalities have in fact long awaited in order to make their 

responsibilities more clear. But there are other sections of Bill 

No. 2 that we are gathering input on and we will require some 

further time to study their implications. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

I move adjournment of this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 3 amends The 

Urban Municipality Act, 1984. This Bill follows on 

amendments that were introduced last year in response to 

evolving local government needs and changes made at that time 

to assessment and taxation processes. Every year a number of 

administrative issues are also brought to our attention by local 

municipal administrations and department staff. These 

amendments contain changes to a few administrative practices 

in keeping with our ongoing efforts to develop user-friendly 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will briefly touch on a few highlights of this Bill. 

First we’ve included an ability to make regulations regarding 

treatment of assets and liabilities for municipalities who are 

interested in restructuring. Although we don’t have all the 

answers on restructuring, we will be ready to help 

municipalities develop their own solutions. This is a means to 

that end. 

 

The regulations will be developed in consultation with SUMA 

and SARM. These will help to clarify municipal expectations 

and remove the uncertainty that exists now for small 

communities contemplating a move into the surrounding rural 

municipality. 

 

We are also requiring that smaller urban municipalities retain 

qualified administrators to manage their affairs. Only the 

magnitude, not the complexities, of municipal issues vary with 

the size of communities. It is very important that administrators 

are competent to deal with changes in technology and practice. 

 

(1445) 



558  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, some of the changes reflect a recognition of 

certain duplication and overlap between local authorities. Three 

amendments in this Bill will resolve some overlap in 

jurisdiction between urban municipalities and health district 

boards. Clarification of their roles will help these important 

locally elected officials fulfil their respective mandates. Issues 

such as the pasteurization of milk and bathing in public waters 

are more profoundly issues of health rather than civic 

administration. 

 

Another amendment provides municipalities with the authority 

to pass bylaws regulating bicycle safety and operation. Such 

bylaws should be welcomed by everyone who sees safety, 

particularly of children, as a major concern. The prevention of 

head injuries is ultimately a goal of this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an amendment that removes the 

requirement that the form of tax receipt issued by the 

municipality be approved by myself as minister. Although 

amendments like this aren’t the stuff of headlines, they can 

improve the efficiency of local administrations. 

 

Last year we made amendments affecting assessment and 

taxation. With a year under our belt since then, we have 

identified some fine-tuning that is required. Issues such as 

mailing certain notices by ordinary rather than registered mail; 

clarifying responsibility as to who is responsible for the cost of 

a transcript in an assessment appeal; confirmation of the exact 

date upon which an appeal period runs, are typical of the minor 

nature of a number of the amendments in this Bill. 

 

A key issue in respect of reassessment and which is included in 

this Bill is the introduction of an extended phase-in period for 

tax increases resulting from reassessment from three years to 

six years. 

 

This amendment was announced by the Premier at the 1997 

SUMA convention. This change responds to a request from the 

cities of Regina and Saskatoon and their business communities 

in particular, and illustrates our commitment to providing 

legislation that works for people. The amendment also received 

approval from SUMA before it was announced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are refinements in an ongoing process to 

modernize a system, an assessment system that has not been 

revised in over 30 years. There have been extensive 

consultations with all affected groups — northern, rural, and 

urban — throughout this process. These are ongoing. They 

continue. And many times that the requests that came from 

municipalities were issues that could not be foreseen until the 

actual numbers to be used from the 1994 base became available 

last fall, in the fall of 1996. 

 

So these refinements that we are bringing forward to the 

changes we made last year are in no way meant to correct what 

some people might see as deficiencies in the amendments last 

year, Mr. Speaker, but still an ongoing refining process which 

will continue, as we continue to consult with all municipalities, 

municipal officials, administrators, businesses, farmers, all 

ratepayers in this province, to work together with them to refine 

this system until we will again have the finest assessment  

system in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I believe I’ve provided an adequate 

outline of this legislation, including the premiss that this is an 

evolving process, that it will continue. I have no doubt 

whatsoever that there will be more amendments to all of these 

Acts this year, next year, and in future years, in order to keep 

our legislation modern, current, and responsive to the needs of 

all local governments in this province. These amendments 

should be supported by all members of the legislature. They’re 

in the best interests of municipalities and all of Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move second reading of Bill 

No. 3. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have a number of concerns regarding this Bill. Last year this 

government embarked upon an extensive program to reform the 

property tax rules in urban municipalities of the province. You 

will recall that last year’s Bill No. 70 made sweeping changes 

to the way lands and buildings were assessed for municipal 

taxation purposes in urban municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had strong concerns about many of the 

changes made in that legislation and those concerns are well 

documented and recorded in the debates of this House recorded 

last year. We still have many of those same concerns. 

 

This year’s Bill amounts to a recognition by the government 

that certain measures they brought in last year were flawed and 

need to be gone through again. The most obvious example of 

the government’s acknowledging that it committed a serious 

error last spring, is the change from three-year phase-in to six 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me shed some light on this subject by recounting the history 

of reassessment. The government made great political hay out 

of the fact that it was tackling the difficult issue of reassessment 

after 30 years of delay and dithering by the previous provincial 

governments. 

 

We heard the Premier state again and again how this is a 

difficult and thorny issue which required the courage and 

determination by his government. We heard him say how 

previous administrations didn’t have the fortitude to deal with 

changing property values over a 30-year time frame. Of course 

the Premier didn’t mention that a great part of the problem 

arose during the 1970s, from the failure of the NDP 

administration to reform those same assessment rules. 

 

The present Premier served as minister in that NDP government 

which held power from ’71 until ’82, so he bears some of the 

responsibility for the present mess that we are in. If 

reassessment had occurred regularly in the ’70s and ’80s, these 

drastic changes in assessment today could have been avoided. 

Instead of the present drastic mess, we would have had regular 

adjustments every few years. Last year’s Bill allowed urban 

municipalities to phase in the changes in assessment over three  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

years if they wished to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the complaints about the three-year maximum for 

the phase-in were loud and clear. Now we see the government 

has decided to extend the time frame to six years. The trouble is 

that the Bill is coming too late. Most cities, towns, and villages 

have already made their phase-in plans and those plans call for 

a three-year phase-in. 

 

The other problem with the six-year phase-in is that the 

government’s own stated tax policy is that there will be another 

reassessment in the year 2000. I will help the Minister of 

Municipal Government with arithmetic on this point, Mr. 

Speaker. Six years after this reassessment will be later than the 

year 2000, and if a municipality adopts the six-year phase-in on 

the current reassessment, how is it supposed to implement the 

next reassessment currently scheduled for the year 2000? Will it 

also be phased in over several years? 

 

All of this is left uncertain, Mr. Speaker. All of this is very 

uncertain. We see this year’s Bill as an attempt to fix the 

problems created by last year’s Bill, but it’s far from clear that 

the attempts is anywhere near successful. 

 

Then we have the ongoing problem of the business 

improvement district levy in cities that have decided to abolish 

their business tax. In last year’s Bill, the Minister of Municipal 

Government asked cities and towns with business improvement 

districts to charge the levy essentially using the assessed value 

of the lands and buildings as a basis and then setting the rate 

and then dividing the levy up among the tenants in a 

commercial building on a proportional basis according to the 

amount of rent they paid to the landlord. 

 

That plan didn’t work, Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of 

Municipal Government has been sent back to the drawing board 

to try to design a system that will meet the needs of small 

business and municipal governments. The result of her work is 

the new, supposedly improved version of section 111.1. 

 

The new formula will allow the city councils to pass a business 

improvement district levy, again based on property value, the 

assessed value of the building in which the small businesses are 

located, and then divide that levy up according to a much more 

uncertain formula. 

 

This year the apportionment among the business tenants will be 

either on the basis of the rent they pay or on the basis of the 

area they occupy. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not clear whether this 

choice is to be exercised by the municipality or by the business 

occupants. And it’s not clear whether the choice is to apply to 

one building at a time or to all the businesses in a particular 

business improvement district. 

 

Furthermore, the whole notion of charging a business 

improvement that goes up as the value of the property goes up 

is one that I think we have to study very carefully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have other concerns about this Bill which my 

colleague, the hon. member from North Battleford, will be 

addressing later. 

One thing must be said about municipal taxation whenever we 

look at a Bill such as this one, Mr. Speaker. We are hearing 

home-owners in our cities crying foul, and they have a point. 

The pain of reassessment is real; that pain could be lessened 

somewhat by this government. 

 

The government could lessen the pain somewhat if they would 

stop offloading their financial responsibilities onto the 

municipalities. 

 

If the government would at least maintain municipal 

revenue-sharing grants at previous levels, which are already 

been low and been downloaded on, then the mill rate charged 

by the towns, villages, and cities could in some cases be 

lowered or at least maintained at a current level. 

 

With the March 20, 1997 we see that the revenue-sharing grants 

to urban municipalities have fallen once again. In the case of the 

city of North Battleford, we see that the revenue-sharing grant 

will fall from $856,385 down to $453,733. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

reduction of 47 per cent. And that’s just the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Glad I’m still not in council. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  By the member . . . My colleague has made 

a good point, Mr. Speaker: who would want to be on council at 

this point in anywhere in a municipality in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s the same in urban and rural municipalities across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. The Premier of the province is 

offloading the costs of running his government onto the 

municipalities and the municipal taxpayer. And the people 

know exactly what’s going on and they’re not being fooled. 

 

We in the official opposition are telling the people exactly what 

is going on and we are not going to let the Premier and his 

government get away with it. We are going to make sure that 

they pay the price for their two-faced attitude towards transfer 

payments. 

 

On one hand they cry bloody murder when the federal 

government transfers some small measure of fiscal 

responsibility to the provinces in areas that they are clearly 

within exclusive provincial jurisdiction. Then on the other hand, 

they starve their own people, the good urban and rural, northern 

municipalities of Saskatchewan, by cutting back on revenue 

sharing, in the case again of North Battleford, to the tune of 47 

per cent in one single year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this follows already much downloading from ’91 

when they were elected, and now this is another 47 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have much more to say on this Bill and on the 

issues which are raised by this Bill. Therefore I move 

adjournment of debate on the motion to give second reading to 

this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 



560  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Dental Disciplines 

Act. 

 

This new Act will address two issues. First it will include all 

dental-related professionals under a single Act, streamlining the 

regulation of these professionals and improving accountability 

to Saskatchewan people. Second, it will allow dental therapists, 

hygienists and assistants to work in a variety of new settings, 

such as nursing homes. This will help improve public access to 

these important preventative health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new Act is based on extensive consultation 

with all the dental-related professional bodies. I’m very pleased 

to say that the Act has the full support of all these bodies. The 

new Act will regulate dentists, dental therapists, dental 

hygienists, dental assistants and dental technicians under one 

statute instead of six, Mr. Speaker. But at the same time the 

statute will allow, for the first time ever, each association to 

regulate its own members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of upgrading their statutes, the 

Saskatchewan Dental Hygienists’ Association and the 

Saskatchewan Dental Assistants’ Association told us they 

wanted self-regulation. And after careful review, we decided to 

support this initiative. 

 

The new Act contains a number of measures to ensure public 

accountability. For instance, the discipline process will be 

clarified and expanded to ensure each association can 

effectively respond to public concerns should they arise. 

Disciplinary hearings will be open to the public and public 

members will be appointed to sit on the dental association 

councils and their disciplinary committees. As well, each 

professional association will be required to file an annual 

report, and proposed bylaws that may impact the public will 

have to be approved by the government after a consultation 

process involving all stakeholders. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to say that this new Act will 

recognize the changing roles of health service providers in our 

new health system. In addition, it will allow dental therapists, 

hygienists, and assistants to work independently in new settings 

such as special care homes or community health centres. This 

initiative will make regular preventive dental care more 

accessible to people who may not otherwise get the services due 

to factors like age, infirmity, or lack of transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this approach is entirely consistent with our 

renewed health system. With these changes, we’re bringing 

services closer to people, giving them the support they need to 

maintain or improve their health. And we’re also encouraging 

the formation of teams of health service providers who can 

bring a whole range of health services closer to where people 

live. 

 

Another feature of the new statute is the approach taken to  

scope of practice. Simply put, this new Act is saying that certain 

dental services can only be performed by the professionals that 

are trained to do them. Similar models have been used with 

great success in other provinces. The approach is seen as more 

flexible than a rigid list of tasks which some of the dental 

professions are now subject to, and it helps protect members of 

the public. 

 

I’m confident that this statute will serve the six dental 

professions and the people of Saskatchewan well into the 

future. It will streamline regulation, ensure public 

accountability, and for some, improve access to dental care. 

 

Because this new Act will regulate all the dental professions, 

the repeal of The Dental Profession Act, The Dental 

Technicians Act, The Dental Therapists Act, and The Denturists 

Act is required. I want to once again recognize the efforts of the 

dental professions themselves in helping us bring this Act 

forward. We appreciate their participation. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Dental 

Disciplines Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of points 

which are of concern to the Liberal opposition, but I think first 

and foremost the question raised by this new omnibus Bill is, 

how will it improve dental care to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Now will this improve dental hygiene generally and the 

provision of dental services? 

 

Well we know that Saskatchewan children have a higher level 

of tooth decay than the national average. Canadian standards 

call for 50 per cent of our children with no tooth decay by the 

year 2000. Again sadly, Saskatchewan’s figures lag far behind 

the national average. In the case of the Battlefords, only 39.73 

of our children, kindergarten to grade 6, have no history of 

tooth decay. In the North, Mr. Speaker, that falls to only 17 per 

cent — 17 per cent of the children, grade 6 and lower, have no 

history of tooth decay. And yet Canadian standards call for 50 

per cent by the year 2000. 

 

How is this Act going to address that problem? Now you’ll 

recall at one time we did have an aggressive program in this 

province, a school program for dealing with dental hygiene of 

our school children. And then a few years ago when the 

Conservatives were in office, that program was cut back 

substantially. 

 

Now the NDP of that day were very, very critical of cut-backs 

to that program. They were going to fix it when they got back 

into office. And so of course when they got back into office we 

thought they would indeed fix up the problem with the cut-back 

to the school dental program. 

 

Well as my colleagues here have said, they sure fixed it. The 

solution turned out to be to cancel it all together. So what the 

Tories scaled back, the NDP cancelled. What the NDP 

criticized as a half measure was instead pulled back to a zero 

measure. 



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

Well they don’t seem to be very fazed by that, but the problem 

of decay of teeth in school-age children is a serious problem in 

Saskatchewan. It is higher than the national average. I wish that 

hon. members opposite would display some of their same 

concern for the problem now, when they are government, as 

they showed when they were sitting on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And I feel confident, Mr. Speaker, that I can 

assure you that members opposite, the concerns we have today, 

sitting in opposition, we will not lose in the migration across the 

floor in a couple of years time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has recently 

taken the initiative of the community schools program, and I 

would like to congratulate them for that. 

 

The community schools program is an attempt to provide some 

enriched programing in schools in which a significant 

percentage of the pupils come from disadvantaged homes. And 

it is an attempt to provide a range of services outside the narrow 

purview, the narrow confines of education generally, in areas 

dealing with the problems attendant on poverty and 

malnutrition. 

 

I would like to say that I congratulate the government for taking 

this initiative after being prodded along by the federal 

government. And I think that they are to be congratulated, as I 

say, for taking the initiative of the federal government and 

going with it. However, Mr. Speaker, one big hole I see in the 

community schools program — and I commit it to the Minister 

of Health — is simply this: there is no dental health component 

whatsoever in the community schools program. 

 

Now why would that not be? We know that in the schools that 

will be served by the community schools program, that dental 

health is a serious, serious issue. I already gave you the figure, 

Mr. Speaker, that in the North only 17 per cent of children do 

not have some tooth decay. 

 

I think that the community schools program should have a 

dental health component in it. We know that 30 per cent of our 

school-aged children have active dental decay. That means that 

30 per cent of our children, at least, are not getting dental 

services that they desperately need. 

 

Will this Act address that problem? I don’t see how it will. Will 

that Act demonstrate that this government, which was so 

concerned with children’s dental decay when they sat over here, 

still have just a tiny, little bit of that same social conscience 

now in the brief period that they are occupying desks on the 

other side of the floor? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other specific issues I would like to 

address in this Act, specifically the issue of discipline 

proceedings. Mr. Speaker, until now, discipline committees in 

the college of dental surgeons had immunity from legal suit 

provided that the membership was acting in good faith. This is  

now being removed and I have to question why. 

 

Why would a dental discipline committee be open to legal suit 

while, for example, the province’s prosecutors are exempt from 

legal suit so long as they are acting in good faith? 

 

Why do we allow more protection for members of the law 

society in Saskatchewan and members of the college of 

physicians and surgeons than we do for the college of dental 

surgeons? Why the distinction, Mr. Speaker, between treating 

these various professional bodies differently? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my concern is that these various pieces of 

legislation appear to set up a hierarchy of professions and a 

hierarchy of professional organizations. Is the college of dental 

surgeons considered less professional in their dealings with 

their members, Mr. Speaker? Is there any evidence of arbitrary 

disciplinary proceedings by the college of dental surgeons? 

 

I am not aware of any, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I am not 

aware of any reasons why the disciplinary powers and the 

immunity granted other professional organizations should be 

denied to the province’s dentists. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, by taking away immunity from being sued, 

are we making discipline more difficult, and therefore less 

likely to occur? Are we making it so that the college will be 

reluctant to institute discipline proceedings? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we probably are. If we are telling the 

members that they are open to legal suit even when they are 

acting in good faith, they may not wish to institute discipline 

proceedings. And if they do not, Mr. Speaker, then this Bill in 

fact lessens protection for the public rather than strengthens it. 

 

Another point I would like to make on discipline proceedings in 

this Act is that when a member is disciplined he has only one 

appeal, namely, to the Court of Queen’s Bench. Now the 

Liberal opposition does not object to an ultimate appeal to the 

courts. We accept that. But while we don’t object to an ultimate 

appeal to the courts, I note that other professional bodies have 

an intermediate step in the appeal process. 

 

For example, the registered nurses association has a provision 

where, when the discipline committee disciplines a member, 

they may appeal to the full council of that body. There is a 

similar provision under the Saskatchewan registered psychiatric 

nurses association and the Saskatchewan embalmers 

association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me to only make sense that there 

should be an appeal process within the body itself, within the 

professional organization. I don’t think it is in anyone’s interest 

that the only appeal is to our courts. We all know that an appeal 

to our courts is lengthy and costly. And I think that it is far 

preferable, from a number of standpoints, that these difficulties 

and these discipline proceedings, whenever possible, should be 

dealt with within the professional organization itself and our 

courts are a last resort only. We do not wish to go to the courts 

whenever that can be avoided. Surely having an appeal level 

within the full council of the college of dental surgeons makes  



562  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

more sense than going directly to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Another example of what I am saying about the flawed 

disciplinary process in this Act is that, if a complaint is 

dismissed summarily, there is no appeal. Now under The Legal 

Profession Act, Mr. Speaker, if a client complains about the 

legal services he received, if there is an initial investigation and 

the results of that initial investigation are that there is nothing to 

the complaint and it ought not to proceed and no action is taken, 

the aggrieved client still has a right of appeal. However under 

this Bill presently before this Assembly, there is no such right 

of appeal and the matter simply dies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that if the complainant does not accept the 

initial results of the first investigation, the first investigator, he 

or she should have the right to appeal the matter further to the 

full council. The initial determination that a complaint is not 

valid is not the final word. They say under The Legal 

Profession Act there is another provision there, and the 

aggrieved client can demand a second opinion. 

 

(1515) 

 

In the case of the dental professions amendments before us, the 

professional conduct committee decides summarily that a 

complaint is not valid and should not go forward and there is no 

right of appeal to the full council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the more disturbing aspects of this Act is 

that it gives the minister the right to unilaterally make bylaws 

for the college of dental surgeons. Mr. Speaker, no such parallel 

right exists in the operations of other professional 

organizations; again, such as the benchers of the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have to ask the minister why he would consider it 

necessary to be able to unilaterally make laws for the college, 

particularly when the college of dental surgeons is being set up 

under this Act as a self-regulating, self-governing body. Why 

does the minister have the right to make bylaws for a 

self-regulating body here and not under other professional 

organizations Act? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have many self-regulating professional groups 

in this province set up by Act of the legislature. What puzzles 

me is why they are all set up differently. It seems to me that a 

professional, self-governing body has basically the same rights 

and obligations and powers as other professions. 

 

In each case the purpose of the Act is, one, to provide for 

registration and admission to the profession, but what is the 

process by which one is certified and recognized to practice in 

that profession; and secondly of course, a mechanism for 

dealing with complaints and for disciplining inadequate 

members. 

 

So the two issues are the same no matter what professional 

body we are talking about. And yet, Mr. Speaker, each 

professional group seems to have a widely different Act 

covering it. Different procedures for certification, different 

procedures for discipline. 

I cannot see why there would not be one standard Act in the 

province whereby all professional organizations are basically 

controlled in much the same manner by their self-regulating 

body. There could be changes obviously as required from 

profession to profession as circumstances require, but basically 

I don’t see those requirements varying a great deal, whether we 

are talking about health care professionals or legal 

professionals, or architects, and say the same basic principles 

still apply; that each of these professional organizations has an 

executive or council or body in place who decides who may 

practice that profession in our province and how discipline will 

be carried out when required. 

 

I think that if there was a standard professional Act in this 

province which was then adopted for the various professional 

groups, it would make it much easier for the public to follow, 

much easier for the public to know how complaints are made. 

Complaints against a lawyer as opposed to a complaint against 

a doctor or a dentist should be handled in much the same way. 

Discipline against a doctor or dentist or lawyer should again be 

handled through much the same process according to the 

professional organization which he or she is in. 

 

I think it would be much easier for the public to understand 

their rights and to understand the procedures if these Acts ran 

parallel and if the principles were the same in each. Surely a 

standard Act would give a greater appearance of fairness and 

would be more easily understood by members of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other issue raised by this Act is that the hon. 

member said that the various related dental professionals will be 

able to practise independently. Well of course that’s not, strictly 

speaking, the case. They will be able to practise their 

professions provided they are employees. They are still 

prevented from hanging out their shingle. 

 

Now the issue arises as to whether, especially in our rural areas, 

better service could be provided to some of our smaller towns 

if, say, dental therapists were allowed to practise independently. 

These are the people who basically kept the school program 

together. 

 

Many of our small towns of course have no dental professional 

services at all, and the question to be resolved is whether some 

of these smaller communities would be able to support a dental 

therapist. But that is not allowed in this Act in spite of the 

minister saying that independent practice was provided for the 

related dental professions. I think that’s an issue which needs to 

be examined and needs to be looked at. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that when dental therapists were 

running our school program, that there was not one single 

complaint against them for their services. So I don’t think there 

is any evidence that some of the related dental professional 

fields have been inadequate in the service they have provided to 

their clients, nor is there any evidence that they have exceeded 

their area of expertise and tried to take on cases which they 

ought not to be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dental therapists were very successful when 

they ran the school program. But then we had an example of the  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

NDP-Tory conspiracy. The Tories started a program to kill . . . 

the Tories started a conspiracy to kill dental services to young 

people in this province and to end the school program. But they 

didn’t totally kill it, Mr. Speaker, they only half killed it, 

because this was a joint conspiracy and it required the members 

of the NDP to kill it totally and end it completely. 

 

So my question, Mr. Speaker, is first of all, how will this Bill 

improve the difficulties of dental services in this province, 

especially to our children? How will this program address the 

needs of school-age children and the high level of child tooth 

decay in this province, higher than the national average. 

 

And finally, I would ask the minister to have another look, 

another look at the discipline procedures outlined in this Act. 

And I would ask the minister, would it not make sense for the 

discipline procedures under The Dental Professions Act to run 

parallel to the discipline proceedings we see under other 

professional Acts. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oh, Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious from these preliminary 

remarks that there are a number of issues that the Liberal 

opposition sees in this Bill. We don’t see it as just a 

housekeeping Bill. We see it as a serious matter. And for that 

reason, I now adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And 

welcome to the minister’s officials. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Deputy Chair, I was asking some questions of 

the minister regarding some of the expenses, and I was given 

the response that I didn’t understand the process, and that there 

was a respect for the process and an understanding that I didn’t 

have. And so I felt that probably I shouldn’t proceed because 

maybe I was the only one in this province that didn’t understand 

what I was supposed to be doing. 

 

So last night I was pleasantly surprised to get a number of calls 

from people who also didn’t understand, and they encouraged 

me to continue questioning until I understood, because they felt 

confident at that time they also would. 

 

So I think that maybe when the minister is talking to me and she 

sees, not only the members of my constituency, but the people 

from across the province that are watching and trying to 

understand how the government is spending our money and 

why they think we should just give quick approval to $675 

million without any response except wait until the real . . . until 

the committees come up, I would suggest that perhaps we 

should spend a little bit of time before we just vote this off and 

understand that the cheque is in the mail, or whatever the  

response usually comes from government. 

 

Yesterday I asked a question; the minister made the statement: 

“(We) . . . don’t know next year at this time what in fact 

equalization will come in at.” So I guess my first question to the 

minister would be: how do you decide, and what process is 

gone through to determine what you will use as an equalization 

number? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. Yes, I’ve had a number of comments made to me as 

well about understanding of processes and the lack thereof, so I 

think it’s worthwhile going over what’s occurring here and 

what is not occurring here. 

 

Each and every year the government brings forth a budget. We 

provide you with extensive documentation on budget day and 

then we provide lots of opportunity for detailed debate about 

the budget. And when you want detailed debate, what you need 

to have are the people here who are responsible for the 

departments that you want to debate, and that’s called estimates. 

 

And it’s up to the opposition to move as quickly as they want to 

to the estimates process so that the proper people are here to 

give you detailed answers. And when these people are here you 

will get those answers. We welcome this debate. We think this 

is an excellent budget and we welcome spending lots of time 

debating it. 

 

Now we’re doing interim supply, which is essentially saying 

there are groups out there who require money because we’re 

into the fiscal year — the fiscal year starts April 1 — and 

they’re relying on this government to provide them with interim 

funding until the budget is passed . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . I wish the member from Rosthern would allow me to 

continue, please. 

 

So what we’re doing is we’re not debating the budget here. We 

welcome the opportunity to debate this budget. We think it’s an 

excellent budget and people from across the province have said 

that; stopped me on the street and said, we really like this 

budget. But we have to be sure we have the people here who 

can provide you with the detailed answers that you require, and 

you will get that as soon as we move to that process. 

 

Now with respect to equalization, what happens is, first of all 

we don’t do the estimates for equalization; the federal 

government does because equalization is a program that 

involves all of the provinces. 

 

So we can make some assessment about how well our province 

is doing, but only the federal government is in a position to 

compile all of that information from across Canada and give us 

an estimate as to what our payment is going to be. So what 

happens is in their budget, in say February or whenever their 

budget is in a year, they give an estimate as to what they think 

equalization is going to be. 

 

(1530) 

 



564  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

But there are re-estimates done in the fall and again in the next 

spring. And so what occurs regularly is when those re-estimates 

are done . . . First of all, the re-estimates go back three years, so 

they cover a three-year period, and the provinces — all 10 

provinces — have an opportunity to provide more information. 

They say, well you gave us this estimate in February and we 

have some more information going two years back that we’d 

like to put into the new re-estimate. So they come out with a 

re-estimate in the fall and there can be massive swings in what 

their estimate is. 

 

Last year the swing was over $400 million. From one year to 

the other they said, you’re going to get this amount of money — 

600-and-some million was their initial estimate. When in fact 

we got to the end of the year, all we got was 200-and-some 

million. So that’s what occurs on equalization. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, thank you for your reply. I 

guess most of us that are listening and watching do realize that 

equalization is based on the fact that the province’s economy is 

also growing and prospering, as we all need it to do, and so that 

should be seen as good news as well. 

 

I guess the other point that I’d like to make is the point that 

maybe the process is wrong. We are asked to spend 

two-twelfths of our budget immediately, before we actually 

have a chance to talk to each department official. So maybe we 

should be starting earlier so that by the time you need the 

money, we can actually have gone through everything. Maybe 

we should have a fall session so we don’t have to be constantly 

sitting up here and asking . . . the government asking to spend 

money before we really know what you’re talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The other comment I would like to make when 

we look at this budget, Madam Minister, is there’s one very 

obvious thing when looking at our expenses, the two great big 

drops for expense budgets occur for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’m wondering if . . . When I look at Agriculture and 

Municipal Government and see that this government has 

decided to cut back those two departments significantly, if it 

doesn’t indicate that there is actually no . . . that rural 

Saskatchewan has no importance in the eyes of this 

government. And could you please explain to me why you 

would decide that, if we have . . . the economy is bustling and 

booming, why these two areas are the two that were decided to 

be picked on? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. First of all, in terms of when the budget is presented 

to the legislature, the year end is March 31, 1996-97, whatever 

year. Any organization would wait till close to the end of the 

year before they present their new budget, to find out exactly 

what their position is. 

 

So traditionally in this province, budgets have been into the new 

year. In fact our budgets have been earlier than any other 

budgets in this province. So there’s obviously a time problem. 

And we’ve ensured that the budget is presented to the  

legislature before the end of the year. 

 

But I mean you have to ensure that you have all the 

information, that you don’t decide, well let’s have a budget in 

October, halfway through the year. I mean what kind of 

organization would have a budget halfway through its year 

without the information as to how you’re going to even finish 

off that year, never mind how much you’re going to have for 

the next year. 

 

Now with respect to rural Saskatchewan, the Agriculture budget 

is declining because farmers are becoming more self-reliant. 

Because they are in a better position, they’re not requiring as 

many safety net programs. 

 

There are significant things in this budget though that do benefit 

rural Saskatchewan. This government paid off $150 million in 

crop insurance debt to ensure that the new crop insurance 

program could start with stable premiums, low premiums. 

Significant reduction in premiums occurred because the 

province of Saskatchewan paid down the crop insurance debt. 

 

If you look at the new money in Highways, that obviously 

benefits rural Saskatchewan. If you look at the new money 

going into health care, a lot of it is for emergency services. 

 

But let’s be clear where the Liberals are at. Once again your 

leader is on record as of yesterday. We put 50-some million 

new dollars into health districts; 70 million increase in the 

health budget, 50 million going to districts. Just yesterday your 

leader said what he really approved was the University of 

Saskatchewan students’ budget which put $3 million into health 

care over five years. I would say to the member opposite, she 

should tell her constituents in rural Saskatchewan what a mere 

$3 million over five years would mean for health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, at this moment we’re talking 

about politics and parties, and what I’m actually trying to talk 

about is the money that the people of this province are trying to 

understand being spent at this time. I think that it’s . . . And I’m 

also talking about rural Saskatchewan, which is something that 

this government doesn’t like to talk about. Crop insurance was 

barely . . . was not offset with the money that was taken from 

GRIP. 

 

And also when you’re talking about the whole budgeting 

process, anybody who has ever had a business knows that you 

have to do cash flow projections. And you have no idea what’s 

going on there, and when you’re starting at the beginning of the 

year either. It makes it very difficult for district health boards 

and for school boards and other agencies who are working for 

two or three months without their budget at hand either. 

 

Madam Minister, maybe you could explain to me how some of 

these things like the corporate capital taxes has been estimated 

to go up. Corporate income tax is going to be going up. What 

kind of figures do you use to arrive at these numbers? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I would say to the member opposite,  

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

I don’t think it’s credible to be in this legislature and come and 

say, well we’re just here to understand your budget and to ask 

you questions. The opposition has to be accountable as well and 

there has to be some coherence to what the opposition says. It’s 

not credible to have members of the legislature coming and 

saying one thing here and then saying another thing somewhere 

else. The public has to hold both sides of the House 

accountable. 

 

You asked a question about rural Saskatchewan and I want to 

go back to that. There is a lot in this budget to benefit rural 

Saskatchewan. A million dollars for added RCMP officers, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan. More money for the 911 

system. One of the two main tax changes was a tax credit 

system geared to promote the expansion of the hog and 

livestock industry in the province. 

 

And as I say, the biggest benefit to rural Saskatchewan is the 

money going into the health care system. And if you want to 

ask us what we’ve done for rural health care, we’ve told you. 

We’ve laid out our numbers and we’ve said that 50-some 

million will go in new money to health districts. But you also 

have to answer the other part of that question which is, what 

would it really mean to rural Saskatchewan if all the new 

money going into health care was $3 million over five years? 

 

Now as far as the tax information, we get our estimates based 

on our economic forecast for the province. This one is also 

coordinated with the federal government because the federal 

government collects all of the major income taxes, the corporate 

and individual income tax system. So they have a major role to 

play in the estimates that are developed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I think we would be able to discuss for a long 

time what members on this side feel you are doing for rural 

Saskatchewan because I think we’re not on the same wave 

length at all. We talk about things like 911. Well I’ll tell you, in 

rural Saskatchewan in most places we don’t even have cellular 

coverage, so sometimes using 911 is a difficult item. 

 

The hog-buying expansion of course is a good thing. It’s going 

to be helping the whole province. And I would think that we 

shouldn’t be just taking from rural Saskatchewan; we should be 

putting back into rural Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Madam Minister, we talk about the . . . I notice that there’s 

going to be a decrease in the sales tax, which of course results 

from the 2 per cent decrease in PST (provincial sales tax). But it 

leads me to believe then that the government doesn’t really 

actually believe their philosophy that by cutting taxes you’re 

going to actually increase jobs and get the economy going. 

Because if you did believe that, there should actually be more 

money coming in. If you believe that we would all have more 

money to spend, then it’s going to go back into the province 

again. 

 

So I guess I’m wondering if you think that you’re going to . . . 

the province is going to lose $143 million from the 2 per cent 

sales tax decrease. Is that the number you’re working on? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s obviously the estimate for  

the sales tax revenue. But this government has never said that 

you could cut the sales tax and get all the money back from 

growth in the economy. I think at one point that was your 

party’s position, as I recall one of the places that you stopped in 

terms of your policy meandering. It was 9 per cent growth, I 

think, 8 or 9 per cent growth. 

 

But we’ve never taken that position. What we have said, and 

what the small-business community has said to the government 

is this. If there was one single thing that the government could 

do and afford to do to promote growth in jobs in the province, it 

would be to reduce the sales tax. That’s the small-business 

community saying that. And they would say that that would 

spur the economy onto greater growth. 

 

But you can’t recoup $180 million. The economy would have to 

grow it and assume 9 per cent, as you assumed during the last 

election, in order to finance that. And there’s no economist that 

is going to say that that is going to result from a sales tax cut. 

 

But I go back to consistency. The budget that your own leader 

yesterday approved said that he liked the students’ budget better 

than our budget, did not have a cut in the sales tax. The sales 

tax was not cut. In fact there was no major tax reduction in that 

budget. So now I think we have three positions, by your party, 

on sales taxes. 

 

The overarching one is harmonization, which means the 

average person in Saskatchewan will pay twice as much in sales 

tax as they do now. The second one was when we came out 

with our budget, you tried to get behind the Leader of the Third 

Party and say you supported the sales tax cut, but you didn’t, 

because it was harmonization that was your position. Now it 

looks like the third position today is the leader of your party 

saying that you would not support the sales tax cut because the 

budget that he’s endorsing, the students’ budget, had no tax cut 

in it. 

 

So as I say, we have to explain what we did, why we did it. But 

there also has to be some consistency and credibility in the 

opposition. We stand by our sales tax cut. We think it is good 

for the economy of the province. We think it is good for the 

average person in the province. But I would like the same 

consistent answer from the members opposite. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Madam 

Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials today. And I’d like 

to speak about the interim supply for Social Services. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to ask if the amount of money 

requested for Social Services is exactly one-sixth of the Social 

Service budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, yes it is. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, is 

the income support portion of Social Service considered 

statutory spending? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, there is no statutory spending in  

  



566  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

that area. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay, I imagine that — because I believe it was 

just yesterday when I had the comment made to me and I’m not 

sure if it was from Madam Minister or who it came from — but 

that any ongoing support that is needed is considered to be 

statutory spending, and so that’s why I’m asking the question. 

Would you comment on that, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, to the member opposite, 

statutory spending means spending in which there’s a law 

saying that you have to spend this amount of money on this 

particular item. So that’s what’s meant by statutory. 

 

So social assistance is not statutory. That is, there isn’t a law 

that says you have to spend this amount on social assistance for 

these reasons. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

just a couple of minutes ago you made the comment to my 

colleague that there are groups out there who are waiting for 

this money and so we’d like to get the show on the road. And so 

what I’m asking, Madam Minister, is could you give us a copy 

of the list of expenditures requested by these groups and could 

you give us a list of the groups that are requesting this spending 

at this time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I can give you some examples. 

I mean the groups would be covered in the budget. 

 

But let me give you some examples in the area that you’re 

talking about: The Battlefords Boys and Girls Club; the Boys 

and Girls Club of Yorkton; Child Hunger and Education 

Program; Circle Project Association; Family Service 

Saskatchewan; Hunger in Moose Jaw; Immigrant Women of 

Saskatchewan; Infant Hunger Action Group; Kinsmen 

Community Group Home Society for Boys; Lestock Women’s 

Centre; Nipawin Nutrition for Kids; Prince Albert Society for 

Services to Children and Youth; Rainbow Youth Centre; 

Salvation Army; Saskatchewan Crisis Intervention Service; 

Saskatoon Group Homes; Weyburn and Area Child Abuse 

Council; YWCA of Regina; Dales House; Kenosee Youth 

Camp; North Battleford Youth Centre; Paul Dojack Youth 

Centre; Prince Albert Youth Residence; Yarrow Youth Farm 

Resident Trust Account. And the list goes on. 

 

So there’s significant numbers of groups of this kind who will 

be looking to the government to provide funding in the near 

future because they’re into their new year and they need the 

funding. 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 

believe you’ve had this question put to you by other members 

of our caucus, but I’m going to ask again because I didn’t hear 

clearly — as you know, I have a problem hearing. But anyway 

why is it necessary to ask for one-sixth or two-twelfths instead 

of the customary one-twelfth? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, that’s a good question and I  

welcome the opportunity to explain that again. In the past — 

it’s an issue of timing — in the past, we had interim supply at 

an earlier date, so it was possible to do just one month’s interim 

supply and then come back later for another month’s interim 

supply. 

 

This year what’s going to happen is because of the lateness of 

the date, we’re actually into the spending year. What would 

happen is, we’re going to get this interim supply passed and 

then have to come back immediately, within a matter of days, 

for another interim supply. 

 

So our assessment in talking to the departments and the groups, 

is that their life is going to be a lot easier if we can do two 

months interim supply, and then of course come back to the 

legislature if the budget isn't passed at that time and return to 

the old process of one-twelfth. But it’s for the convenience 

really of the groups, so that there isn’t the uncertainty about are 

we going to get our cheque in time to pay our bills. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 

respect the fact that you want to get the interim supply out in 

time and that you want to have the budget passed quickly, in 

order that areas like the district health boards get their money. 

 

I have to make this comment because I know in our Central 

Plains Health District, even though the budget has been passed 

in previous years, the district health board there did not deliver 

that money to the district health board until it seems like 

sometimes three months, three to four months after. And I guess 

whether or not you can do something about this is at question 

here, but I would like you to make note of that and to see that 

possibly the people that are in management within the district 

health boards are compelled to deliver that money to the 

facilities in time so that they are not held up also. 

 

Although the government right now seems to be trumpeting 

increased spending to alleviate child poverty, Madam Minister, 

the Social Services budget has actually declined by $.04 

million. In the budget, it says another 13.8 million has been 

redirected to child and youth initiatives in the form of various 

programs. So will the money being requested for interim supply 

cover the interim costs of these initiatives, the street youth 

initiative, the child nutrition and development program, etc.? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, to the member opposite. Yes, 

the interim money will go to the new initiatives in the budget. 

 

And I will note the member’s concern about health boards and 

the money getting to them as quickly as possible and look into 

that. But you may want to raise that when the Department of 

Health is here as well to get either an explanation or else a 

change so that the money does go out as quickly as it can. 

 

Final comment — I am in no rush to get the budget through at 

all. I like debating this budget; I like talking about it; I use 

every opportunity to talk about this budget because I think it’s a 

good budget for the people of Saskatchewan. So as far as I’m 

concerned, talking about the budget is something I welcome. 

 

The concern is that these groups . . . my concern is about  

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

interim supply. That the money gets to these groups quickly 

enough so that they’re not concerned about their capacity to pay 

their bills. But the budget, that debate, I welcome it and 

welcome a long debate on it. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, do 

all of the initiatives that I have just spoken of, the new 

initiatives, etc., from the Department of Social Services begin 

immediately? Do those programs and those initiatives begin 

immediately? Or do some of them or all of them need some 

time to be implemented, and therefore can it wait for the budget 

to be passed? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I would say to the member 

opposite, you may want to ask the Minister of Social Services 

that question when the Department of Social Services is here 

because here is an excellent example of — I don’t know all the 

detail of the different initiatives. 

 

A general answer is though, some of them will obviously be 

able to be initiated immediately. But I’m sure many of them, 

because they are partnerships with community groups — the 

department is working in partnership with different groups in 

different communities — will take some time to get the two 

partners deciding the best way to spend the allocated funds. 

 

So as I say, when the Minister of Social Services and the 

Department of Social Services is here you can ask them more 

detail. But I’m sure there’s a mixture. Some of them obviously 

will be able to go right away, others will take some time to 

work out the details. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. My concern with 

that question was just simply that if these initiatives are not 

beginning immediately, then I question the necessity of having 

an interim supply of money dedicated to these initiatives at this 

time if the initiatives are not even being put forward right now. 

 

Is the spending for each of the new initiatives and for each 

component of the Social Service budget spread evenly 

throughout the year? For example, again the street youth and 

youth prostitution initiative may need a large, immediate 

expenditure to start the program, then the spending may decline. 

Or the bulk of spending for other programs may need to be 

done later in the year. So could you answer that for me? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, well again what I 

would say to the member opposite is, this is the kind of question 

you should ask the minister when he is here with all the details. 

He can go through the different programs and tell you which 

ones will require most of their funding at one time of the year 

and which ones will require most of their funding at another 

time of year. 

 

But to go back to the first comment the member made, this 

doesn’t mean . . . just because you’re allocating two-twelfths 

doesn’t mean that they are going to spend two-twelfths. It’s 

permissive. It is saying if in fact they have expenditures that 

have to be made within this time frame, they can spend up to 

two-twelfths, but it doesn’t mean that they will spend it. And if 

the programs aren’t ready to go in this time frame, obviously  

they won’t spend the money and it won’t be approved to be 

spent. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

just as a matter of curiosity, in the past has the government 

taken the full interim supply of money and used it immediately, 

or do you generally take the interim supply and throughout the 

year use it some other way? Like why the great amount of 

money at this time? And how can the public be assured that the 

amount of money that is being supplied in the interim in fact . . . 

how can they be sure that the government is accountable for 

expenditures that are on time? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  A couple points of clarification. 

First of all, the interim supply becomes completely redundant 

once the budget’s passed — this no longer exists. It’s just a 

bridging mechanism to ensure that groups that will need money 

between April 1, which is the beginning of the year for the 

government, and whenever the budget’s passed, to be sure that 

in that interim groups who need money get the money they 

require. The minute the budget’s passed, interim supply is no 

longer valid — it’s gone. 

 

And again, the only money that can be spent under interim 

supply is money that’s in the budget So it has to be in the 

budget and the controls that exist throughout the year are there. 

That is, you have to say here’s the budget — here’s the bad 

budget allocation; here’s what it said the money was going to be 

spent on, here’s what we’re spending it on. And the control is 

the Public Accounts which come out every year at the end of the 

year — they usually come out in the summer or in the fall — 

and they say, yes, the government did spend the money 

according to where they said. 

 

And probably the best evidence that the system is working and 

the money is being spent where the government said it was 

going to be spent is the auditor who said last year in the 

summary financial statements all government spending — 

where we spent our money — he gave us an unqualified 

opinion. He said, complete stamp of approval. No qualification 

whatsoever — they spent all the money exactly as they said 

they were going to spend it. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

Social Services has increased the amount of grants that it gives 

to various organizations — for instance, grants to family and 

youth services has increased by approximately two and a half 

million dollars. Could you tell me exactly where this money is 

being spent? And I presume that what you’re going to be saying 

is to check with the Minister of Social Services, so I will do 

that. But could I ask you if these grants are one-time expenses, 

and if so, do they need to be given out right now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think what the member 

opposite is referring to is one of the parts of the budget that I 

am most proud of which is that we are beginning to give to 

people who work in small organizations that benefit children 

and families — child care workers, people who work in 

women’s shelters — we’re beginning for the first time to give 

them pensions and to provide them with a decent standard of 

living. 

  



568  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

So it’s a very important part of the budget. I think it’s a very 

important symbolic first step to actually begin to pay properly 

the people who look after our children and our families. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I notice that you 

were in conversation with your officials for part of my question 

so I’d like to refer again to the grants. Are these grants that are 

being put forward right now, are the grants one-time expenses 

and do they need to be given out right now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. This is the point I keep making. There would be many 

different items in that subvote, so the Minister of Social 

Services is going to be here shortly. What I would do is ask him 

what the . . . how many of them are one-time grants and how 

many of them are permanent grants. That’s where the detail of 

the budget comes out is in the Estimates, and so I think that’s 

where you need to get into that sort of detail. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

applications for grants normally take months to process, so 

what type of grants can be given out now, like within the next 

two months, that do not require such an application? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I’m not sure how to respond to 

the member’s question. We don’t just decide today to give 

somebody a grant. There’s a long process whereby you have to 

qualify and there has to be a program; there has to be criteria. 

 

So we don’t decide just today that we’re going to give 

somebody a grant. There has to be a program that exists that has 

parameters, that has criteria, and you have to apply and you go 

through a process. And that would be done; that would be an 

extensive process. It’s not something that happens overnight. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, it’s interesting to listen to your responses today. And I 

think I sense a bit of cooperation in some of your answers today 

which is very, very nice to hear after your chastising of us 

yesterday for our direction, and then you going all over the map 

criticising the leader, criticising . . . You name it — I guess you 

did. And so maybe since I do detect a bit of commitment on 

your behalf today to respond, I’ll ask you a question again that I 

asked yesterday that you were reluctant, or wouldn’t answer. 

 

But before I do, I’d just like to quote to you a couple of 

statements from a few years back in this House in this very type 

of debate on interim supply. And the first quote is from the 

Minister of Agriculture and Food, the member from Watrous, 

and I quote: 

 

And the Minister of Finance and the Premier of this 

province have a commitment to things like this interim 

supply Bill. They have a commitment to put forward a 

position that is clear, concise, and adequate to cover the 

needs of rural communities out there. 

 

Again, and I quote, the member says: 

 

I mean they can use all the excuses. He can give me every 

excuse in the book and use the rules to get around this  

question. But it isn’t going to work because I tell you we 

have to know. The farmers are entitled to know what 

position and how much they are getting from the provincial 

government. Mr. Chairman, I don’t need a lecture from the 

hon. member as to what questions I should be asking and I 

don’t doubt that he wants to get off this issue. 

 

Now that’s your Agriculture and Food minister back in 1989 

when you were debating in interim supply and were talking 

about a drought in Saskatchewan, as you all remember, from 

that time when farmers were in dire straits and indeed in a lot of 

trouble. 

 

(1600) 

 

I go on to quote the member from Regina Coronation Park in 

his questioning to the Minister of Finance in the interim debate. 

And I quote: 

 

I want to address some questions to you in relation to 

SaskTel and some of your financial jiggery-pokery that 

you have done in relation to SaskTel and in relation to this 

annual budget. 

 

The member goes on, and I quote again: 

 

Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have lost faith in 

your administration. 

 

Not a lot different than right now in your administration, people 

have no faith. 

 

And you’re exhibiting today every reason why they have 

lost faith. 

 

And your example . . . examples of your answers yesterday just 

indeed did reflect that. I go on to quote: 

 

You have refused to answer the question in a direct 

manner. You have ignored the major question, a quarter of 

a billion dollars that went into your black hole 

Consolidated Fund to hide the defeat and hide it until after 

the next election, whatever that means. 

 

Well that’s a quote from Hansard. 

 

Madam Minister, yesterday when we asked you about the 

emergency measures in this province and we asked you about 

what types of money would be going to the people, to the RMs 

to help them cope with the flooding that we’re seeing in 

southern Saskatchewan, you’re all over the map, all sorts of 

answers, and wouldn’t really answer the questions the people of 

Saskatchewan are asking. 

 

So I’ll ask you once more today. In your interim Bill here, in 

your two-twelfths, is there money in it that will rectify the 

problem for rural municipalities and small urban ones in this 

province to help them cope with the flooding that we’re now 

seeing? 

 

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I would say to the member 

opposite is, of course, when we get to the estimates process he 

will get a detailed answer to that question. What is included in 

interim supply is two-twelfths of spending for all departments. 

So when we get to estimates we will of course answer you that 

question. 

 

But if the member wants to get into a discussion of his leader, 

which he introduced into the debate today — I did not. You 

don’t have to worry about what I’m saying about your leader. 

What you have to worry about is what his home town 

newspaper is saying about your leader. The good doctor has 

been watching far too many episodes of the X-Files, and it goes 

on to criticize your leader and the outlandish comments that 

he’s making. 

 

So I am here to talk about interim supply. But I will tell the 

member opposite if he wants to get into comments about his 

leader, I have a number of different quotes about his leader that 

we could discuss at length if that’s what he chooses. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Madam Minister, your side of the 

House, and you in particular, are great at criticizing everybody 

under the sun for all the problems that you’ve got, whether it’s 

the provincial Tories and their administration or whether it’s 

from Mulroney days. You can blame the federal government of 

today; you’re now trying to blame everything on the Leader of 

the Liberal Party. 

 

And I guess the people of this province are getting a little tired 

of it. I get calls asking why can’t you get those people on the 

other side of the House to answer a question? And, Mr. 

Chairman, I guess here we are again today — and I thought 

maybe the minister had a turn of faith, but I guess she hasn’t — 

and refusing to answer a question that is so important to so 

many people in this province. We’re in emergency situation, we 

have water rising almost daily, and yet you continue to talk 

politics on this issue. 

 

Part of the interim supply, as I understand it, is to — in your 

own words, I think — to get monies out there to the people that 

need them right now so that they can go on with their lives and 

get their budgets in place and spend money on services and 

supplies that they need. 

 

To me this is an emergency, Madam Minister, so why can you 

not tell us and why will you not tell us what money there is for 

emergency relief in this province to the people that are affected 

by the flooding? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I will say to the member opposite is 

if he wants that information, he wants a detailed discussion of 

people’s budgets, we’re quite prepared to move to that right 

now, to get the ministers here so they can give you those sorts 

of answers. 

 

But what I will say to the member opposite is that you as well 

have to be accountable. We’ve laid before the people of 

Saskatchewan a budget which, you say, people talk to you. 

People talk to me as well; actually come up to me and say, darn 

good budget for the people of Saskatchewan. You may want to  

tell them why you voted against such a good budget. 

 

And what I said is that if you want that detail, we’re more than 

willing to provide it and we will call the departments forward 

that can give you the detail that you request. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I don’t want 

all the details. All I want is a simple statement, a commitment 

from you that there is money there to help the municipalities in 

this province cope with the flooding. Will you make that 

commitment today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 

the member opposite is let’s proceed to the estimates process, 

let’s go through it, and let’s get the detail out before the people 

of the province. It’s up to the members opposite to decide how 

quickly we move to that process. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can see that the 

minister is unwilling to answer the question. I can see that she 

doesn’t really particularly care what’s happening out there 

today in the emergency situation across the province. And if the 

minister is willing . . . not willing to answer the question and 

commit to the people of the province, then we may as well quit 

wasting taxpayers’ money in this forum right now. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, I move we 

report progress. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Chairman, through you and to all 

members of the House, I would like to introduce to you an 

MLA that sat in this House from 1971 to 1975. He is now the 

mayor of Carrot River, Saskatchewan, and principal of the high 

school in Carrot River. Please join with me in welcoming Mr. 

John Comer back to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair:  The next order of business is Social Services 

and I would ask firstly that the minister introduce his officials 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 

introduce to members Mr. Con Hnatiuk, who’s deputy minister; 

Mr. Vic Taylor, assistant deputy minister; Mr. Bob Wihlidal, 

director of our budget management branch; Mr. Richard Hazel, 

executive director of family and youth services; Mr. Phil Walsh, 

executive director, income support services; and Ms.  

  



570  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Deborah Bryck, who’s director of our child care services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome — 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Deputy Chairman — welcome to the 

officials that are with the minister today. 

 

Mr. Chair, I would like to just put forward some very direct 

questions and the first of them will be, how many social 

assistance cases were there in 1995 and how many were there in 

1996? How many cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I wanted to get the precise 

figures for the member. They are as follows: in the budget year 

1995-96, the average number of cases — they will vary on a 

monthly basis — but the average number of cases over the 

course of that budget year was 39,990 — 39,990. 

 

In the budget year ’96-97, the budget year just finished — again 

this is average number of cases over the course of the year — 

39,307. And so we’ve seen a reduction in the course of that year 

of approximately 683 cases. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And while I’m up, I 

guess I would ask you also, maybe not at this time but if you 

could forward it to me in the near future, the number of cases 

between ’94 and ’95. 

 

How many of the individual recipients that were on social 

services . . . how many were individuals in total in 1995 and 

1996? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I can provide to the member 

the case-load in ’94-95. That case-load that year was 40,224 

cases, and so we’ve seen what we believe is a good trajectory. 

Perhaps not as rapid as we might desire, but a good trajectory 

showing the case-load numbers coming down year over year. 

 

In terms of the actual number of people that the case-load 

represents, a case will be a household. The household may be a 

single person; it may be a couple; it may be a family with 

children. So when we take all of the individuals for the years 

that you’ve . . . that we’ve discussed, in 1994-95 the number 

was 82,341 individuals — again, these are the average numbers 

for the year. In ’95-96 the number was 81,963. And in ’96-97 

the number is 80,747. 

 

So again we’re seeing the trajectory with the numbers falling 

year over year. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Of these recipients, Mr. Minister, how 

many were between the ages of 18 and 22? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we don’t have the breakdown 

of 18- to 21-year-olds over the annual yearly period. I can tell 

you what the average has been in the last year. If the member 

would like to see that number, over the year, we can provide it 

to her. 

 

But currently there will be approximately 4,800 individuals  

between the ages of 18 and 21 who will be receiving social 

assistance. Of those, 1,300 — and this is prior to any of the new 

programing we’ll be offering through this budget — of that 

4,800, 1,300, approximately, are today involved in some form 

of education or training, and 3,500 who are today not involved 

in education, training, or employment. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, how many are single 

parents with children? And if you could give me the numbers 

and also the percentage in comparison to other categories, I 

would appreciate that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, what I can do for the member 

is provide a snapshot, the most recent snapshot we have of the 

case-load which would be February 1997, and the breakdown 

would be as follows. 

 

Children who will be receiving social assistance would 

represent 34,880 or 43.6 per cent of the case-load; single 

employables are 12,787 or 16 per cent of the case-load; single 

. . . I’m sorry, single unemployable, single unemployable are 

12,787 or 16 per cent; single employable are 8,241 or 10 per 

cent; the single parents, 12,220 or 15.2 per cent — to the 

question you asked — and adults in couple relationships, 

11,864 for 14.8 per cent. 

 

So single parents represent 12,220 individuals or 15 per cent of 

the case-load. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate also 

if you could give me sort of the yearly breakdown within the 

last year, of those same categories. And I am certainly willing 

to wait but not very long. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Estimates show that your department has cut 

about $17 million in income support payments for this year, and 

that funding appears to have been shifted to Post-Secondary 

Education. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, that is correct. The shift 

in the funding has gone from Social Services to Post-Secondary 

Education, primarily as a result of Post-Secondary now taking 

responsibility for the Youth Futures program, directed 

particularly to 18- to 21-year-olds we were talking about earlier. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Is that 18- to 21-year-olds that you’re targeting 

there, or is that 18- to 22-year-old? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  It’s 18 to 21 inclusive. The Education 

Act speaks to the age 21, and so it is inclusive of 21-year-olds. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay, in regards to the shift of funding to 

Post-Secondary Education, what specific programs have been 

designed for reallocation of income-support funding? You 

know, with the income-support funding, what are some of the 

specific programs that you see that could be developing through 

the Post-Secondary Education funding? I’d just like to know if 

you have an indication that you can give me on what kind of 

programs are there. 

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, let me speak to a couple of 

programs we believe will grow out of this new initiative. One 

will be the provincial training allowance. Up until now, we 

have provided living allowances for individuals who may be 

taking some training, some education, and there may have been 

other sources of funding through Post-Secondary that provided 

for their education, the schooling and supplies and so on. 

 

What we’re doing is bringing those together into one program 

— a provincial training allowance to provide one source of 

financial support for these students that will cover living 

expenses, their education expenses, and so on. This has the 

benefit of course, of reducing a fair amount of duplication, so 

we don’t have two departments working opposed to one 

another, or at least in duplication of one another — to bring that 

together into one program for those people generally, who will 

want to improve their education and training. 

 

The other will be the more specifically targeted Youth Futures 

program and this will involve, first of all, a pilot initiative in the 

city of Prince Albert where we will be targeting staff and 

resources to the young people in that region, developing 

hopefully for them, almost on an individual basis, programs that 

can put them in education and put them in work experience and 

move them . . . give them that leg up from dependency on social 

assistance. 

 

We’re starting in Prince Albert with a pilot project because we 

want to really ensure that this can work and we develop it 

before we move to a more general, provincial program. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I do agree with pilot projects to test 

the waters as such, but $17 million has been shifted, you know, 

over to that and so I am wondering if you can give me an 

estimate about how soon you’ll be able to assess whether this 

pilot project will be successful or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we have had some 

experience. The member may know that, several years ago now, 

we did a similar kind of thing with the 16- and 17-year-olds 

who were on social assistance. At that point in time it was quite 

easy for a 16- or 17-year-old to simply leave home or leave 

school and access social assistance. We’ve changed that now 

and we’ve had some demonstrable results. 

 

Where at that time we had in the neighbourhood of 350 16- and 

17-year-olds just directly receiving social assistance, as a result 

of intervention, almost on an individual basis with them — 

targeting some programing for each individual child — we’ve 

seen that number drop very considerably. 

 

We’re confident that we can see the same kind of drop in the 

18- to 21-year-old age group but we want to . . . We understand 

this is a big project. It’s not easy always to find appropriate 

training or education or work opportunities for these 

individuals. And so we’re starting in Prince Albert where we 

know there’s a . . . there’s good community support, there’s a 

very active department, and there’s a high need. So that’s where 

we’re starting, but we’re confident that we will see some very 

positive results. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Can you tell me of when will the programing — 

excuse me — in this regard in Prince Albert be put in place? 

Will that be immediately? Does it look like it’s down the road 

three months, four months? Can you tell me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the notion of the Youth 

Futures program was sort of part of our redesign of social 

assistance; the proposals that we discussed with many, many 

people in our province. The initial proposal has gone through 

some change, as you will understand. One of those changes is 

now that it becomes the responsibility of Post-Secondary 

Education. 

 

In some ways I am very supportive of that because I believe we 

should see this as an educational and a growth opportunity for 

these young people. In another way I hate to see this good idea 

sort of leaving our department and moving into another 

department. 

 

Our hope is, in working with Post-Secondary Education, that 

discussions are beginning immediately in Prince Albert with the 

community and the various supports that will need to be in 

place. What we’re doing is targeting September as the 

beginning point to coincide with the beginning of the new 

school year. So our target is September. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. September is what, about six months 

away or so? Again I have to comment on the fact that $17 

million is being targeted for initiatives for training for youths. A 

good idea. However that’s an awful lot of money to be standing 

still you could say, or without use, if we’re not in fact maybe 

making a bigger effort throughout the province. 

 

I know that it’s a quandary that you certainly have, because we 

do need to look at pilot projects and still the need in the 

province is so great for training programs. 

 

So I’ll just go on, asking you, if the youth that are going 

through this training do not participate well in the program or 

for some reason cannot achieve throughout that program, will 

these same youth still qualify for benefits and will a portion of 

that $17 million then be redirected to support . . . income 

support for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair. We have dedicated this 

portion of money fully for the provincial training allowance and 

the Youth Futures program. 

 

Now if in the circumstance that we have, let’s say a 21- or a 

20-year-old who for some reason we simply cannot find an 

individual plan that works, we’re not going to leave someone 

without support. We’re just not going to do that. But they will 

then be accommodated through our more traditional programs 

and our traditional budget. 

 

So we’ve targeted this money because we . . . And it is a lot of 

money, as the member points out. That’s for sure. But we know 

. . . I sincerely believe that money invested at this point in a 

young person’s life is some of the best money that we can 

invest for the long-term benefit of that individual, of his or her 

future family or current family, and for the future of our  

  



572  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

community and province. So it’s a lot of money but we think 

it’s going to be money very well spent. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if for 

some reason our youth go through these training programs and 

cannot find employment after, or simply do not have the right 

attitude, I guess, to the work ethic as such, will they be then 

granted income support? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, with anyone who makes 

application for social assistance, if the person has ability to 

work, we insist that there be active work searches going on 

continually. 

 

What I am pleased to learn, after becoming Minister of Social 

Services, is that most of our single employables who access 

social assistance are relatively short term in receiving social 

assistance. I think the average is somewhere around six months 

that they will be receiving assistance before they move back 

into the workforce. Now there may be new people coming in, 

but we do see a transition of those who are able to work. And 

that’s encouraging. 

 

We ask every individual who will be accessing social 

assistance, if they’re able, to be out pursuing every available 

opportunity for work. Now we know in some circumstances — 

there will be circumstances where it’s difficult either because of 

perhaps lack of training or other personal issues going on in 

their lives or the particular circumstance where they live — that 

it may not be possible immediately to find work. But we will 

ask every young person or older adult who has the potential to 

work to be out searching diligently for work, and records would 

show that in fact most of these folks do find opportunity and 

move out of the system. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think as 

you well know there are different qualification standards, I 

guess you would call them, in other provinces for how soon 

youth or any person can access social assistance in a particular 

province if they come from another province. 

 

Now in regards to the training program that this province will 

be putting forward, are there going to be any stipulations in this 

regard? Will people have a waiting period when they enter our 

province before they can qualify for training programs? How do 

you see the department dealing with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, there will not 

be any residency requirements. This we see as an important 

principle. There will not be a residency requirement. If you are 

a resident of Saskatchewan you are a Canadian and welcome in 

our province and we don’t expect that there will be any 

significant migration of individuals in search of this program. 

There may be some, but if you’re living in Saskatchewan we 

believe you to be a Canadian and we believe you to be a 

resident of our province and therefore you are available for the 

benefits of our programs. 

 

This does take us to that discussion, that important discussion, 

about national standards and how, as Canadians, we should feel 

free to move in our country and understand that, as a Canadian  

anywhere in this great country, we should have access to the 

programs available. The programs will vary province to 

province but we should have access by virtue of our Canadian 

citizenship. 

 

And if I may say, that the Premier of our province and certainly 

ministers here and I know members of the opposition have 

spoken out very publicly about the need to preserve and 

maintain national standards, and in some cases to be building 

some national programing. So back to your very specific 

question the answer is no, there would not be a residency 

requirement. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that you realize 

I asked that question because there are a number of citizens that 

are taxpayers that are concerned that somehow there may be an 

influx of people that are using our educational facilities for 

training, and in the long run will not be able to find jobs within 

the province and so the taxpayers will be paying for this 

training. 

 

And they’re already under a major tax load and tax burden, not 

only through PSTs, GSTs (goods and services tax), etc., but all 

kinds of taxes. And they’re afraid that it might end up being sort 

of the same scenario that we have looked at with doctors being 

trained in this province, or a number of people being trained, 

and then scooting out of here to have to find employment 

elsewhere. 

 

So that’s why I mention that and I bring it up on behalf of the 

taxpayers of the province. Would you like to comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes I would. I think we could have a 

long discussion about this very issue. 

 

Let me say that another aspect of the good news that we’re 

seeing in our province is for the last, I believe it’s the last 13 

quarters in a row, we’ve seen now a net migration into 

Saskatchewan — people coming into Saskatchewan. Our 

population is growing. 

 

(1630) 

 

And that tragic out-migration that happened during the Tory 

administration of the 1980s when we were seeing our young 

people particularly, and people of all sorts, leaving the province 

by the thousands, that has turned around. We’re beginning to 

see now people coming to Saskatchewan. And my view is we 

welcome, we welcome those who come. 

 

Now it has been traditional — although I suppose other 

jurisdictions in Canada could make the same argument — that 

we would educate people and then find that they’d leave our 

province and pursue their careers elsewhere. On the other hand, 

we’re the beneficiary of some who have been educated in other 

jurisdictions and who come to Saskatchewan. 

 

I think what is important in the discussion is to remember that 

we’re part of one country. And this is where I think the 

discussion that’s been going on and continues to go on about 

our federation and how we do in fact need to support one  

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

another through transfer payments, through equalization funds, 

and so on — this is the important discussion; so that no single 

province should be left divorced from the country and expected 

to do all of its education of all of its people on its own, with its 

own resources. 

 

And so it’s been a Canadian tradition that those provinces who 

have a greater ability to pay, contribute; where provinces that 

have maybe a lesser ability to provide have the support of the 

nation. And in that way we educate ourselves, not just as 

Saskatchewan people, but as Canadians. 

 

My view is that if folks are wanting to come to Saskatchewan 

we welcome them and we hope they can make a long and happy 

career here. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I do hope so too. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 

Minister, do you have any understanding . . . I guess maybe the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Training could 

probably answer this better, but I will ask you. Is there 

provision for programs that . . . are there provisions for some of 

the programs to be targeted towards entrepreneurial skills 

training and . . . well not so much skills training, but 

entrepreneurial activity being stimulated? 

 

And I know that a good number, or a good amount of these 

programs will be geared towards training for the existing 

industries in the province, but I wanted to know whether or not 

your government has looked at entrepreneurial programs also. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, actual programing is now sort 

of the process we’re moving into with . . . if we’re speaking of 

the Youth Futures program and the pilot in Prince Albert, that 

the discussion will be happening in the community there. And 

we’re talking about education, and we’re talking about work 

placements and so on. And part of that may well be an 

experience in a business setting or a small-business setting 

where there is some of that kind of entrepreneurial learning that 

you’re talking about. 

 

I have been saying most recently to some of my friends and 

colleagues in the business community, who have said to us 

quite directly, as the Minister of Finance pointed out earlier, 

that from their point of view one of the most effective tools for 

the creation of employment would be a reduction in the sales 

tax, I think we agree that reduction in the sales tax has potential 

to create employment. 

 

Secondly, I think we all agree that perhaps the best social 

program is a job. And so I’m now saying to many of my friends 

in the business community, well this tool is now at your 

disposal; we invite you to create some of that employment. 

 

And I invite them particularly to direct some of that 

employment to folks who may be today receiving social 

assistance or in need of an experience as a young person or who 

may be disabled. If just one position could be created in every 

business in the province for someone who’s receiving social 

assistance, for a young person without experience, or for 

someone who’s disabled, we would see a dramatic decline in 

the welfare case-load that we’ve talked about. 

So I’m hoping that as we pilot in Prince Albert around Youth 

Futures that we will be working not just with the traditional 

educational community but also with the business community, 

looking at opportunities for those people in that sphere. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad that you 

brought up the disabled, because I’m also wondering whether or 

not there has been some thought given to the numbers of 

disabled people we have in this province. I’d like to know right 

now what the numbers are that are on social assistance and I’d 

also like to know if there are programs regarding training, etc., 

that has been specifically designed for our disabled people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, from my experience now 

within the department and travelling the province, I would say 

to the member there are some tremendous things happening 

within the community, particularly through SARC, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, the 

SARCAN experience of the recycling. There are some very, 

very dedicated people in the group homes that are working now 

with the disabled. 

 

It is difficult to single out from our case-load, people with 

disabilities. We’re able to do it in a broad stroke. But many of 

those who will be receiving benefits and who we describe as 

unemployable will be individuals who have some form of 

disability. 

 

We’re not quite comfortable with that word unemployable, 

because we’ve learned even in the last few years that some 

folks who because of disability may in . . . even 10 years ago 

not had the ability to be in the workplace. Now with new 

technologies and new tools and new training, many of those 

who may have been considered “unemployable” even five years 

ago, today have potential to be in viable occupations. 

 

And I know that when I visit with our group homes, our 

community-based organizations, the centres, and so on, they are 

making every effort, with much success in some cases, at 

moving those who had been considered unemployable or 

disabled into very active and productive places in the workload. 

 

My officials tell me that about one-half — about one-half of the 

case-load which are described as not fully employable or 

unemployable will be disabled. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, you make reference to 

some of the disabled working in group homes, etc., and I too am 

very proud when I hear about the successes through SARCAN, 

etc. But there are a number of people that are not within those 

group homes that are in our society, and are looking for a 

specific programing designed to meet their needs and their 

training needs. And they do tell me, from the ones I have 

spoken to, they do tell me that they feel a little bit like their 

specific needs are being neglected or not understood. 

 

And so I’m concerned that if some of this training money is 

going to be allotted for training, that we would ensure that there 

are programs that are specifically designed in a very sensitive 

way towards the disabled. 

 

  



574  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, yes, and I appreciate the 

member’s concern and point that she makes here. 

 

For the member’s information, I’ve been provided a sheet by 

my officials that describe in more detail those in that case-load 

which we describe as not fully employable. And this is rather 

interesting. Of that case-load, employed part-time or casual are 

932; undergoing training, 860; involved in employment and 

sheltered workshops, 1,449; short-term unemployable would be 

4,433. And so a significant number of these people are finding 

experiences of work in the community or in the workshop 

model. 

 

I want to report to the member that while there has been much 

public discussion, and appropriately so, about a new national 

children’s benefit and concentrating efforts as provinces and the 

federal government on the issues of child and family poverty, 

almost equal in terms of attention being given by the Council of 

Ministers is income security and support for the disabled across 

Canada. 

 

This is not reached as definitive of conclusions yet, but there is 

much work going on between provinces, between the province 

and the federal government and the Council of Ministers’ table 

around issues facing the disabled in Canada, and therefore in 

our province. It hasn’t received the high profile yet, but it’s very 

much a part of that discussion. 

 

And I can report also that within our own province, the 

community of those who represent the various disabilities have 

come together now in an interagency kind of fashion and are 

working very much together, and if I may say, are working 

very, very closely with the Department of Social Services. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I see that $250,000 has been 

allocated for youth outreach programs. How is the minister 

planning to allocate that money? Are there specific designations 

at this time for this money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, as we speak today there are not the 

specific allocations. We want to work very, very closely with 

the communities where we . . . with those communities which 

have identified to us they feel that they have a problem with 

children on their streets. 

 

In our two most urban largest centres, Saskatoon and Regina, as 

the member is well aware, one of the major issues has to do 

with children involved with prostitution. In some of our other 

communities, there may be children who are finding themselves 

on the street but are not involved in any prostitution activities or 

sexual abuse activities. And we want to be able to work there, 

too. 

 

And so we’re very much wanting to work with individual 

communities, with community associations, with people who 

are as close to these children as we can get, and then build and 

make our decisions from there. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I understand that 

you’re planning to allocate some of this youth outreach funding 

for transitional safe houses and/or treatment programs  

associated with victims of child prostitution. We have definitely 

. . . And I know that you have been given some proposals that 

seem to me very commonsensical, and some of them 

incorporate the idea of recreation centres within Saskatoon and 

Regina and Prince Albert and North Battleford, etc., etc. 

 

Is there no chance that we can get immediately started with 

some of these right now? If we could possibly have cities 

donate buildings to us for these purposes . . . I’m not sure that 

the $250,000 is going to be enough, but I believe that we should 

start somewhere and we should start very quickly. Has the 

minister given this some consideration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  A big, very, very active consideration. I 

would want to assure the member that discussions are starting 

immediately — immediately — with the various communities 

involved. There are some good ideas already existing and 

people have done a lot of thinking, a lot of work. So I’m hoping 

that we can see some very tangible things happening quickly. 

 

As the member pointed out in her comments in discussion of 

the interim supply Bill with the Minister of Finance, I think she 

realizes that there may be need for initial funding or there may 

be periods of the year where more is required than other periods 

of year. We know the summertime has a certain . . . the number 

of children will likely rise during the warm summer season, and 

we see people coming from other provinces and so on. But we 

are working on an immediate basis with the communities. 

 

Now this particular money I’m very pleased that we have in this 

budget, and it is very specifically targeted. But there are also 

many other resources contained within this budget and 

contained within the child action plan that will also impact in 

some ways on these same communities and same groups and 

same children. 

 

So this should not be seen, I think, as the only initiative but a 

very specific and targeted. But that will also be . . . will fall 

within the much larger package of initiatives for children and 

family under the child action plan which this year has reached 

the budgeted amount of about 25 million. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well I’m happy for that. I really hope that you can 

take that money and put it together and use it wisely 

immediately. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the Social Services communications 

budget for this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I can give the member a total, 

approximate total if my math is good, and then I can give her 

the breakdown of the allocations, if that would be appropriate. 

 

The total will be around $300,000 — $301,000. And that will 

provide for direct communications of $140,000. There will be 

salaries in our communications wing, of $161,000. The career 

placement ads that we provide to advertise when we need staff 

will represent 62,100. And then there will be some 

long-distance telephone, other charges, of around $5,000. 

 

(1645) 

  



April 3, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, what was the communications budget for last 

year, for ’96-97? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the budget is the same. 

There’s been no change. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. How many communications staff are 

employed within the Social Services department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there will be five people 

involved in the communications of the department. That will be 

three who are described totally as communications and two who 

are support staff to them. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Are you referring to the staff within the immediate 

department, or are you referring to staff that work in the field as 

such also on communications, or are there staff working out in 

the field? There aren’t? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’ve described the entire 

communications department wing of the Department of Social 

Services, which in relative terms is a very small, small unit for a 

department with a very large number of employees, and of 

course dealing with thousands of people on a daily basis in 

many, many, many community-based organizations. But our 

unit is smaller and a very effective unit. They produce many of 

the informational materials that are provided to people who are 

getting social assistance, or the disabled and so on. They do a 

great deal of work, I think. A very small group of people. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I know that if I were one of those five I would feel 

quite stressed. 

 

Mr. Minister, how does the minister’s department publicize 

changes to regulations . . . or regulation changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  If it’s going to be a change to a program 

like social assistance or . . . The seniors income plan is maybe a 

good example because it’s a very current example. There has 

been, as the member knows, a change in the SIP (Saskatchewan 

Income Plan) plan where now we’ve coordinated our efforts 

with the federal government so that there’s no longer two 

cheques coming, but one cheque with both programs. 

 

How we communicated that to SIP recipients were several 

months ago to begin putting just a stuffer in their cheque, so 

with the cheques leading up to the change there was 

information included with the actual cheque. We would do this 

too if there were going to be a change in social assistance rates 

and so on. 

 

We will then . . . if that mechanism is available to us, we’ll use 

it. We’ll also use some of the more traditional techniques of 

providing brochures, printed brochures. We often will put in our 

regional offices and in our offices, posters hopefully that attract 

attention and provide information. 

 

Rarely, if we believe it’s important, we would take some paid 

media ads — newspaper or radio or television. And we do . . .  

we have enjoyed the support of media outlets with free public 

service broadcasts and we’ve tried to access them as much as 

we can. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Actually last May, Mr. Minister, you authorized 

widespread changes to social service regulations. How many 

clients were really informed of these changes properly? Because 

we have had some notification from people that they don’t 

know about these changes until their social workers tell them, 

and it’s often down the road after a great deal of confusion and 

frustration, phone calls trying to get things straightened out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we obviously attempt to do 

our very best. When we’re talking about providing benefits to 

80,000 or 79,000 individuals, we recognize that sometimes we 

may fall short in reaching all those who should be made aware 

of the changes. 

 

When we talk about our communications wing and while the 

professional communications wing is a group of five people, we 

do hope that all of our people, all of our social workers, are in 

the arena of communicating with the people they serve. And I 

think in the vast majority of cases they’re good communicators 

sharing information with their clients. Obviously there will be 

times. I’ve worked in an MLA office; you’ve worked in an 

MLA office. We have appeal boards and there can be 

confusions and there can be misinformation on occasion. We 

try our very best not to have that happen. 

 

We’re hoping as we can redesign social assistance, that as we 

can simplify these programs — we talked about the youth 

training, the provincial training allowance earlier where we 

begin to combine programs — simplify that that alone will 

make communications somewhat easier and make changes 

somewhat simpler to understand and simpler to explain. 

 

Over the last 30 years, and we’re talking about social 

assistance, the program has become very complex, very 

complex. You know the Act. It’s a very complex circumstance. 

So if we can, through our redesign, hopefully make it more 

simple and straightforward, we’re hoping that the 

communication therefore becomes easier. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, the 

Social Services agencies, how are they informed of these 

changes? Are they informed directly, immediately, or how are 

they informed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Again I think we could have a very 

tangible live example. We were able in this budget to provide 

some new benefits to costs, to supports for the 

community-based organizations. 

 

What has happened since the budget day is that each of those 

community-based organizations has received a letter, direct 

mail, explaining what’s happening. Each of them will be 

contacted by the staff of our department in their region for 

further discussions. And so we use that very direct vehicle of 

communication, the direct mail vehicle. It’s a large group but 

it’s a definable group. It’s a large group of community-based  

  



576  Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 1997 

organizations, but it’s a group that we can define and address an 

envelope to each one. 

 

We also try and communicate as best we can with their 

provincial representative organizations. In terms of any changes 

that might be coming, we try and consult and discuss, and when 

changes have been made, then we want to meet with them as 

soon as possible and describe to their provincial organizations 

what’s happening. At the same time, we also provide the more 

general media releases that we hope can be picked up by the 

press and the media, and share information in that way. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve had a concern 

brought to my attention by a family member who was notified 

that there was a regulation change made last November 

regarding travel allowance to transport one of his children to 

see other members of the family, and this was in the case of a 

divorce. 

 

Now this person has said that he was receiving some funding 

for travel in order to take his son to see the siblings, and out of 

the clear blue there was indication that there had been a 

regulation change, that this was not going to be provided for 

any more. So why does the department change things in the 

middle of a year before the public can be assured that there is 

some good reason for this? Or how does the department assess 

what needs to be changed, and be changed that quickly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, without discussion of the 

specific case which the member knows we wouldn’t or 

shouldn’t do in a more public circumstance like this, it’s my 

view that there was not any policy change made. Now there 

may have been a circumstance — but because again we’re 

dealing with 39,000 cases, 79,000 people, and many, many 

workers — there may have been a circumstance where someone 

was in fact receiving a benefit in error of the policy. And then 

when that was determined and the policy then was applied, that 

person would be losing a benefit that he or she may have been 

receiving in error. 

 

We’ve not in the last, to my knowledge, in the last 12 months 

made a change in policy in this regard. I hear the member’s 

point generally, that when policy changes are made, that we 

need to find as good a mechanism as we possibly can to inform 

the recipients of benefits and our workers and the public 

generally about those changes in policies. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we have 

received many complaints from social assistance recipients 

between the ages of 60 and 64 who have been informed by your 

department that they must now attempt to access their Canada 

Pension Plan early. How many social assistance recipients does 

this policy affect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we don’t have an exact 

number. My officials tell me that our best estimation here in the 

House would be a few hundred — a few hundred individuals 

would be thusly affected. 

 

We understand the difficulty here and the concern. But at the 

same point, also recognize that social assistance and welfare  

must be funding of the last resort, of the last resort. And so we 

have always considered other sources of income to be income, 

and that welfare payments, social assistance, must be funding of 

the last resort. 

 

We may be able to — I’m not sure we can, exactly — find the 

exact number. We can do a little research and see if we can get 

a more proximate, but our sense here today is that it’s a few 

hundred. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would assume then 

that the department hopes to save some money by this measure. 

How much money does the department hope to save by people 

having to access these pension funds so early? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  It would save the provincial taxpayer in 

social services benefits about $400,000 or free up $400,000 that 

we might dedicate to where need may in fact be greater. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, but if you 

don’t know how many people exactly, how do you know how 

much you’re going to save? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we don’t have the exact 

numbers. Again, the 400,000 is an approximate number based 

on our estimate here in the House that it’s several hundred. We 

will try and get for the member some more precision on those 

numbers. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, some social service 

recipients with children have deductions from the federal child 

tax benefit on their support payments. When they inquired 

about this adjusted wage deduction, Social Services officials 

said that it’s to offset the old baby bonus allocation. Could the 

minister please explain this deduction to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there has been a change, as 

the member will know. We used to have the program federally, 

of the family allowance. Now we have the child tax credit. 

When the family allowance program was in place, 

Saskatchewan considered the family allowance to be income to 

the household, again the social assistance representing income 

of last resort. That has continued now through the change to the 

child tax credit. 

 

What we’re hoping to do is move as quickly as we possibly can 

and hopefully in cooperation with our counterparts in Ottawa to 

the national child benefit. And so that all of the resources now 

. . . that we won’t have this issue, we won’t have this problem. 

It will become one benefit to the child, the child in 

Saskatchewan, to the children of Canada, and hopefully that 

benefit can be, if not immediately at least incrementally, a 

stronger benefit for Canadian children. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Id like to thank your 

officials and I will certainly resume questioning another day. 

Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 545 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 545 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 Clerk .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 545 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 546 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 546 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 546 

  Upshall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 546, 547 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Shaunavon Woman Makes Impact with Canada’s National Women’s Hockey Team 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 547 

 Code of Ethical Conduct 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 547 

 Al Ritchie Health Action Centre 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 547 

 Heroic Rescue of Accident Victim 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 547 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 

 Fund-raising Event Held in the North 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 

 Cooperative Dairy Industry Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 548 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Legislative Building Security 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 549 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 549 

 Teaching Licence Revocations 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 549 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 

 Short-line Railways 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 550 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 550 

 Gross Revenue Insurance Program Court Case 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 551 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 551 

 Short-line Railways 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 551 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 551 

 Cabinet Ministers’ Travel 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 552 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 552 

 La Loche Hospital 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 553 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 215 — The Cabinet Travel Accountability Act 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 554 

 Bill No. 212 — The Integrity of Members of the Legislative Assembly Act 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 554 

ANNOUNCEMENT 



 

 Birthday Wishes to the Clerk 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 554 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 554 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 555 

 Bill No. 2 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 556 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 557 

 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 557 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 558 

 Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 560 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 560 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Interim Supply 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 563 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 563 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 565 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 568 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Social Services  Vote 36 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 570 

 


