




















































Hansard: March 06, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

 March 6, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 

received a communication from the private secretary to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will 

open the second session of the twenty-third legislature at 2:30 

p.m. today, the 6th day of March, 1997. 

 

2:33 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech as tabled: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 

It is an honour to welcome you to the Second Session of the 

Twenty-Third Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is a particular pleasure to reconvene the Legislature today – 

one of the most hopeful times in our province in many years. 

 

Today, through co-operation, community, and shared effort, 

Saskatchewan is back on its feet. 

 

Our agricultural industry is rapidly diversifying. 

 

Our resource sector is strong; trade is growing; investment in 

oil, gas, mining and forestry is booming. 

 

The value-added industries of tomorrow, like equipment 

manufacturing, food processing and ag-biotech, have never 

been stronger. 

 

We are witnessing a renaissance of Saskatchewan arts and 

culture. For example, our province is home to some of today’s 

best Canadian writers and poets – including Robert Calder, 

Maggie Siggins, Anne Szumigalski, and Guy Vanderhaeghe – 

four recipients of the Governor-General’s award. 

 

For the first time in almost a decade, more people are moving to 

Saskatchewan than are moving away. 

 

It’s a remarkable turnaround – a turnaround mirrored in our 

province’s public finances. This year my Government will 

present for your consideration a fourth consecutive balanced 

budget. 

 

Thirty-five years ago, Saskatchewan gave Canada public, 

universal health care. 

 

Today, the people of Saskatchewan are making another, perhaps 

equally important, contribution to our country. 

 

We are setting a new example – pioneering a new model. 

 

We are showing that a people who hold true to the values of 

co-operation, community, mutual aid and responsibility: 

 

 can return from the brink of bankruptcy; 

 can preserve and renew the foundations of civil society, like 

Medicare and education; and 

 

 can build a growing, competitive, high-employment 

economy, 

 

without regressive transfers from the poor to the rich, and 

without undermining essential supports for our families. 

 

The day may come when this model too – and the values that 

underlie it – will find its way into our country’s national life. 

 

As for Saskatchewan: 

 

 We can build together again. 

 

 We can invest in our province’s people, and in our future. 

 

 We can meet the challenges and opportunities of the 21st 

century. 

 

My Government will introduce an agenda during this session of 

the Legislature which invests in our people, and focuses on six 

areas: 

 

 Investing in jobs and the economy; 

 

 Investing in the quality of education and training; 

 

 Investing in our children, reducing child poverty – part of a 

far-reaching and progressive welfare reform; 

 

 Ensuring a secure, stable health system; 

 

 Renewing our highways and transportation system; and 

 

 Preserving a key accomplishment: a return to fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

THE TOP PRIORITY: JOBS 

 

My Government's top priority is jobs. That means a partnership 

with working people, business and the co-operative sector on a 

clear goal: building towards a growing, prosperous, full 

employment economy. 

 

Our strategy is spelled out in my Government’s economic 

blueprint, Partnership for Growth. 

 

Our plan builds on some remarkable opportunities for our 

province. Food demand from Pacific Rim nations is expanding 

rapidly. Tourism is now the largest business sector in the world. 

Demand for our resources, and the value-added products we 

make from them, is strong and growing. 

 

Our progress in meeting these opportunities is encouraging. 

There is a great deal more to do. 

 

This year, working with our business and co-operative partners,  



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1997 

my Government will: 

 

 Encourage expansion of trade; 

 

 Promote expansion and diversification of our rural 

economy; 

 

 Renew Saskatchewan’s crown corporations, so they can 

continue to fulfil their role as vital partners in building jobs 

and prosperity; 

 

 Work to improve access to capital; 

 

 Pursue key strategic projects like the Synchrotron Light 

Source project; 

 

 Promote tourism and the hospitality industry; 

 

 Work with northern communities and the forest industry to 

promote suitable economic and employment growth for 

northern people and businesses, building on a successful 

collaboration with the northern mineral sector; and 

 

 Participate in an extended national infrastructure plan. 

 

Building tomorrow’s economy is everybody’s business. 

Hundreds of communities are taking their own futures in hand. 

 

For example, at the Southwest Centre for Entrepreneurial 

Development in Swift Current, community leaders, business 

people and Government are working together to encourage 

young entrepreneurs – the future owners and operators of the 

region's businesses. 

 

All across our province, our agricultural economy is 

modernising and diversifying. Saskatchewan will implement a 

new crop insurance system this year; we will introduce a major 

new hog marketing strategy; we will continue to invest almost 

$100 million in the rural economy through the Agri-Food 

Development and Equity funds; and my government will 

continue an unyielding defence of a modern, responsive 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

In the North, a major milestone was reached last year. Over 

1,000 northern residents were employed in northern mining – 

the result of true partnership between Government, industry, 

training agencies and northerners, including First Nations and 

Métis people. 

 

Initiatives like these are a big part of the reason why this is such 

a hopeful and optimistic time in Saskatchewan. 

 

My Government will present the following bills for your 

consideration. The Trust and Loans Corporations Act is the 

first step in modernising financial services legislation in 

Saskatchewan. My Government will lay the groundwork for a 

single arts agency in The Saskatchewan Arts Board Act. The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act will give developers 

more flexibility and enhance consumer protection. 

 

EDUCATION AND TRAINING: BRIDGES TO EMPLOYMENT 

The people of Saskatchewan are building jobs and a prosperous 

economy. Our young people – and our workforce as a whole – 

need the skills to fill those jobs. My Government is therefore 

committed to providing the best possible public education and 

training, at every level. 

 

In elementary and secondary education, this session my 

Government: 

 

 Will work to provide educators in our schools with better 

tools to support learning in the classroom; and 

 

 Will encourage school division restructuring as the needs 

are locally determined, to improve the efficiency and quality 

of our education system. 

 

A few examples of how we are supporting learning in the 

classroom: My Government is implementing a new English 

language arts curriculum for high school. For the first time, our 

curriculum will include, acknowledge and celebrate 

Saskatchewan’s own writers, authors and poets. And this year 

my Government will fully implement innovative pre-school 

programs in our province’s twenty-six community schools. 

 

In this session of the legislature my Government will present 

for your consideration The Education Amendment Act to 

respond to evolving circumstances and needs in the school 

system. 

 

In post-secondary education and workforce training, my 

government: 

 

 Will work with businesses, educators and communities to 

implement a made-in-Saskatchewan training strategy – 

building on the strengths of SIAST and Regional Colleges, 

and our highly successful JobStart and Future Skills 

programmes; and 

 

 Will work with the universities to implement joint proposals 

as outlined in the MacKay report. 

 

My Government will submit for your consideration The 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act to 

better respond to the needs of our economy. 

 

REDUCING CHILD POVERTY 

 

In 1995, the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops said 

this: "To think that almost one Canadian child in five lives in 

poverty in one of the richest societies in world history is 

nothing less than a damning indictment of the present 

socio-economic order." 

 

They are right. This year is the time for the federal Parliament, 

Legislatures across Canada, and this Legislature to take action. 

 

 My Government will continue to make economic 

development its top priority. Jobs are the best way to 

address child poverty, and to enable people to escape 

welfare; 



March 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

 My Government will work energetically on the national 

scene to implement a new, integrated National Child 

Benefit this year. If we succeed, we will have helped launch 

the first new national social programme in 30 years; 

 

 Pending the National Child Benefit, my government will act 

now, in this session of the Legislature, to further strengthen 

Saskatchewan’s nationally and internationally-recognised 

Action Plan for Children-targeting child poverty; investing 

in child care in inner city neighbourhoods, rural 

communities and the North; and strengthening child 

nutrition programmes; 

 

 My Government will introduce amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act to accommodate a 

Saskatchewan Employment Supplement. This will 

provide an incentive to parents to increase their earnings 

and pursue child maintenance; and 

 

 My Government will begin to implement two new measures 

to help youth and low income people to get the training they 

need. Youth Futures will assist young people to complete 

their education and make the transition to the work force. A 

Provincial Training Allowance will help low-income 

individuals enrolled in adult education programmes. 

 

There are many good people across Saskatchewan hard at work 

helping their fellow citizens: 

 

 Like the people who work in Shelwin House, in Yorkton. 

Through rural outreach and child support programmes, they 

are providing prevention, intervention and bridging services 

to children and families who are victims of violence; 

 

 Like the people who work in the wonderfully named 

Grinning Lizard Teen Wellness Centre in Moose Jaw, 

offering health and social services to young people aged 12 

to 19 years; 

 

 Like the people who work in the Souris Valley Child Care 

Centre in Weyburn – providing innovative and accessible 

child care for rural and working families, during harvest, 

during night shifts, and all year round. 

 

These people and thousands like them deserve our support. 

They deserve more. They, and the children they work with, 

deserve to see this Legislature, and Governments across 

Canada, do our part to address the blight of poverty. 

 

My Government will introduce The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act to strengthen provisions for child support. The 

Young Offenders Services Amendment Act provides liability 

protection to volunteers who serve on youth justice committees. 

 

A STABLE, SECURE HEALTH SYSTEM 

 

For five years my Government has worked with health 

professionals and communities across our province to renew 

our health system; to modernise it; and to refocus it on real 

needs. 

Saskatchewan is years ahead of other jurisdictions in renewal – 

and we can therefore now focus on stabilising and securing our 

health system, which is solid on its new foundations. 

 

A strong economy and fiscal stability mean stable and adequate 

public funding for health care. We can work on improving 

health services. 

 

In this session of the legislature, my Government: 

 

 Will work to improve services and health security for 

seniors; 

 

 Will work to strengthen partnership with health 

professionals, and will work with them on better models of 

care; and 

 

 Will work closely with communities to ensure a stable, 

secure health system. As communities and technology 

change, so will health care, but in a balanced, 

locally-responsive manner. 

 

Communities all across our province are renewing our health 

system, and people are increasingly using it for its best purpose 

– to stay well. Just a few examples: 

 

 In Esterhazy, health, wellness and fitness events bring out 

the entire community; 

 

 In Regina, the Four Directions Health Centre, located in an 

inner-city neighbourhood, is providing milk and vitamins 

along with counselling and support through the Healthiest 

Babies Possible programme; 

 

 In the Prince Albert Health District, home care nursing 

services have tripled, and other home support services have 

doubled. These new services have nearly eliminated waiting 

lists for nursing home care in this community. 

 

Renewing our health system has not been easy. But we are 

nearing our goal – a caring, stable, secure health system there 

when people need it – ready for the 21
st
 century. 

 

Among other bills, my Government will introduce The Dental 

Disciplines Act and The Occupational Therapists Act to 

improve the framework governing health professions. 

 

AN INTEGRATED TRANSPORTATION STRATEGY 

 

Our transportation system faces unprecedented pressures – from 

the elimination of the Crow benefit, rail line abandonment, new 

inland grain terminals, changes in trade patterns, and our 

growing, diversifying economy. 

 

In this Session, my Government will address these challenges 

by introducing a comprehensive, integrated transportation 

strategy. 

 

An important part of our strategy will be planning our 

transportation system in partnership with industry, communities 

and local people, to ensure we have a system that will meet our  



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1997 

needs well into the future. 

 

This partnership approach is working well in the province’s 

southwest and west central regions. Area transportation 

planning committees are hard at work defining the transport 

needs of these regions, and ensuring all partners are working 

together. My Government is working to expand this initiative 

where there is local interest. 

 

The Transportation Act will be presented for your 

consideration. 

 

A COMMITMENT TO GOOD GOVERNMENT, AT EVERY LEVEL 

 

Saskatchewan people have plenty of experience with bankers 

and moneylenders. One of the hard lessons of our province’s 

pioneering days – and, sadly, of the recent past – is that big 

debts mean the bond dealers call the shots. That’s not healthy in 

any democracy. 

 

My Government will therefore continue its commitment to 

efficient good Government at every level, provincial and local; 

to responsible public finance; and to the orderly reduction of 

the public debt. 

 

CONCLUSION 

 

My Government has put before you the key priorities of the 

upcoming Session: action 

 

 to create jobs and build the economy; 

 

 to strengthen education and training at every level; 

 

 to reduce child poverty, and radically reform welfare; 

 

 to build stable, secure, high-quality health care; 

 

 to implement a comprehensive transportation strategy; and 

 

 to maintain our commitment to fiscal responsibility. 

 

Futurist John Schaar once wrote: “The future is not some place 

we are going to, but one we are creating. The paths are not to be 

found, but made.” 

 

We are making our path – to a prosperous, just, co-operative, 

modern Saskatchewan. 

 

Our province is on the move again. We are investing in people, 

jobs and communities. We are building Saskatchewan together. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless our 

province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

God save the Queen. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:50 p.m. 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to introduce the pages for this session 

to the members of the Assembly. I will ask that the pages stand 

as I introduce them: Michael Dowie, Claire LaBelle, Guy 

Turton, Daniel Abramson, and Lyle Cowles. Your pages for the 

session. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member from Regina 

Elphinstone: 

 

 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Friday, March 7, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Hon. House Leader, the member for Regina Northeast: 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that 

he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but 

such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion I have a few announcements I would like 

to make. 



March 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

I would like to thank all the guests and members of the public, 

including the students from Wetmore School in Regina and 

Stoughton Central School, who have joined us today. You help 

to remind us for whom decisions in this Chamber are made and 

we welcome you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I want to also welcome the A.E. Peacock 

Collegiate vocal jazz choir from Moose Jaw. I will be calling on 

them to sing for us immediately following the adjournment and 

we will also hear from them again later this afternoon. 

 

Following the choir selections I would like to invite everyone to 

join their Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, 

the Leader of the Third Party, and members of the legislature at 

the Speaker's tea which will take place immediately following 

the Chamber ceremony. The tea will take place in two locations 

— room 218 to the West and the Legislative Library in the east 

wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now stand 

adjourned. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I now welcome the A.E. Peacock Collegiate 

vocal jazz choir and invite them to perform under the direction 

of Allison Litt. The choir will sing two selections for us this 

afternoon — “Riv Riv Chiv” which is Spanish for call of the 

nightingale, and their second number will be “Witness”. The 

A.E. Peacock Collegiate jazz choir. 

 

(The choir sang.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of all of us, I would like to thank 

you for that excellent performance. We are going to adjourn in 

just a moment and we’ll allow you to join the tea for a while 

but we will look forward to you performing in the rotunda in 

about a half-hour or so from now.  

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:04 p.m. 

 

 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................1 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................4 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................................4 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  Speaker ..........................................................................................................................................................................................4 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................4 

 Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


