



















































Hansard: March 24, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 343 

 March 24, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of concerned citizens with respect to offences committed 

by young offenders: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions are a little far more reaching, 

Mr. Speaker — Saltcoats and Rokeby. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present more petitions on the big game problems that we have 

in rural Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the Saskatchewan 

big game damage compensation program so that it 

provides more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers 

and townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are all from the village 

of Frontier and the RM (Rural Municipality) of Frontier in the 

south-west part of the province. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reverse the 

municipal revenue-sharing reduction; 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task  

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to assist women in 

poverty by continuing the services of Working for Women 

in Saskatoon. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, The 

Democratic Unionism Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my distinct privilege to introduce to you and to the 

members of the House, the Premier of Free State province in 

the Republic of South Africa, Dr. Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri, who 

is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Would you please stand, 

Doctor. There’s the Premier, and a nice warm welcome, please, 

for her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The Premier is accompanied by Mr. 

Samson Makena, who is the third secretary of the South African 

High Commission in Ottawa, and Dr. Michael Jackson of the 

Saskatchewan protocol department. 

 

This is the Premier’s first visit to our province since she took 

over that office in December, 1996 and we’re very honoured 

that one of her very first trips abroad includes a visit to our 

province of Saskatchewan.  

 

Mr. Speaker, in some ways this should be expected because our 

province has had a special connection with Free State, South 

Africa. Since 1993 our government has worked closely with the 

province, Free State, in developing institutions of governance. 

The new South Africa is not only a parliamentary democracy 

but also a federal state, and it has been our unique privilege to 

host many elected representatives and officials of Free State to 

exchange views on our models of government. 

 

Premier Matsepe-Casaburri has had a distinguished career as an 

academic, public administrator, and international development 

specialist with the United Nations. She has chaired the South 

African Broadcast Corporation and has served on numerous 

other science and technology and telecommunications boards. 

She is particularly devoted to policy development in the new 

South Africa in the fields of gender equity, education, and 

economic development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministers of Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice and the opposition and third party leaders have attended, 

or will be attending, various meetings and functions with the 

new Premier, and I’ll be having the pleasure of hosting the 

reception and dinner for her this evening. 

 

I’d ask all members to once again join me in extending a very 

warm welcome to our special guest, the Premier of Free State,  



344  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

South Africa, Dr. Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to add to the 

Premier’s words a warm welcome to Saskatchewan and to the 

Legislative Building to Dr. Matsepe-Casaburri. 

 

I note on her biography a list of tremendous number of 

accomplishments, many different things that the doctor’s been 

involved with. But I note also that she has spent a great deal of 

time in the field of education, and as a fellow educator I want to 

compliment her on the work and the efforts that she’s put in 

into her own province of Free State and wish her a very, very 

enjoyable Saskatchewan visit. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

our caucus I would also like to welcome the Premier to 

Saskatchewan, and Mr. Makena. We had a very delightful lunch 

with the representatives from South Africa where we had the 

opportunity to discuss the roles of government and opposition. I 

hope that this aided them in their deliberations, and if the 

Premier ever wants to invite any members from this legislature 

to visit South Africa, January is a good time to do that. 

 

I would just again ask members to welcome the Premier and 

Mr. Makena to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I 

would like to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

Assembly, an acquaintance and a gentleman I am pleased to be 

able to call friend, Mr. Alan McIntyre, who is a respected 

attorney here in the city of Regina. Please welcome him to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also happy 

today to have the privilege of introducing to you and through 

you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, two young men 

from my constituency, from down at Eastend, Saskatchewan. I 

don’t know yet why it’s called Eastend when it’s in the furthest 

west part of the province, but they’re up there giving us a 

briefing on how things are with the Frenchman River this 

spring, and the potentials of some flooding that’s going on. 

 

They’re also so of course two young men heavily involved with 

the museum down there which will be built to house Scotty the 

Tyrannosaurus rex. And of course the tourism in that area is 

going to be booming this summer we know, so we know that 

these young men are going to help out a lot. 

 

We have Craig Vansandt and Scott Morvik, and if they will 

take a little bow, I’d ask all members to please welcome them 

here today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Passing of Justice J.G. McIntyre 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to offer my condolences to the family and friends of the 

Hon. Justice Joseph Gerard McIntyre. Justice McIntyre passed 

away on Friday, and I know he will be sadly missed by all those 

close to him and with many people in Saskatchewan. 

 

He was a very active and well-respected member of the 

community and involved in numerous events too numerous to 

list. 

 

Justice McIntyre had a long and distinguished legal career, a 

career which culminated with his appointment to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench of Saskatchewan in 1981. This achievement 

was based on the integrity of his work as a criminal defence 

lawyer and his dedication to the legal profession. 

 

He was a man ready to act on his beliefs. He worked hard to 

establish separate high schools in Regina and he served on the 

separate school board for nine years. 

 

Justice McIntyre was well known for his wit and camaraderie. 

He had a great deal of compassion for the little guy in matters 

of conflict, and our province has had the good fortune of his 

hard work and able judgement since he moved here from Cape 

Breton in 1953. 

 

I have had the pleasure of being acquainted with and sharing the 

enjoyable companionship with his son, Alan, the attorney here 

in Regina. Family, friends, and the people of Saskatchewan all 

share in mourning the loss of Mr. Justice McIntyre and I’m sure 

all hon. members here of this Assembly will join with me in 

expressing our deepest sympathy to the family. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fire at Grace Haven 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, last Thursday fire 

destroyed Grace Haven, the Salvation Army’s home for single 

mothers in Regina. Twelve people, including staff, five teen 

mothers, and three babies, safely escaped from the fire. One 

fire-fighter suffered second degree burns while fighting the fire, 

but he has been discharged from hospital and is reported doing 

well. 

 

The five teen mothers lost all of their possessions in the fire. 

News reports, I am proud to say, suggest that Reginans are 

responding generously to an appeal for help. They are donating 

money, clothes, baby items, and free lodging. More is welcome 

and people should contact the Salvation Army for details. 

 

There is in this tragedy some additional good news, Mr. 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

Speaker. No lives were lost. Fire department officials point out 

that smoke detectors worked as they should in alerting Grace 

Haven residents and that monthly fire drills resulted in an 

orderly and timely evacuation. 

 

Grant Nicurity of the Regina Fire Department said, quote: “If 

they didn’t have effective fire prevention measures, this fire 

would have had tragic results.” 

 

I think it appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to recognize and applaud the 

ongoing efforts of fire-fighters to promote prevention and the 

efforts of the Salvation Army personnel in implementing an 

effective fire prevention program. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Success of Durafibre 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

I rise to salute the accomplishments of a local initiative in the 

Canora area. Every farmer who has grown flax knows how 

difficult it is to dispose of the straw after harvest. Most often, 

this nuisance is burned in the field. 

 

In 1991 a group called Sask-Can Fibre organized itself to 

purchase flax straw and develop a useful product from the 

strong straw fibres. A partnership was formed with Cargill 

Limited to assist in processing and marketing. Sask-Can Fibre 

has successfully developed a process to separate the fibre from 

the chive waste product. This cutting edge technology was 

developed right in Canora, Saskatchewan, Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A new straw processing plant was constructed in 1995 under 

the name of Durafibre. It is difficult for a new product to catch 

on, but last week Durafibre announced its first major sale to 

Terra America, an erosion control company in Idaho. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Durafibre’s first major sale is a crucial turning 

point and it’s the foot in the door a new company requires. 

Through local initiative, a waste product is now being turned 

into a value added agricultural commodity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Durafibre for their accomplishments in becoming a real 

Saskatchewan success story. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Floods in Swift Current 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my part of the world, 

we are accustomed to a variety of character builders from nature 

— drought, prairie fire, hail, grasshoppers, straight or 

funnelling winds. Until now though, we haven’t had a lot of 

experience with floods — that is until now. 

 

As you know the Swiftcurrent Creek has jumped its banks; but 

the quick action of city crews, the EMO (Emergency Measures  

Organization), the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 

the Red Cross, and hundreds of concerned volunteers prevented 

extensive damage. We had some flooded basements, a couple of 

flooded living-rooms, and a washed-out bridge. 

 

Other communities in the area are also under siege, particularly 

Ponteix, which has had three roads washed out. Of course 

farmers in the area are concerned about their livestock and 

buildings. I’m sure that similar cooperative, energetic measures 

will be undertaken in these areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Swift Current the creek rose 5 metres above its 

banks. The people of Swift Current worked throughout 

Saturday and Sunday to build a 500-metre-long sandbag wall, 

using over 30,000 sandbags. The Red Cross set up a centre to 

keep track of those displaced. The Mounties worked round the 

clock. Mayor Paul Elder and his crews provided great 

leadership, and we think and pray that the worst is over. 

 

I know all members will join me in expressing admiration for 

the work already done and in hoping for a slower run-off 

henceforth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Movies That Couldn’t Have Been 

Made In Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight is 

Oscar night in Hollywood. And once again, in spite of all the 

government’s talk about investing in the film industry in 

Saskatchewan, we see that none of the nominees for best picture 

could possibly have been made in this province. 

 

The English Patient couldn’t have been made here. With the 

state of Saskatchewan health care, he probably would’ve died 

before the opening credits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Jerry McGuire couldn’t have been made 

here. We’re still waiting for the Finance minister to show the 

money for municipalities from VLT (video lottery terminal) 

revenues. Of course Fargo couldn’t have been made here. 

Fargo is in North Dakota, eh? And Shine couldn’t have been 

made here because, judging from the throne speech responses 

by members opposite, a babbling lunatic wouldn't be considered 

all that unusual in this province. 

 

But on reflection, Mr. Speaker, I guess I have to be fair and 

admit that there is one Oscar contender that could’ve been 

based on this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. That 

movie is, of course, Secrets and Lies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Country Music Awards 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has become Canada’s capital of country music. 

Last night at Saskatoon’s Centennial Auditorium a crowd in  



346  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

excess of 1,500 people watched as many of Canada’s finest 

country performers were honoured at the Saskatchewan 

Country Music Association’s eighth annual MIKEE awards. 

 

Winners of this year included Marilyn Fay Parney, entertainer 

of the year; Marty Grambo, male vocalist of the year; Tammy 

Hunter, female vocalist of the year; and The Poverty Plainsmen, 

group of the year. Country radio station of the year went to 

CJVR in Melfort. 

 

The Saskatchewan Country Music Association is Canada’s 

largest provincial, music-based organization, boasting a 

membership of over 800. Through the efforts of the SCMA, 

Saskatchewan country music performers, writers, audio and 

video producers, and sound recording engineers are enjoying 

unprecedented success worldwide, while creating 

approximately 87 million in economic activity each year for 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Congratulations to all nominees and winners, and to outgoing 

president Jim Chute, and president-elect Larry Knibbs for a job 

well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Naicam Cadet Corps 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cadet program in 

Saskatchewan is founded on respect and self-discipline, 

offering training on leadership, community service, self-esteem, 

winter and summer survival, and physical fitness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to recognize the Naicam Cadet 

Corps led by Capt. Scott Ponath, which has developed a superb 

biathlon and rifle program. 

 

This corps has sent a female team to the biathlon national 

competition for the past three years, a boys’ team last year, and 

the top male from Saskatchewan for several years. To get to the 

national competition, the team must win at the army cadet 

competition and then at the tri-service competition of army, 

navy, and air cadets. 

 

One member of the girls’ team has developed a love of the sport 

and became a member of the Saskatchewan biathlon team. 

Louise Weber competed at the national biathlon race where she 

placed first in the 7.5 kilometre individual, and fourth in the 6 

kilometre sprint. She then caught a plane and joined her cadet 

team-mates, Jackie Kellington and Helen Meekins, in 

Valcartier, Quebec, for the cadet national biathlon race where 

she won a gold medal in the 6 km individual race. 

 

March 22, the air rifle team of Jackie Kellington, Helen 

Meekins, Kelly Ungar, and Darren Draude won gold at 

provincials in Regina and will be competing nationally in 

Ottawa during Easter break. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the Naicam Cadet Corps on their hard work and 

accomplishments in the biathlon and wish those competing in 

the riflery the best of luck in the upcoming competition. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cooperative Program between Sherwood Co-operative 

Association and Regina Catholic North-west Schools 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week my 

colleague from Battleford-Cut Knife stood in this Assembly and 

applauded the transition-to-work program implemented in this 

province. 

 

Enriching the lives and increasing employment opportunities 

for students is most important, so I am very pleased today to 

congratulate the cooperative partnership that has been 

established between the Sherwood Co-operative Association 

and the Regina Catholic north-west schools. 

 

This partnership enhances education and promotes community 

interest in school. This new model, Mr. Speaker, combines the 

interests of both the business and the education communities by 

preparing youth for the challenges of today’s society. 

 

The partnership will provide students with the opportunity to 

interact with business people and better prepare them to enter 

the workforce. Its success relies on the involvement of students, 

parents, teachers, and community members. Because the 

program is community based, the community benefits. 

 

It was a pleasure to attend the signing ceremony, Mr. Speaker. 

The enthusiasm and commitment of the partners to this project 

was very encouraging. I congratulate them for this initiative; I 

know it will succeed. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan’s 1993 Budget Crisis 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, back 

in the fall of 1991 as many of us campaigned across this 

province, probably the worst kept secret in this province was 

the mess that the previous Tory government had made of our 

finances. And yet I found it fairly surprising over the weekend 

to see that the Premier was very short to come to a realization of 

the seriousness of what was going on. I recall that there was a 

Gass Commission and number of reports and resources of 

government that should have made that available. And I noticed 

with alarm that it’s . . . he’s quoted as saying that there was one 

budget where we were simply grid-locked in ideology between 

cabinet and caucus. 

 

My question is, Mr. Minister, is that if everyone in the province 

knew what a miserable state of financial affairs we had in 1991, 

why is it that it took us almost 15 months before you did 

something about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member of 

course concocts a question from a completely false state of facts 

and assumptions, with the greatest respect. We took the 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

position when we were sworn in on November 1, 1991 that we 

would set up a committee, headed by Don Gass, called the Gass 

Commission, to examine the state of the books. That 

commission completed its report and we’re able now to assess 

truly the situation. 

 

You might also know that before that time and before we 

assumed office — on or about June 17, 1991 — Mr. Grant 

Hodgins, who is well-known to you as the former member from 

the constituency of Melfort, got up and in his resignation from 

the Devine government of the day, said the province is on the 

verge of bankruptcy and we cannot afford to do otherwise — 

referring to why he was opposing the Fair Share concept. 

 

And I have talked about this in my television addresses as 

Premier. We knew the gravity of the situation and acted on it 

immediately after getting Gass. It’s not a story so much of 

difficulty as it is a story of cooperation — the people of 

Saskatchewan pulled together, rallied around the flag. And it’s a 

story of cooperative federalism between Ottawa and the 

provinces that has allowed us to present the kind of budget 

which we did on Thursday by the Minister of Finance — a 

budget of hope and optimism and opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, for someone that was so 

knowledgeable about the mess, I find it very strange that it took 

until the spring of 1993 for your government to solicit the 

support of the federal government to keep Saskatchewan from 

being pushed into bankruptcy. 

 

Mr. Premier, I wonder if you would like to share with us at this 

time what you haven’t shared over the last three years. What 

were the terms and conditions of the deal that were made 

between your government and Ottawa to keep us from falling 

over the cliff that you seemed to know about all along? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member should 

know that it was always the intention of this government, and it 

is the premiss of this government at all stages, from 1991 — the 

very difficult years and dates — that we were not going to 

allow bankruptcy in the province of Saskatchewan under any 

circumstance. It was just simply unthinkable. 

 

The hon. member also knows that there were a number of 

widespread reports in The Globe and Mail and elsewhere about 

one or two provinces that had very serious difficulties which 

took place. In fact the Premier of Manitoba, Mr. Gary Filmon, 

at about that time identified Newfoundland and Saskatchewan 

in a public press conference as being two that were on the verge 

of doing that. 

 

There are no special conditions to the situation which has been 

described in the newspapers, I think, with respect, quite 

accurately as outlined by the Minister of Finance. What 

happened was at the time of the ’92-93 preparation of the 

budget, Ottawa, through a special stabilization fund of theirs, 

advanced to us $30 million; and secondly, made changes to the  

equalization formula with respect to the calculation of forestry 

and potash — changes for which we’ve been fighting for now 

for the last four years prior to that time; the previous 

administration did too — benefiting all provinces. And a lot of 

provinces equally received similar stabilization benefits. 

 

Unfortunately, if I may say so, we got that in ’92-93 but in 

’95-96, your colleague the Liberal federal Minister of Finance 

clawed it back from the province of Saskatchewan and we had 

to return it. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is going to be more specific about the terms of the 

agreement. You indicate that there was a special stabilization 

fund that was reached into in order to help Saskatchewan at that 

time, of some $30 million. It seems strange that if we were $15 

billion in the glue, that $30 million was going to be enough to 

suddenly put us in the good books with the international 

bankers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask again for more details in terms of the 

agreement. Were there guarantees or undertakings by the 

federal government on our behalf in order to assure the creditors 

that we would indeed not default? And are the ongoing amounts 

of stabilization still being received? And are there any 

repayment terms in those agreements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have to say, and I 

mean this with the greatest of respect — I chalk it up to the 

inexperience of the member as the Liberal critic — he has got 

his facts almost completely wrong, and therefore it is very 

difficult to answer the question. I’m not saying this in an 

aggressive or partisan way. 

 

I have here in front of me a press release by the federal minister 

of Finance at the time, Mr. Don Mazankowski. And the 

headline, I think tells it all, although the press release would 

give you much of the details: “Interim stabilization payments 

announced for Ontario, Prince Edward Island and 

Saskatchewan.” And in the case of Ontario, $300 million; in the 

case of P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), $4 million; in the case of 

Saskatchewan, $30 million. 

 

This is federal funding in a federal, special stabilization fund 

which they had. There is no agreement. The Minister of Finance 

of the province of Saskatchewan outlined our circumstances; 

and in making the submission to Mr. Mazankowski, under his 

legislation, he made this kind of a payment out with no terms 

and conditions. 

 

What we did find, however, was when the change in 

government took place, however, one term and condition did 

come to the fore. Mr. Paul Martin said we’ve got to give that 

money back. And so in ’95 and ’96, fair enough, we were 

healthy enough to be able to do it. What we received to try to 

get us through this difficult circumstance, the Liberal 

government in Ottawa took back. 



348  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t find it all that strange, 

I guess, that it’s taken three years before this has been properly 

disclosed. And I note that the Minister of Finance, defending 

the decision not to go public about this bail-out, says, and I 

quote from the Leader-Post this weekend: 

 

We simply could not go public and say this province might 

go bankrupt because everyone would pull their money out 

of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I concur with the understanding and with the 

sentiment expressed in the minister’s comments, but what I 

want to know, is that after three years have gone by and it’s 

1997, and we’re first hearing about this whole issue, are there 

any other deals that have been made that no one knows about at 

this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member again 

absolutely is inaccurate in his description of a deal, or the use of 

the word, agreement. There is no deal; there is no agreement; 

there is no paper; there is no written agreement; there is no 

verbal agreement — the government’s changed in any event. 

 

This is a solely discretionary act by Ottawa and the federal 

minister of Finance, occasioned by the submissions made by us 

and presumably the other provinces into other areas. And that’s 

all it is, pure and simple. 

 

And the matter is out now because we are in a very solid 

position, as our budget has indicated. It’s a testament to the 

people of Saskatchewan — that’s why it’s out — that we stood 

together regardless of ideology and political differences. It’s a 

testament, in a sense, of the strength of Canada, that we’re able 

to see Ottawa and the provincial governments come together to 

help stick this thing through to success. 

 

And I can say to the people of Saskatchewan today, we’re 

standing tall, our bonds are solid; the discrepancy and 

difference rates between those of the highest rated is the 

smallest it’s been in generations, or at least for years; our 

economy is growing; we’re giving tax relief; and we’re 

spending more on education and on health. That’s a great 

success story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Auditor’s Budget Comments 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, that’s a long answer to a 

question that doesn’t have an answer. The question was, are 

there any more of these kind of arrangements, deals, 

understandings, undertakings, whatever way that you want to 

describe it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only our opposition that has expressed 

concern about the way we do the books in the province. Over 

the weekend, the Provincial Auditor was also expressing 

concerns about the very glib way that the government takes 

money out of the side of the Crowns, which represent 40 per  

cent of the activities of this government, on an arbitrary basis, 

and indeed using Liquor and Gaming as an example about a 

contingency fund and those sorts of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister would like to comment on 

the concerns raised by the auditor, and will she comply with his 

concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I 

welcome the opportunity to comment on what the auditor said. 

First of all, in terms of the auditor’s comments about our books, 

when he audits the books of the province and says, what have I 

found, he’s given us an absolutely clean audited opinion. He 

says the government’s summary financial statements are 

first-class. 

 

What he’s advocating is a change in policy whereby we would 

move toward an Alberta model. All the money that comes in in 

a year that is unexpected has to go to debt. And that’s fine for 

Alberta because Alberta is about debt reduction. That’s their 

priority and that’s their key priority. 

 

There’s two reasons why we wouldn’t move this way in 

Saskatchewan. One is we believe in a balanced approach — 

1994-95, all the extra money did go to debt, because we needed 

to get the government debt in good shape. But when it’s in good 

shape, we also have commitments to reduce taxes and to 

enhance spending. So if the members opposite are like Alberta, 

all debt, please to tell the public. 

 

The final point is, in a province like Saskatchewan with our 

kind of economy, it’s essential that we have a stabilization fund. 

Ottawa has one; Manitoba has one; we have one, and we’re not 

apologizing for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the 

Provincial Auditor is talking about necessarily going to an 

Alberta model but is suggesting that there should be a five-year 

plan that not only is made up of the General Revenue Fund but 

also includes the Crowns, the anticipated income and dividends 

of the Crowns, so that a complete picture is presented on budget 

day. Not just of the money going into the General Revenue 

Fund but also the anticipated and projected profits and 

dividends of the Crown Investments Corporation. That’s what 

the Provincial Auditor is talking about, Madam Minister, and 

will you commit to that kind of a concept? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve addressed that 

particular question before and said that when our Crowns are 

increasingly in a competitive environment we can’t be 

expecting them to disclose things beforehand. After the fact, 

yes, they disclose everything. We can’t be expecting them to 

disclose things beforehand that their competitors do not have to 

disclose. 

 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

But I want an answer from the members opposite. They say 

they support what the auditor said in the newspaper. If they did, 

then I suggest they need to propose an amendment to this 

budget. Because what they would be saying is in 1996-97 they 

want to spend 140 million more on debt. Fine; then they need to 

tell us which of the spending in ’97-98 that they don’t support. 

Is it the money for schools that they want out of here? Is it the 

money for universities that they want out of here? Is it the 

money for day care that they want out of here? They can’t have 

it both ways. Either they’re going to do what the auditor says 

and apply it all to debt and not spend some of it, or they’re 

going to support what we’ve done — a balanced approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, the Provincial Auditor 

the other day continues to say your government is failing to 

give the true financial picture in the provincial budget. He says: 

 

. . . budgets should reflect the actual amount of money 

coming in and going out and not some figure the 

government arrives at by moving money in and out (on) 

. . . rainy day funds. 

 

This year, Madam Minister, your government did it again by 

cutting the 1996 dividend from the Liquor and Gaming 

Commission and jacking the 1997 dividend up to nearly $400 

million. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the exact criteria for moving money 

from these rainy day funds like Liquor and Gaming? Or is it 

simply a political decision designed to make the government 

look good when it needs the money to balance the budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I will spare the 

members opposite the comments made by the auditor about 

your practices in the ’80s when the auditor just threw up his 

hands in despair and said, I can’t tell you what they’re doing. 

But what I will say to the members opposite is this. What we’re 

doing is perfectly consistent with past practice in this province, 

in other provinces, the federal level. It is exactly what the 

Conservatives in Manitoba did a couple of days before our own 

budget — bridged money from one year to another. You may 

want to talk to your Conservative friends in Manitoba. 

 

My point is this. Every government that is prudent, that is not 

going to get the taxpayers in trouble if something absolutely 

unexpected like massive drops in equalization occur, have a 

stabilization fund. And we have one. And we have it there 

because we want to protect Saskatchewan taxpayers no matter 

what occurs, whether it’s a forest fire or a drop in equalization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan’s 1993 Budget Crisis 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the Madam 

Minister of Finance: Madam Minister, the auditor says  

taxpayers need a clear picture of the province’s budget. And 

you’ve been telling us you’re going to give us that clear picture. 

The auditor obviously doesn’t believe that you have provided 

that clear picture as yet. He continues to tell us and tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that there’s a fuzzy way of accounting 

for finances in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And over the weekend we just heard that in 1993 this province 

was on the verge of bankruptcy. In fact your Premier was 

saying that. 

 

Madam Minister, it seems interesting that the province was on 

the verge of bankruptcy over a $45 million payment from 

Ottawa that could bring us out of bankruptcy when, Madam 

Minister, in 1993 you had $130 million saved up in the Liquor 

and Gaming Commission you could have used rather than going 

to the federal government. 

 

Madam Minister, you had Cameco shares; you had PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) shares. Madam Minister, 

why did you create this financial crisis over $45 million when 

there were other options available to you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’m appalled at the 

member’s question. These people are trying to get away from, 

one would hope for their own sakes, they’re trying to get away 

from their record in the 1980s. Yet it’s right back to the future. 

 

Do you mean to say if you have a fiscal stabilization fund 

sitting there which is your last kitty — the last bit of money you 

have in case the furnace in the house breaks — why wouldn’t 

you just take it out and spend it? That’s the kind of thinking, 

Mr. Speaker, that got us into this sort of trouble. This is 

absolutely incredible. 

 

And as far as the auditor goes, where the auditor comments in 

terms of his legal capacity as the auditor of the province is 

when he has to put the stamp of approval or the not stamp of 

approval on the summary financial statements of the 

government. He has consistently said, I do not have any 

reservations at all, and these are the best summary financial 

statements that exist in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mandatory Union Membership 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. Minister, a group called the Work Research Foundation 

today released a survey on Canadians’ attitudes towards trade 

unions. Over 1,500 Canadians were questioned by the Angus 

Reid group. And a survey found that nearly 90 per cent of 

Canadians oppose mandatory union membership. In 

Saskatchewan, thousands of people are forced to join unions 

against their will. The Dorsey report takes this step one further, 

forcing people to switch unions against their will. 

 



350  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

Mr. Minister, will you change The Trade Union Act to make 

union membership voluntary? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  One should recognize, Mr. Speaker, 

what right-to-work legislation is in the southern American 

jurisdictions. It really is an instrument of oppression for 

working people. 

 

And we should recognize, Mr. Speaker, what trade unions are. 

They are voluntary organizations of working people who come 

together to promote their own interests. That is all they are. 

They are not some sort of an evil apparition. They are voluntary 

organizations of working people who seek to promote their own 

interest. The answer to your question is a ringing no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of course 

the NDP will never change this because much of their party 

funding comes from trade unions; so the more people that are 

forced to join unions, the better off the NDP are. And of course 

this is neither fair, this is neither fair nor democratic — people 

being forced to join unions and support the NDP against their 

will. 

 

Mr. Minister, 82 per cent of Canadians say union dues should 

not automatically go to political parties, but the NDP isn’t going 

to let that stand in the way of their political agenda. Mr. 

Minister, prior to question period, our labour critic gave notice 

of a private members’ Bill that will make union membership 

voluntary here in Saskatchewan. Will you support that 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I think the hon. member must know 

the answer to that. The hon. member might also . . . the hon. 

members opposite might have some interest in the facts upon 

which they base their . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now the Chair is having a 

great deal of difficulty being able to hear the answer being put, 

and I’ll ask all hon. members to cooperate to allow the hon. 

minister to provide the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I know members opposite skirt things 

like facts and fiscal integrity and things like that, but this 

government does not. And I say to you, the answer is no. I just 

want to tell members opposite there is no such thing as a 

compulsory check-off. Check-offs which go our party are done 

voluntarily by the members of the union, and they agree to it. 

 

So there’s no such thing as an involuntary check-off. It is a 

voluntary check-off. Check-offs in this province are agreed to 

by the membership. That’s how we work. It’s a democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Swift Current Area Flooding 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister responsible for Sask Water. 

Mr. Minister, we have heard from many people in the Swift 

Current area regarding how water at the Duncairn dam has been 

managed. They feel that if the dam had been opened earlier to 

let the water out gradually the crisis over the weekend could 

have been avoided. 

 

As it was, only the valiant efforts of hundreds of Swift Current 

residents saved an entire neighbourhood, and other 

neighbourhoods as well, I guess, from being flooded. Mr. 

Minister, will you conduct a review of how the water release at 

the Duncairn dam was managed so that this crisis will not 

repeat in future years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member opposite for that question. And we may in the days 

ahead, if we have unusually warm weather, face some 

experiences of flooding. At the Duncairn dam and reservoir in 

particular, Sask Water puts out regular stream flow forecasts 

and run-off predictions, and they have communicated to the 

municipalities and emergency service providers in the area 

some weeks ago that the Duncairn reservoir was very close to 

being full, and that if there was a large run-off coming in from 

the west, that we would have to have a controlled release out of 

the reservoir. 

 

So communities were expecting it. And as you’ve said and as 

the member from Swift Current said in his members’ statement, 

as is tradition in Saskatchewan, that emergency service 

providers and hardworking community volunteers have averted 

a great deal of the damage that could happen. And planning is 

going ahead to have the same things happen as events unfold 

and the weather warms up and the spring thaw continues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Reform 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the provincial 

budget was delivered last week, the Minister of Health 

indicated that he wanted two messages to emerge. 

 

The minister stated that nurses and health care employees 

should no longer worry about losing jobs, and communities 

should not worry about losing hospital beds and nursing home 

beds. We’ve achieved the number of beds we should have, he 

said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is small consolation to those communities 

which have felt the wrath of this government’s hack and slash 

approach to health care reform. 

 

All that aside, will the minister, or in his absence the Premier, 

back up his statements by making a commitment in this House 

that not one more care-giver will lose their job, not one more 

acute or long-term care bed will close under this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, apart from the very 

many differences which distinguish this side as against the  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

Liberal side on health care, this is another one. 

 

That side favours two-tier, privatized medicine — we oppose it. 

That side favours user fees — we oppose it. That side favours 

premiums, and we oppose it. That side says that medicine and 

health care has not gone through any changes in technology or 

delivery and therefore should be frozen in time — we don’t. 

 

We say that phase 2 of medicare and hospitalization involves 

the transformation of the system to a preventive and wellness 

model which compliments the acute care operation. And what 

the Minister of Health is indicating is that we have made great 

strides, and through this budget much of the task is nearing 

completion. To answer the question in the way the hon. member 

would want me to answer it, he knows is patently impossible 

and undesirable. And if he faced up to the truth of where the 

Liberals really stand on health care, namely privatizing it and 

opposing it, then we’ll all be better off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure to the 

people of this province that phase 2 of health care reform under 

the two-tier system of this government is pretty frightening out 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason I look for the Minister of Health’s 

commitment, or in this case the Premier’s, on this matter is 

because of the fact that many health districts continue to battle 

deficits. And the money that’s been pumped into the health 

system in this province over this last budget is only a short-term 

solution, because the wellness model is a fiasco. 

 

Given the fact that the funds follow patients under the present 

health care formula, and rural patients are travelling in 

increasing numbers to Regina and Saskatoon for medical 

attention, there is a growing financial strain on rural health 

districts in particular. Will the Minister of Health or the Premier 

indicate how he plans on addressing this concern in light of his 

commitments that the elimination of care-givers has ended and 

that there will be no further acute, long-term bed closures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, there they go again, the 

Liberals and this supposition. The member refuses to accept the 

straight, bald fact that this government has back-filled 100 per 

cent of everything that your party in Ottawa took away from 

health care — that you and the Liberal Party, every penny — 

plus added on top of it, 57 million more dollars in this year’s 

budget, on top of all of that. 

 

And the member, in the face of that budget announcement, has 

the audacity to get up today and say, what is your government’s 

commitment to health care? There is no other provincial 

government anywhere in Canada that has back-filled health care 

100 per cent and added this proportionate amount of $57 

million more for both acute care and for prevention and 

wellness treatment care in health. No other government. That’s 

our record. 

 

But I tell you what I challenge you to do. You please tell the 

federal Liberals to stop attacking the front-line acute care  

workers. You tell the federal Liberals to stop their attack on 

health care by stopping the reductions to the provinces in health 

care funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 40  An Act to amend The Residential 

Services Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 40, 

The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Crown 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move first reading of Bill No. 41, The Crown Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

members at the other end of the caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday, although time didn’t permit me to fully 

outline my views on this budget, I was pleased to have the 

opportunity to start talking about some of the tough decisions 

that you and our other colleagues made during the difficult 

years immediately after election in 1991. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. I’ll want to remind 

the hon. member that he’s not to draw the Speaker into debate 

and I’m sure that he will not want to do that and address his 

comments accordingly. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, I want to pick up on that point and talk about the 

tremendous turnaround Saskatchewan has seen during the past 

five years. Over the weekend, I think we all came to learn just  



352  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

how close to disaster this province was when we inherited the 

legacy of Grant Devine’s PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government. And I want to talk about that for just a second. 

 

I was amazed today in question period to see the member for 

Moosomin stand up in amazement and shock that the province 

was in bad shape in 1991. I was absolutely stunned to hear him 

talk about the way that this government is making use of its 

rainy day fund, of its stabilization fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members of this Assembly know, we used to 

have a stabilization fund — it was called the Heritage Fund — 

and it was squandered and misused by the previous PC 

administration when that member for Moosomin was part of 

that government. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s amazing for that 

member for Moosomin to stand up in this Assembly and say, 

well we didn’t know it was that bad, but what do you mean it 

was that bad? What do you mean we were virtually bankrupt? 

 

The member for Melfort knows because the previous member 

for Melfort, Mr. Hodgins, resigned over that very point. Now 

whether it was simply that this member for Moosomin didn’t 

have the knowledge, the courage, or the integrity to resign, I 

don’t know, but he should have known that we were in bad 

shape in 1991 when we took over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, while the member for 

Moosomin should have known better — and I think did know 

better but is simply playing games today in this Assembly — I 

want to speak for a minute about the feigned shock that the 

Liberals have on this issue. 

 

Over the weekend I was watching the news last night on 

television and there is the Liberal leader — in this case the real 

Liberal leader, Mr. Melenchuk— standing up and saying, well 

he’d like to know about this situation and what exactly the 

federal government did. And he says that he found it interesting 

that here the Saskatchewan government is criticising Ottawa 

today for its cuts to health and education transfers, when in fact 

the federal government had given some minor assistance over 

this previous period in 1991. 

 

I have to tell you I’m not even sure where to start to attack that 

sense of logic from the members opposite. I’m not sure whether 

Dr. Melenchuk didn’t realize that the Liberals weren’t in power 

in 1992 when this situation was dealt with, or whether in fact he 

simply doesn’t understand the difference between equalization 

and what at the time was EPF (established programs financing) 

and has now become CHST (Canadian Health and Social 

Transfer). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am amazed that this is the man who would want 

to be the premier of Saskatchewan, who the Liberals are putting 

forward as their person who should be the premier of 

Saskatchewan. And yet he himself cannot understand the 

differences between equalization and the way that the federal 

Liberals have treated this province now under the CHST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been an interesting, interesting day. I want  

to . . . I could spend probably the rest of my allotted time 

beating up on our friends opposite, but it’s unfortunately 

wearing thin on me. What I want to do is I want to talk a little 

bit today about some of the positive things that we’re doing, 

because I think that that in itself will contrast nicely with both 

what the Liberals would do should they ever, God forbid, 

govern this province again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know what the Conservatives did when they 

were in office. They squandered the resources of this province, 

and more, I think, sinisterly, they pitted our communities 

against each other. Mr. Speaker, as you will know, those days in 

1991 were difficult ones. However, through all the decisions, 

the tough decisions that needed to be made, there remained a 

hope that we would be able to turn things around. The first 

throne speech of the new government announced that we would 

embark on a new beginning. It stated that we would restore 

honesty, integrity, and competence to government. 

 

Now the members in the Conservative Party may want to listen 

to this because it’s something they have yet to learn. Honesty, 

integrity, and competence in government — and that’s what we 

have attempted to deliver. We’ve promised as well that in our 

first budget that we would restore common sense to our 

collective finances. Mr. Speaker, this was no easy task. With 

government spending exceeding revenues by almost 20 per 

cent, with a debt load reaching 14 billion or 70 per cent of our 

GDP (gross domestic product), with a growing uncertainty in 

the financial markets about the affordability and sustainability 

of Saskatchewan’s debt, we were faced with a simple choice. 

We could either make the tough economic choices and risk 

losing the government, or we could make the easy political 

choices and risk losing our future. 

 

Again today, I want to congratulate those members of this 

Assembly who made the difficult but correct choice to stand 

firm against the growing expectations and growling opposition 

in order to protect Saskatchewan’s autonomy, integrity, and 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  The fact that this new budget is able to make 

such a substantial investment in people is proof positive that 

this caucus made the right choices during those difficult times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget contains many positive elements. I 

know other colleagues will speak on many of them, and as such, 

today I want to limit my comments to three areas — namely, 

our economy, our education system, and our options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to see that our economy is 

strong and growing. Thousands of sustainable new jobs have 

been created. Our retail economy has grown significantly. Our 

agricultural economy is more market driven and responsive 

than it was five years ago, and our manufacturing sector has 

retooled and taken off in terms of growth. The outlook for our 

province is good. And as a result of this budget, we’ll continue 

to see significant growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many positive initiatives in this budget  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

for consumers, for manufacturers, and small businesses. 

Clearly, the cornerstone of this budget is the 2 per cent 

reduction in the E&H (education and health) tax, reducing it 

from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely 

proud of this initiative and pleased to stand today and support it. 

 

Apart from the fact that we have reduced the sales tax, however, 

I am equally proud that we have done so without harmonizing it 

with the GST (goods and services tax) as the Liberals in other 

parts of this country have colluded to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, this 2 per cent reduction amounts to 

more than $180 million in increased discretionary income for 

Saskatchewan consumers and businesses. And it builds on our 

commitment to re-establish tax fairness and affordability in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

To listen to the Tories, you’d think it was their idea. Well let me 

remind the people of Saskatchewan what the Tories’ position is 

on taxation. Let’s remind people of what the Tories’ position on 

taxation was. Both opposition parties, Mr. Speaker, support a 

harmonized, hidden sales tax on Saskatchewan people — 

harmonized and hidden. That’s the position of the Conservative 

Party. That’s the position of the Liberal Party. 

 

Let me assure you that this sales tax proposal of the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative) and Liberals won’t decrease taxes 

for Saskatchewan people, it won’t help build our economy, and 

it won’t re-establish tax fairness. Instead, Mr. Speaker, it simply 

helps hide the tax and shift the burden onto families and 

consumers. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, it is this New Democratic 

government that repealed the harmonization of the sales tax as 

its very first act in office on November 1, 1991. In doing so, we 

reduced taxes for ordinary families by taking the tax off of 

children’s clothing, drugs, reading materials, snack foods, and 

restaurant meals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these were taxes that the Conservatives put in 

place on goods that had previously not been taxed. Further to 

this, we ended the double taxation of products that were resold 

after use, and we also prevented the tax from being applied to 

basic services like haircuts and utility bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives I notice are silent now, which is 

good. Perhaps they’re taking note. Perhaps they’re taking a note 

of how the sales tax can be fairly applied, rather than the regime 

that they had previously put in place. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you why we did this, why we 

repealed the harmonization and why today we continue to 

refuse to harmonize sales tax in this province. We did this on 

the basis of a philosophy. A philosophy that said ordinary 

families should not pay taxes on basic goods. That’s our 

philosophy. That’s not the Liberal philosophy. We know that’s 

certainly not the Conservative philosophy. 

 

I think, to be quite . . . simplify things, we could simply refer to 

it as the right-wing over there whether it . . . I forget which 

member it is that always uses that, my favourite story about the 

one chicken with the two legs. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is an 

apt story. Because this is exactly . . . taxation is an excellent 

example of how this is the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our philosophy is based on the idea that we want a 

simpler, fairer, more responsible tax system. Mr. Speaker, we 

also did this harmonization change . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. Now the Chair’s 

having some difficulty being able to hear the remarks made by 

the hon. member for Regina South. Order. Order. And all hon. 

members will have plenty of opportunity to put their remarks on 

the record, which is the most appropriate place to put them. As 

good luck will have it, there is much time available for the 

debate on the budget and I’ll ask all members to allow the hon. 

member for Regina South to be heard. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

passing strange that the moment I take to my feet to talk about 

the sales tax situation that the Liberals now want to jump into 

the debate, because it took them a whole year. And last session 

we heard nothing from them on sales tax harmonization. Not a 

word about what it was going to do to consumers, not a word 

about what it was going to do to businesses, not a word about 

what it was going to do to our economy. 

 

But today, today they seem to have something to say. So I 

won’t take a lot of time because I’m very anxious to hear the 

Liberals stand up and explain to us where they are on this sales 

tax issue. Do they support the 2 per cent reduction or don’t 

they? Do they support the de-harmonization or don’t they? 

 

This is in addition to the other important initiatives in this 

budget that put more money into important areas like health 

care and education, which I’ll also be interested to find out 

where the Liberals stand on this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, apart from the philosophical reasons for us 

changing the tax harmonization structure, I was going to tell 

you there was a practical reason for it. And that reason was that 

it was crippling the economy. It reduced the ability for 

Saskatchewan people to afford basic items, and as a result, the 

economy was not growing, the retail sector was slumping, food 

and beverage sector was — to be quite honest — in a free fall, 

and as a result, jobs were being lost rather than created. That, I 

think, in more ways than one simply sums up the record of the 

Conservative administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that today we are continuing a plan for 

tax fairness — a plan that not only sees a 2 per cent reduction in 

sales tax but continues to provide more than $570 million in tax 

relief to Saskatchewan families and businesses by maintaining a 

limited, non-harmonized tax base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that one more time so some of the 

members opposite can write that down for when they stand up 

to talk. This budget provides $570 million in tax relief to  



354  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

Saskatchewan families by maintaining a limited, 

non-harmonized tax base. So the members will want to know 

that if you harmonize, that tax gets transferred onto families. 

Just so there’s no misunderstanding here; so the members 

opposite actually understand what the impact of their policy is 

going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of these changes in this budget, I am 

very pleased to say Saskatchewan consumers today pay less in 

sales tax than they did when we took office in 1991. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s our commitment to Saskatchewan families. And 

I think it’s in stark contrast to that of the Liberal Party and the 

PC Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to this sales tax initiative, this budget 

also provides a series of other items to help Saskatchewan’s 

economy grow and prosper. In total it provides almost 105 

million in direct tax relief for Saskatchewan small businesses, 

resource producers, and manufacturers, both through targeted 

tax reductions and rebates. It provides an additional $127 

million in tax relief for our agricultural sector. And it introduces 

new measures to encourage increased production in growth 

areas such as hogs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that this tax system today is 

fairer and more responsive to Saskatchewan’s economic needs 

than it was when we took office in 1991. As a result, we’ve 

seen a substantial and positive economic growth. We’ve also 

seen that economic growth comes with increased jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has been said about job creation in the past 

several months, and rather than get into a numbers games with 

the opposition about how many jobs have been created or what 

constitutes an FTE (full-time equivalent) or whether it’s 

seasonally adjusted or actual and how much better than average 

the numbers are, instead I want to talk about how we’re helping 

people find jobs that fit into the new Saskatchewan economy. 

 

We have seen an unprecedented abandonment of young people 

and the unemployed by the federal Liberal government in 

Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, that Liberal government has attacked 

Saskatchewan people by increasing UI (unemployment 

insurance) costs while decreasing benefits. It has stripped back 

protection that otherwise helped people employed in many of 

Saskatchewan’s seasonal industries. It all but completely 

abandoned any national role in a labour force development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a record for the Liberals, be it in Ottawa 

or here, to be proud of. This is a very serious and, I think, 

shameful public policy that has been embarked on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could tell you that the federal government has 

cut 70 per cent of its support for apprenticeship programs in this 

province; I could tell you they’ve stripped our universities and 

technical colleges of almost $50 million in funding; I could tell 

you that they’ve offloaded the basic responsibility for adult 

basic education out of the province. But in the end — and I 

hope the member opposite hears this — in the end what we 

need to understand is that regardless of whether it is federal 

politics or provincial politics, they’re still Saskatchewan people. 

And I hope that the members, just for a minute, think about the  

impact that their party is having on these Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was addressing the reply to the throne 

speech, I noted that 4,000 Saskatchewan people have been 

denied access to adult basic upgrading as a result of the 

decisions of the federal government. I noted that 1,200 

Saskatchewan people would be denied access to apprenticeship 

programs that would help them move from the classroom into 

the workforce. 

 

I also want to, at this point, note that as a result of the federal 

government’s funding decisions, 30,000 Saskatchewan people, 

in this case mostly young people in our universities, will see 

their share of the education bill increase because of the federal 

cut-backs to the universities. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the Liberal record — that’s the Liberal 

record. It’s not simply the federal record, because from what 

I’ve heard from the members opposite, they support that very 

same position. The Liberals here in Saskatchewan are not 

standing up for people in Saskatchewan, they are not standing 

up for young people, they are not standing up for anybody other 

than their Liberal friends in Ottawa. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have invited them time and again to 

stand up for Saskatchewan people and we’ve invited them time 

and again to join in our debates, to join with us to take this 

message to Ottawa — they’ve refused. Not only have they 

refused to join us, they’ve refused to even stand up and be 

critical of what the opposition member . . . what the Liberal 

government’s done in Ottawa. And I think that’s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the impact of the Liberal Party’s 

philosophy on Saskatchewan people. Fortunately, fortunately 

we refuse to simply stand by and allow the Liberal Party of 

Canada and its legislative lap-dog on the benches opposite to 

simply dismantle the education and training system of this 

province and country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that we’ve again taken a different 

approach than the Liberal Party and we have found the money 

necessary to back-fill 100 per cent of the cuts the federal 

Liberals have made to education and training in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, this will help allow those 4,000 

people to attain adult basic education. This will help 1,200 more 

Saskatchewan people get into apprenticeship programs. This 

will allow the universities to reconsider their tuition rate 

increases that they were considering because of the federal 

cut-backs. And, Mr. Speaker, this is all on top of the other good 

programs we already have in place like JobStart and Future 

Skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all governments make choices and all 

governments reflect their choices and the priorities on the 

balance sheets of their budgets. Increasingly in Saskatchewan 

that choice is clear. All we need to do is look at how our 

government makes decisions compared to what the Liberal 

government makes in Ottawa. And let me just run through the  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

list in case the members opposite have forgotten. 

 

Our budget sees the debt being paid off. Mr. Speaker, in fact we 

will see that debt drop to 48.8 per cent of our GDP. Well what's 

happening in Ottawa? Despite four years of Liberal government 

committed to supposedly balancing the budget, we have yet to 

see a balanced budget from the federal government. Not one. 

 

And we have seen, even more shamefully, the federal Liberals 

take the national debt to record highs — record highs. More 

than $600 billion is now owed because of the mismanagement 

of this country by the federal Liberals, and to a large extent the 

federal Conservatives. 

 

But I want to talk in particular about the federal Liberals 

because they did not do anything like what this government has 

done to turn around the books that they are responsible for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we move from debt to taxes and take a look at 

the records of these two different parties and these different 

philosophies, you’ll see much the same story. We are providing 

$570 million in tax relief to Saskatchewan’s consumers and 

additionally are reducing the sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per 

cent. 

 

And yet the Liberal members opposite, in collusion with the 

federal Liberals, are continuing a tax they promised to abolish 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now of course they don’t 

want to talk about, they don’t want to talk about promising to 

abolish the GST and they’d just as soon we all forget about it. 

That’s why they’d like us to agree to hide it. Well we’re not 

going to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take great pride in the fact that this 

government does not tax children’s clothing. We do not tax 

electricity. We do not tax natural gas. We do not tax reading 

materials. We do not tax restaurant meals. We don’t tax snack 

foods. We don’t tax used goods. And we certainly don’t tax 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the narrowest tax base in Canada and we 

are proud of that. What the federal government should do is 

take those pages out of our budget, slide them into their own, 

and do the same thing. If they’re interested in harmonizing, I 

would say this: harmonize on our base, not on the federal base. 

Take the tax off of children’s clothing. Take the tax off of 

foods. Take the tax off of used goods. And take the tax off of 

services. 

 

That’s what the Liberals should be doing in Ottawa. That’s 

what I want to hear the Liberals doing here in Saskatchewan. 

Join us on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I also think it’s worth 

reminding people of the differences we have in terms of our 

social policy. Now we’ve heard . . . I mean in the U.S. (United 

States) they often talk about tax-and-spend liberals. 

Unfortunately here in Canada we have tax-and-cut Liberals, 

which is even worse. Not only do taxes go up, but services  

decline. Let’s not forget that while we have increased funding 

to health care, to education and social programs, in Ottawa . . . 

and the Liberal members opposite support this; they continue to 

support the fact that a quarter of a billion dollars will be cut 

from social programs in Saskatchewan alone because of the 

federal government. 

 

Now the argument last session, as you’ll remember, from my 

friend the local Member of Parliament, Goodale, and the 

Liberals opposite, is they said, so what? That’s not a big amount 

of money. What do they say? One point something per cent, I 

think is the number they kept tossing around. A quarter of a 

billion dollars is an awful lot of heartache for people if you are 

wanting to enter into post-secondary education, if you’re 

wanting to make sure your kids have a future, if you’re wanting 

to make sure that the basic social programs are protected. 

 

So we gave them another chance. The Government of 

Saskatchewan pioneered — and in particular the Premier — 

pioneered the idea of a child benefit. This was supposed to 

specifically help reduce the amount of child poverty in our 

province, and indeed across our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was amazed to find out when we were listening 

to the federal budget, after the much ballyhooed agreement or 

the leaking that they said that they would be able to do this, to 

in fact find out that they’re not going to do this until July of 

1998. 

 

(1445) 

 

So while the Liberals are sitting here now, albeit quietly in this 

House, but nevertheless standing up in question period and 

attacking us for what we’re doing on health and education, I 

listen to the member for — I forget her seat now — who often 

stands up and talks about social issues and talks about child 

poverty . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  The member for Humboldt. Oh yes, thank 

you, the member for Humboldt. I’m amazed to hear her stand 

up and say we’re not doing enough for child poverty when in 

fact all that she says about Ottawa, from Ottawa’s response, is 

that these poor children can wait. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly pleased that we here in this 

caucus and on this side of the House don’t believe that they can 

wait. And we will put our money where our mouth is and we’ll 

put the money there to ensure that child benefit is there now, 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, as I say, this budget is about 

choices and it’s about priorities. I’d say to you that this budget 

provides an opportunity for Saskatchewan people to look at the 

options in different visions of our economy, our country, and 

our future. This budget, like the five that have preceded it, show 

Saskatchewan people, and indeed Canadians as a whole, that 

there is a better way to govern. 



356  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, let me say when our New 

Democratic government was first elected in 1991, we promised 

to provide a new beginning for Saskatchewan. We promised to 

restore honesty, integrity, and competence to government, and 

we promised to ensure government lived within its means. We 

kept that promise. And today, five years after that first budget, 

five years after the first budget of our first term in 1992, we’re 

prepared to begin again. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that in beginning again, 

we will once again prove to Canada and the world that our 

future is in fact in our own hands and is in good hands. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to rise today and 

discuss the budget. 

 

Saskatchewan families haven’t received good news from the 

budgets delivered by this government over the past six years. 

Over these last years, instead of good news they heard of 

increases in the PST (provincial sales tax) from 7 to 8 per cent 

and then from 8 to 9 per cent. They heard their fuel taxes were 

going up a total of 5 cents per litre, so now we are paying 15 

cents on every litre of fuel to the provincial government — one 

of the highest in the entire country. Mr. Speaker, they heard of a 

10 per cent deficit surtax that was invented by the members 

opposite. And since we don’t have a deficit any more, it should 

be completely removed. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people haven’t heard a lot 

of good news from the NDP, period. Municipalities haven’t 

heard good news, school boards haven’t heard good news, 

health providers haven’t heard good news, business owners 

haven’t heard good news. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I really can’t 

think of anyone that did hear good news over the years from 

this government. 

 

Saskatchewan families and businesses have each . . . have had 

each and every fee and utility rate increased by the NDP, a 

party that promised in 1991, no new taxes. According to the 

Leader-Post, Mr. Minister: 

 

For a Saskatchewan family of four making $50,000 a year, 

we’re on top of the provincial tax parade — paying more 

to our government in income taxes than anyone else in the 

country. 

 

An editorial from the Leader-Post, April 4, ’96. We’re paying 

more than anyone else in this country, Mr. Speaker. More 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, is that at the bottom of the income 

tax hierarchy is Alberta where provincial income taxes for that 

same family will be about a thousand dollars less than in 

Saskatchewan — again from the Leader-Post, April ’96 — a 

thousand dollars less in income taxes. 

 

Now that doesn’t include the extra 6 cents per litre that 

Saskatchewan residents pay in provincial fuel taxes and it 

doesn’t include the PST either, Mr. Speaker. Albertans have a  

thousand dollars more in their pockets before all of the rest of 

the NDP’s taxes, fees, utility rates are taken into consideration. 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP finally came through in 1997 

with a glimpse of tax relief it is welcomed very much by 

everyone. Of course, Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to the 2 point 

reduction in the PST. Again, I want to thank the members 

opposite for fulfilling one of our campaign promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the NDP finally 

bowed to the pressure from the PC caucus, from the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, from the businesses all across this 

province. They finally listened to the thousands of individuals 

who signed our PST petition. 

 

Obviously the NDP’s own polling was showing that the PC 

campaign platform was pretty much on the money and that we 

were providing Saskatchewan people with what they were 

really asking for. And as I’ve always said, a credible opposition 

does a lot more than just simply oppose. 

 

The PC caucus has held this government accountable for many 

of the decisions that they have made that simply don’t make 

sense or that hurt Saskatchewan families. We also congratulated 

the NDP on the odd occasion when they did something right. 

Cutting the PST was a step in the right direction and it’s one of 

these times that I would want to congratulate the government. 

 

Before the members start to think that all aspects, however, of 

this budget are positive ones, let's not get ahead of ourselves. 

Saskatchewan people are still grossly overtaxed and the 

members opposite are raking in more than $1 billion more, year 

over year, in taxes than they did when they took office in 1991. 

 

Considering that our province’s budget is somewhere in the 

area of $5 billion, a 20 per cent increase in tax revenue is a 

substantial and hefty increase. So when the NDP are busy over 

there patting themselves on the backs, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers remember all of the taxes and fees that 

the NDP have increased over the past five years. They will 

remember that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s really no trick to how the NDP have balanced the 

budget. They simply raised taxes by a billion dollars year over 

year and they really got lucky in the oil patch. And now they’re 

hoping Saskatchewan people will thank them by giving them 

back some of their own money. 

 

And further, Mr. Speaker, you’ll have to wonder about this 

government’s long-term plan. Look at the manner in which our 

budget has been balanced. Look at the way the budget has been 

balanced in the last few years — by raising taxes. This year 

hundreds of millions of dollars have been taken from Liquor 

and Gaming to help balance the budget. Last year’s budget was 

helped by the sale of Cameco shares, the sale of LCL (Leicester 

Communications Limited) cable and others — much of these ad 

hoc approaches, Mr. Speaker, one-time injections that won’t do 

much in the long term. 

 

What about long-term tax relief for families and businesses so  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

some real job creation can take place in this province? How 

about the goal to eliminate the PST altogether? It’s not that 

hard, Mr. Speaker, when there’s a determined government. Just 

think of what that measure could do for our economy. 

 

Since the NDP took office here in 1991, there have been about 

3,000 new jobs created in Saskatchewan. And you can use 

whatever figures you want. Say it’s even double that, at 6,000, 

Mr. Speaker. During the same period of time, 123,000 jobs 

have been created in Alberta and Mr. Klein is predicting an 

additional 155,000 jobs created in his next term of office. So the 

score is about 278,000 for Alberta; 3 to 6,000 for 

Saskatchewan. If this government would stop thinking the only 

way to deal with government finances and deficits is to raise 

taxes, we could be in Saskatchewan experiencing the same kind 

of job growth that they are in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government needs to get serious about what’s 

best for Saskatchewan people and businesses and forget what’s 

best for the NDP here in Saskatchewan. We need to get rid of 

things like the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement; that 

all it is, is a pay-back to unions here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know the NDP have a hard time with this one, with those 

members on the opposite side who believe job creation is their 

number one priority and the NDP on the other side want to 

make union members happy so their donations will keep 

flowing into the NDP. So I understand when the NDP caucus is 

divided on this one. 

 

But if you want what’s best for Saskatchewan taxpayers, for 

Saskatchewan people, eliminating this discriminatory policy is 

a start, Mr. Speaker. We need to amend our labour legislation 

so business owners can actually run their own businesses 

instead of having the NDP run them for them. Business owners 

deserve a pat on the back for creating a few thousand jobs under 

this government that has done everything within its power to 

hamper and to hinder government creation . . . job creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need true commitment from the members 

opposite to creating a positive economic climate. Then maybe 

our brightest and our best would stop leaving our province for 

Alberta and we’d start living up to some of the potential that we 

have here in this province. More efficient government, lower 

taxes, a booming economy — it’s all possible right here in 

Saskatchewan if the government takes the right steps. 

 

I had the pleasure of hearing North Dakota Governor Ed 

Schafer speak this weekend, Mr. Speaker, on a number of 

issues. Governor Schafer was just re-elected with one of the 

largest majorities in the history of North Dakota last November. 

And there’s good news and there’s good reason for him being 

re-elected — he got rid of a $240 million deficit in workers’ 

compensation and improved services. This year they’re 

expecting a surplus in the neighbourhood of $35 million. 

 

His government cut government spending and government 

waste and lowered taxed. He’s lowered the unemployment rate 

to about 2 per cent. In some areas of the state, the 

unemployment rate is even lower at 1 per cent. Imagine, Mr.  

Speaker, an unemployment rate of 1 per cent in a positive 

business climate where small businesses are free to create 

thousands and thousands of jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he also spoke of a 2.5 per cent income tax rate. It 

seems almost unimaginable here in Saskatchewan. You see, Mr. 

Schafer wasn’t involved in politics until shortly before running 

for governor last term. He was a businessman, not a politician, 

and he knew that he had a state . . . he had to run a state just like 

a business in order to provide the necessary services for people. 

And he did exactly that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He was also 40 points behind the incumbent governor his first 

time around, Mr. Speaker, and ended up winning the election 

because he promised the people he’d run government like he 

ran his businesses. 

 

What about in Alberta and Ralph Klein, Mr. Speaker? The 

members opposite often like to take pot-shots at Ralph Klein, 

making it sound like things are terrible in Alberta. 

 

Well the NDP may think things aren’t so good in Alberta, but 

apparently the Albertans think it’s not that bad. I’m sure his 

gain . . . his gaining several seats in the recent election has a lot 

more with his . . . to do with his commitment to low taxes and 

less intrusive government; his philosophy that governments 

should create a positive business climate and that they should 

get out of the way. And I would certainly agree with that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that it takes dedication, it takes 

commitment to bring about changes for all of the right reasons. 

As I’ve said, there are some things about this budget that are 

positive. 

 

Certainly a cut in the PST is good news. A little more money 

towards highways is good news. But we’ve still got a long way 

to go with highway budgets, somewhere that . . . in terms of 

regaining where we were before, Mr. Speaker. The highways in 

this province are still in dreadful condition and I don’t think that 

this amount of money that’s being dedicated towards highways 

is going to address the concerns. 

 

Schools and municipalities aren’t jumping up and down about 

their funding either, Mr. Speaker. And things are tough for the 

property taxpayer in this province. This government had some 

choices, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly hope that they will rule on 

the side of what is right not what is politically good for them. 

 

They could continue to ignore the promise to provide 

municipalities with 10 per cent of the VLT revenue or they 

could honour that promise and help municipalities and property 

taxpayers in a big way. Or they could continue to pretend the 

CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) is a good 

agreement or they could do the right thing and scrap it, saving 

taxpayers millions of dollars every year. 

 

They could continue to ignore our province’s welfare numbers 

or they could take tangible, meaningful steps to address this 

problem. Other provinces have undertaken reforms that are 

paying off for everyone in a big way  those who were  



358  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

formerly on welfare, and taxpayers in general. Nothing cures 

poverty better than many, many well-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

This budget, these decisions, are all about choices, Mr. Speaker, 

and whether the members opposite are willing to make the right 

choices over the long run. This is a good news and a bad news 

budget. There’s much more that needs to be done; much more 

that must be done in order to create the kind of province . . . a 

province where we all hope to be someday — a province where 

government is smaller and efficient; where welfare numbers are 

almost non-existent; where quality education is provided for 

every family; where families can afford to live and remain here; 

where business can expand and create jobs. That’s what I think 

we all should be working towards here in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, there are many aspects of this budget 

that I believe do not go far enough in addressing the concerns 

here. However the NDP have taken a step in the right direction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a week ago or so, I said that the if the NDP 

reduced the PST by 2 points, I would support this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve introduced in the last few days legislation, a 

private members’ piece of legislation into this legislature, 

calling on free votes. 

 

We believe in free votes, Mr. Speaker. We are the party that 

believes that we as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) should be voting the wishes of our constituents — 

not just simply accepting the party line, but voting truly what 

we think is appropriate and best for the constituents that we 

represent. We will be doing that in this upcoming budget, Mr. 

Speaker. We will be, as of the PC caucus, voting freely to 

represent the constituents that we represent here in 

Saskatchewan. The other members of this caucus are free to 

vote however they wish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although, although . . . Mr. Speaker, although I 

have some very, very serious reservations about some of the 

aspects of this budget, I will be voting in favour of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Now I certainly realize that this doesn’t happen 

very often, but I believe, because of the PST reduction, I have 

to support it. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, however, there still are a number of 

things within this budget that need to be corrected. And that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a subamendment that reads: 

 

That all the words after “relief set out in the government’s 

budget” be deleted and the following be substituted: 

 

but demand the government immediately undertake a plan 

to provide long-term tax relief for Saskatchewan families 

and business through reductions in the provincial sales tax 

and other taxes and fees; and further regrets this 

government’s failure to recognize the hardship imposed  

upon municipalities through decreased revenue-sharing 

grants and failure to honour the provinces commitment to 

provide 10 per cent of the video lottery terminal revenue 

directly to municipalities; and further regret the 

government has not gone far enough to provide 

Saskatchewan businesses with the climate needed to create 

permanent, well-paying jobs in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move this subamendment, seconded by the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ll want to pause . . . I’ve not 

had opportunity to review the amendment before the hon. 

member moved it, and I’d like to take a moment just to reflect 

on whether it’s in order. Order. 

 

Order, order. I’ve had opportunity to review the subamendment 

moved by the Leader of the Third Party and do find it in order. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

second the motion . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, and I beg 

indulgence of the member opposite, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

to you this afternoon a group of 12 students who have driven all 

the way down from Prince Albert to observe the proceedings in 

the legislature and to take a tour of the legislature. And with 

them is their teacher, Dale Hassett, and as well as Sheryll Roy 

and Lois Ehlert. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members join with me in welcoming 

the guests from Prince Albert to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  To join with the member in introducing guests, 

welcoming guests from P.A. (Prince Albert). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s also a privilege to 

join with the member from Prince Albert Carlton in welcoming 

the guests from Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Hassett is certainly no stranger to this Assembly. He’s 

taught in the Christian School in Leader. He’s presently 

currently teaching in Prince Albert. And we’re pleased to see 

him again bringing his students down to visit us here this 

afternoon at the Legislative Assembly. And we welcome them 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

all and I look forward to meeting with them later on this 

afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 

this is my pleasure to second the motion by my colleague, the 

member from Kindersley. And like my colleague, I’d like to 

emphasize that there are definitely some positive features about 

this budget. And that isn’t usually a statement you hear from a 

member of the opposition. 

 

I had the privilege this weekend when I went home to discuss 

with quite a number of my constituents this particular aspect, 

and the aspect I’m referring to is the cut to the PST. And the 

people out there are in favour of it, and I wasn’t surprised. It 

happened to be one of the planks in our election campaign and I 

was elected on that. So when I went back home and found the 

people supportive of it, there was no surprise. 

 

And I must say to the people across that I gave you full credit 

for that cut to the PST. And our caucus, our caucus took full 

credit for the idea. And our caucus is getting full credit for the 

pressure to get that item passed. And so the score at present is 2 

to 1, and that’s a substantial victory and that’s the way it will 

continue to be. 

 

In fact I would be a hypocrite to suggest otherwise. Because as I 

said, I ran for that . . . on that position in ’95. And one of the 

main things I was asked to do by my constituents was to vote 

for a 2 per cent cut to the PST. Now I’m in exactly the position 

to be able to do that, and I have no intention of betraying the 

mandate that my constituents have given to me. 

 

However PST reduction was not the only point that I ran on, 

and I would be just as much of a hypocrite if I didn’t stand to 

defend those other principles as well. For starters, I was elected 

to voice the people’s call not only for one particular tax relief, 

but for general, long-term tax reduction as a guideline for 

government. 

 

We have not seen that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Sure, the 

Premier has been fond lately of going around saying that when 

the NDP cut a tax, they cut it forever. Well forever is a long 

time. Forever is a word you use when you’re prepared to stand 

behind it with commitment and integrity. 

 

We have never seen that kind of commitment and integrity from  

this government. This, after all, is the government that ran the 

last election on a promise of no new taxes, only to find 

back-door ways of doing exactly that through utility rate 

increases and fees, not just one time but again and again and 

again. And all you had to do was walk down the streets of your 

communities and ask them about it, and their memory is very 

good. 

 

This is the same government that rushed out after the last 

election to tell us they were incapable of keeping any of their 

election promises. The word forever now rings pretty hollow in 

the context of the government's ability to stick to its own word. 

We have to keep those two things in mind, for my voters 

believe that this cut is truly forever. 

 

They need to see a plan: first, a plan for the complete 

elimination of a PST, because that’s what they want. Second, 

and just as important, they need to see a binding agenda that 

shows this government has left behind its avaricious and 

tax-gouging ideologies of the past and recognizes the 

importance of tax relief to the economy of the province and the 

lives of ordinary taxpayers. 

 

And we had people across the way there making sundry 

remarks about the oil that was theirs and they had found it. Well 

I suggest to the NDP it wasn’t their oil. I suggest furthermore 

they didn’t find it. It belongs to the people of Saskatchewan and 

that’s where the profit should go. 

 

But frankly I’m not holding my breath, Mr. Speaker, for those 

kinds of plans. The main reason I’m not hopeful for that 

outcome is because of what I’ve seen with regards to this 

government’s municipal policy. At the same time that they 

point the bony finger of blame at the federal government for 

offloading their responsibility, the NDP in Saskatchewan are 

pointing three bony fingers back at themselves, because they’re 

doing exactly the same thing on the municipal level. 

 

In fact the most single disturbing aspect of this budget is that 

further cuts have been made on municipal spending. And when 

I go back to my town and my municipal bodies, they’re aware 

of those cuts. They’re concerned about those cuts. And they 

have only one person to offload them off to, and that’s the 

taxpayer at the very bottom of the rung. 

 

The results of this are clear. Municipalities will have to raise 

taxes, and these come as a result of NDP policies. It is this 

government that will bask, or at least attempt to bask, in the 

public approval for the cut to the PST. But remember who gets 

two of the three points on that — it’s over here — while local 

politicians act as the scapegoats for the increases that have been 

caused. This isn’t fair and it should be addressed before this 

budget can be allowed to pass. 

 

One small thing that can be done to alleviate it is to give the 

NDP an opportunity . . . to give them an opportunity to show 

that they are capable of the kind of commitment that would 

back up a statement like, tax cuts are for ever. And we will give 

you that opportunity. All we are asking of the members 

opposite is to live up to their own promise and to direct a 

portion of VLT revenues to the communities. This would offset  



360  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

government’s aggressive cuts and give municipal bodies further 

source of secure funding, rather than going back to the taxpayer 

at the bottom and saying, dig in that pocket and find another 

dusty dime to pay for your problems. 

 

These are just a few of the concerns that I have with this 

budget. I’ll reserve most of my thoughts for the debate on the 

budget motion proper. However once again, before that can 

proceed, I feel that this Assembly must take immediate steps to 

address the deficiencies of this budget. 

 

Our motion allows that. By treating municipalities fairly, by 

committing the government to further tax reduction, and by 

setting us on a more aggressive course for creating job creation 

environments, I and the other members of my caucus will be 

able to look at this budget with the knowledge that it is fully a 

budget that we would have written were we the government. It 

is already about two-thirds of the way there. I invite the 

members of the Assembly to go all the way by voting to support 

this amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I sat here 

earlier listening to the member from Regina South and thinking 

to myself how unfortunate it is for a member to be elected to 

this House with absolutely zero life experience. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s probably very easy for that member to come into 

this House and read the speaking points that are prepared for 

him. I suppose it would be very easy for us to do that as well. 

 

But what would be hard for many people to do is actually 

believe them, to believe that everything in our province is 

simply perfect now. Because that party is in power, to believe 

that all the problems have been conquered for everyone in this 

province, to believe that that government is looking out for the 

interests of us all. 

 

It would be easy for that member to believe his own rhetoric 

since he’s probably had very little opportunity to get out of the 

city very much in the last few years to actually encounter 

what’s been happening outside of the boundaries of Regina or 

Saskatoon since this government came to power. Yes, it’s 

probably easy to convince yourself everyone in this province is 

better off when you probably couldn’t find places like Ituna or 

Lemberg or Neudorf with a road map and a compass. 

 

I suppose it’s very easy to think everything is just wonderful if 

you go straight from the insular world of university to a plum 

patronage position, courtesy of the NDP, to this House as an 

MLA. I suppose in those circumstances it would be easy for a 

person to stand here and say what he’s been saying with a 

straight face, actually convinced of the words he’s been told to 

say. I would have thought that sitting on the back benches for 

all these months would have given him some time to reflect on 

the truth of things, but I guess I’ve been wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an MLA who represents an area that is 

definitely not better off through the actions of this government 

and will not be better off with this budget, I want to tell the 

members opposite some of the things that I’ve heard since this  

budget was brought down on Thursday. And I’ll be quite 

truthful here. 

 

My constituents in Melville are telling me that they are pleased 

the PST has been dropped back to 7 per cent, precisely where it 

was when the NDP came to power. Yes, Mr. Speaker, they are 

happy the government saw fit to reduce their tax burden slightly 

after the constant hammering they’ve taken for the last five 

years at the hands of this Minister of Finance and this 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Melville see the other side of 

the coin as well. Of course they’re happy to pay less sales tax. 

Who wouldn’t be and who isn’t? However, they also know the 

people of this province are still paying far more in taxes than 

they were five years ago. How much more? Seven hundred and 

ninety million dollars more, Mr. Speaker — $790 million more. 

So you’ll excuse the people of Melville if they don’t commence 

dancing in the streets any time soon for this 2 point drop in the 

PST. 

 

Though they obviously welcome it, they don’t forget who 

raised it in the first place. They don’t forget who inflicted the 

pain of high taxation for so many years. The members opposite 

won’t fool the people of Melville any longer, Mr. Speaker, 

because they can’t fool them. Because what they have forgotten 

— that $790 million, Mr. Speaker — is that it was as a result of 

this NDP government’s hit. Not much, by my estimation, that 

they are doing anything to alleviate that serious problem. Oh 

yes, they know the government is better off today than it was 

five years ago, but they themselves? No, they’re not better off. 

 

The people of Ituna are not better off without their hospital. The 

people of Melville aren’t better off with constant cut-backs to 

their hospital. And for all the extra tax money that was taken 

out of the constituency, what was the return? Reduced services, 

crumbling highways, and a government that couldn’t give two 

hoots to what’s happening in that constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last five years came with a series of slaps in 

the face for the people of Melville constituency. It didn’t matter 

for the first three and a half years they were represented by an 

NDP member, the hits came anyway. And when the people 

said, enough of that nonsense, they elected me. And the hits 

kept coming. 

 

Only now, only now at least I have the right to stand in this 

House and tell the government about the hurt and destruction 

their policies have caused out there — something the members 

opposite unfortunately can’t do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through this government’s actions, government 

service after government service have left the communities in 

my constituency despite the high rates of taxation. It’s come to 

the point in Melville that even our judges and lawyers have to 

go hat in hand to try and find a place to hold Provincial Court, 

Mr. Speaker, because the government kicked them out of the 

court-house. 

 

Of course, the Melville Court of Queen’s Bench doesn’t have 

the same problem since that was shut down completely last  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

year. And where court was once held in Melville will go to the 

gutted SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management) office — crumbs left over by the government 

after it centralized this office too, in Saskatoon. 

 

Wonderful. What a great move. Our SERM people are now 

located in the largest city in Saskatchewan. But yes, we’ve got 

to keep the wildlife safe there too, I suppose. We don’t want too 

much illegal hunting going on near the banks of the South 

Saskatchewan, especially near the Bessborough. I hear the 

problem is very bad there. 

 

Seriously though, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re all relieved that 

the rise in the debt has been arrested. I think everyone would 

agree with me when I say we are relieved the actions of the 

1980s and the wasteful ways of the Devine government are 

over. Yes, I think the people of Saskatchewan should be proud 

of themselves, that we are getting a handle on the debt. 

 

As an employee of Crop Insurance during that time, I saw 

unimaginable waste go on. Not by the workers, Mr. Speaker, 

but by the politicians themselves and their hand-picked hacks, 

who had absolutely no regard for the taxpayers’ money. 

 

I’ll always remember those days, especially around 1986 and 

the lead-up to that election, because I always find it slightly 

amusing when I sit in this House and listen to those members 

opposite — a few of whom were elected in 1986 — point 

fingers at the wasteful ways of Grant Devine and the Tories. 

 

And, yes, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no defence for what 

that party did to this province. Even while the economy was 

sinking lower and lower because of the farm and commodity 

crisis, they kept spending and spending. There’s no doubt the 

Tories do deserve the fingers that are pointed at them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I see some of the members opposite 

pointing those fingers, I find it just slightly ironic because, if 

memory does serve me, if anything, in 1986 the members 

opposite who ran in 1986 were calling on the Devine PCs to 

spend even more. Members like the member from Regina 

Coronation Park or Regina Victoria or the member from 

Watrous, and the Premier himself. Those members told Grant 

Devine that he wasn’t spending enough, though deficits were 

approaching $1 billion. That’s what the NDP members said. 

 

So for us to believe that we would have not had this terrible 

problem had that party been elected in 1986, defies logic. That 

is of course, Mr. Speaker, if they were planning to keep their 

billion-dollar promises. But I mean, after what we saw in the 

aftermath of 1991 and 1995, we shouldn’t assume anything like 

that at all. 

 

I think the only person actually talking about the deficit in that 

election in 1986 was Ralph Goodale and the Liberal Party. The 

PCs weren’t interested in talking about it. The NDP weren’t 

interested in talking about it. Only Mr. Goodale was telling it 

like it was. Only Mr. Goodale resisted the urge to bribe people 

with their own money. I only give this brief history lesson for 

the younger members of the House opposite who are probably 

too young to remember or who close their ears to the true facts,  

Mr. Speaker. 

 

One thing that troubles me about the last couple of budgets 

we’ve seen from the government is their lack of accountability 

to the people of Saskatchewan. The Provincial Auditor on 

numerous occasions has stated that this government only gives 

a partial picture of the true state of finances in this province. 

That cannot be denied. Because 60 per cent of the financial 

activity of the government are actually contained in the 

financial statements provided by this government, but so far the 

government has refused to be completely open and accountable. 

 

I don’t suppose this comes as a surprise to anyone. This is a 

government that says it prides itself on openness, but the facts 

simply don’t back this up. Getting information from this 

government is getting to be more and more of a chore. There 

must be more and more to hide. I guess I was as shocked as 

anyone this past weekend when we heard the Premier admit to 

back-room financial dealings with the federal government — 

dealings the Premier says the people of this province had no 

right to know about. That’s openness, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also find it of grave concern when a Minister of 

Finance states she now considers the Liquor and Gaming fund 

as the government’s stability fund. Isn’t that just wonderful. 

The stability, the finances, of this government now rest on the 

shoulders of the vices of people. We see the government 

Estimates estimates it will take in 30 per cent more through 

video lottery terminals this year than last. Clearly the 

government knows it’s got the people hooked and is happy that 

they’ll just spend more and more gambling. Now if they could 

only find a way to put a tax on strippers, Mr. Speaker, I suppose 

the province would be even more stable. 

 

They’ve a good thing going on, Mr. Speaker. And though I 

personally don’t believe we can stop the average person from 

gambling if that’s what they choose to do, I think, I think we 

have to commit ourselves not to take advantage of their 

weaknesses without also accepting the consequences. Yet this 

government continues to refuse to determine the effects of 

gambling in this province by not having a review of the social 

and economic impacts. 

 

You just can’t reap the benefits without acknowledging the 

problems — something this government simply refuses to do. 

We’ve got VLTs in this province, and until the people of the 

province tell us to remove them, they’ll stay. It’s very hard to 

turn back the clock. This government began the deluge of 

gambling, and it’s going to be hard to shore up the dike now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But do we have to prey on the weakest in society and be proud 

of it? Which is what the Minister of Finance seems to be doing. 

And it’s not just individuals who are hurt by this government’s 

greed, Mr. Speaker, it’s also the communities. This government 

takes millions and millions of dollars out of villages, towns, and 

cities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

And at one time they acknowledged their responsibility to 

return a portion of this money from whence it came; of course 

they didn’t do that. Have they kept any commitments? Instead  



362  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

we get the same old song and dance that the money is better off 

in general revenue because it’s used to fund programs for these 

same towns and villages. 

 

Well tell that to the communities which have lost their 

hospitals. Tell that to the communities which have lost their 

schools. Tell that to the communities where the highways 

leading into them have become virtually impassable. It’s a tale 

that’s become pretty hard to swallow any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has got to stand by its commitment to return 

some of its VLT money back to the towns it has been drained 

from, whatever the percentage — you promised 10 per cent. 

The hoteliers call for 20 or 30 per cent. That’s money that could 

be used to fund our non-profit organizations or minor sporting 

organizations. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order, order, order. 

Order. Now the . . . All hon. members will recognize that the 

hon. member from Melville has the floor. And there is plenty of 

opportunity to put their obviously strong-felt views and 

concerns on the record, which is the appropriate place to put 

them, not shouting them across the floor. From both sides of the 

House, I will simply ask for the cooperation of all hon. 

members and to allow the hon. member from Melville to 

continue to present his case. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

promised a return of 10 per cent of VLTs. That’s money that 

could be used to fund our non-profit organizations or minor 

sporting organizations — organizations that once kept their 

head above water through local fund-raising. 

 

There should be more than 10 per cent return, Mr. Speaker, to 

benefit these communities. Much of those funds that they used 

to raise came through small community bingos, but of course 

this has been made virtually impossible since the introduction 

of VLTs and the expanded gambling program. 

 

These communities need the money back. And we’ll keep 

talking on this side of the House until the government sends it 

back or until we’re in a position to send it back ourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 

comments on this government’s so-called new-found 

commitment to our highways. I say so-called because once 

again they are trying to fool a public that has been fooled once 

too often by the members opposite. 

 

We hear of a 10-year $2.5 billion commitment to our roads. 

That sounds like a lot, to be sure. But in reality, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not much more than what they were budgeted for last week 

. . . or last year, and it’s still less than what was budgeted before 

this government came to power. So just what is the 

commitment? 

 

I guess it’s a commitment to keep our highways in deplorable  

shape, Mr. Speaker — highways like No. 15 from Melville to 

the Yellowhead at Langenburg. It’s a disgrace it’s so dangerous. 

So much so that the people travelling west to east now bypass 

Melville and travel instead through Yorkton. This hurts the 

economy of Melville, and it’s not isolated to there. 

 

There are many such examples throughout my constituency, 

and there are examples in other members’ constituencies near 

my own. Highway 35 from Qu’Appelle to Weyburn springs to 

mind. That’s in the Minister of Environment’s riding. Or 

Highway 22 from Lipton to Southey, which is almost beyond 

repair. That’s the member from Last Mountain, Mr. Speaker. 

Each and every member of this House can probably cite two 

dozen examples of disgraceful highways, and this government 

makes the commitment to spend what it’s spending now. 

 

In other words, I guess they’re committing to keeping our 

highways in the same deplorable state for the next decade that 

they are now. And this government, which has doubled the gas 

tax since taking power, this is a government that has run up a 

billion-dollar surplus in gas taxes and registration fees since 

coming into power. This new-found commitment looks an 

awful lot like the old commitment to me, Mr. Speaker, and that 

commitment has wrecked our highways, absolutely destroyed 

them. 

 

The only saving grace here is that they’ve only got another 

couple of years left in their mandate. Then our party, a party 

with a real commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, will 

take over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll hear a lot in the next while about this 

government’s tax relief and how much it’ll save taxpayers. But 

again, let’s give a whole set of facts here. What the people save 

in the PST, they’ll more than lose in higher property taxes, and 

not only because of the reassessment scheme this government is 

imposing, but because municipal governments have once again 

been pillaged by the members opposite. 

 

This government, which says all the problems of the world are 

caused by cut-backs from Ottawa, thinks nothing, thinks 

absolutely nothing of downloading even more onto our 

hard-pressed, hard-working, and intelligent local governments. 

The hypocrisy is absolutely unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean how can those members stand there and say 

downloading is bad when that’s all they’ve done for five years 

now. And who pays? The same taxpayers that those members 

say are getting a tax break. Hardly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where do they think the municipalities are going to get the 

money to make up for their own shortfalls, Mr. Speaker? You 

know this point was really driven home to me on Friday, when I 

think everyone knew somebody who was stuck somewhere on a 

Regina street because of the lack of snow clearance in the city 

this past winter. Downloading to the municipalities and cutting 

back on money. 

 

Already this year the city of Regina . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now all hon. members will  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

recognize the decorum in the House exempts members from 

shouting across the floor no matter how enthusiastic members 

may be. And I will ask all hon. members to respect the decorum 

of the House and to allow the hon. member from Melville to be 

heard. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Already the city of 

Regina has spent over two and a half million dollars of its $3 

million snow removal budget. And obviously the pressure is 

going to be on the city to increase the budget so it can clear the 

snow on residential streets once again so we can avoid this 

situation next year. 

 

Probably some of the Regina members opposite have been in 

those clogged streets and snow and slush, and I hear them 

chirping that they have been, in front of their own homes. So I 

ask them, where do they think the cities like Regina are going to 

be able to find this extra money when you cut transfers to the 

city by 30 per cent? And that’s only this year’s cut, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Where is this extra cash going to come from? That’s right. We 

know where it’s going to . . . you know where it’s going to 

come from. It’s going to come from the taxpayers, from the 

local taxpayers again. 

 

So I’m very interested, and I will be, to hear what the members 

opposite will have to say to the municipal leaders in this 

province. 

 

The member from Regina Victoria, who himself was a city 

councillor here in Regina, I’d like to hear, when that member 

gets up to give his vitriolic speech which reminds people of 

being at an evening for the improv, when he gives that, what 

this budget will mean to the budgets of urban and rural 

municipalities. I’d like him to use his expertise to tell us how 

cities, towns, villages, and RMs will be able to avoid passing 

along tax increases to their ratepayers. 

 

I’d like to hear somewhere in his rhetoric how some of these 

local governments are going to be able to cope with this latest 

30 per cent cut. And then I’d like him or one of his colleagues 

to explain to me how their downloading is justified when they 

say over and over, what a sin it is for the federal government to 

reduce its transfer payments. That cut, by the way, this year 

equals about 1.2 per cent of this government’s total spending. 

 

I’d like to hear someone on that side of the House explain that, 

but I doubt very much that they will, Mr. Speaker, because 

there’s no way they would be able to justify this type of 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. So please don’t pat yourselves on the 

back too hard for the reduction of the PST. 

 

Just look at the property tax bill you get this year and next, and 

think about the actions of your government. Then the reality of 

this so-called tax cut will hit you squarely between the eyes. Of 

course, Mr. Speaker, what better way to gain a stranglehold of 

municipalities than by choking the life out of them. 

 

Could it be, Mr. Speaker, that this is the way the government is 

now going to force municipal amalgamation? The government  

was forced to back down last year, so now they’re trying to 

accomplish the same results by cutting funding. Another cynical 

action by a cynical government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while addressing the needs of rural Saskatchewan, 

one can’t forget the topic of education and health care for one 

moment, because one affects the young and innocent and the 

other affects the sick and the elderly. One represents our hope 

for the future; the other the legacy of our past. But both have 

been under attack by this government since it came to power, 

and it looks like its going to continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new money to health care amounts to about 1 

per cent. And during the last five years, funding to sick and 

elderly has not even kept up with the rate of inflation. 

Saskatchewan people, especially in rural areas, have seen their 

health care services disappear, replaced with first-aid stations 

— if they are fortunate. 

 

The Plains hospital, which served so many rural residents — 

and which, by the way, the member from Regina South vowed 

to save if he were elected — will not be saved by that member 

opposite. It will not be saved by the 1 per cent increase to the 

health care budget. 

 

The people in rural areas have taken matters into their own 

hands. The people of Redvers are building their own hospital 

because the government won’t. The people of Coronach 

subsidize their own doctor so they have at least some access to 

health care. The people of Dodsland are simply asking the 

government to let them use their own money to keep their 

health care centre open a couple of days a week so the doctor 

can continue coming to town. 

 

This 1 per cent won’t fix any of those problems. 

 

And there are many other such instances, Mr. Speaker. And 

those problems will continue, because it’s not only a money 

issue we’re talking of when we debate our health care system, 

it’s a systemic problem created by the flawed system that this 

government has put in place, a system that virtually assures our 

rural areas of further reductions in services in the next few 

years. 

 

It promises to be another long, hot summer for the government, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan told this government, 

they told them what they thought last year, and I’m confident 

they’ll do it again this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has happened to our hospitals for the last 

five years is what I fear is in store for our schools as well. Mr. 

Speaker, I chuckled when I heard about the so-called increase in 

funding the government has committed to our public schools — 

8 million bucks. Wow! That sure sounds like a lot, doesn’t it? 

That is, until you discover that it’s only enough to cover the 

costs of the teachers’ contract that the government negotiated, a 

contract that the school boards have to pay for. So in essence, 

there is no more money to actually use to teach our children. 

Again, some commitment, Mr. Speaker, by that government. 

 

So I am very anxious to hear how this budget addresses the  



364  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

problems in our province that I have raised today. I am very 

anxious to hear what the members opposite are thinking. Of 

course we never really get to hear what they’re thinking because 

they’re not allowed to say what they really think. And that’s too 

bad, because I think their constituents would like to have a 

voice in this legislature for a change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I know the government did the right thing in 

putting the PST back to the level it was when they came to 

office, the reality is the people of Saskatchewan will not see the 

benefits of that reduction because of the government’s other 

moves. It’s another shell game performed by the Minister of 

Finance, the best sleight-of-hand artist I’ve ever seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has caused a lot of destruction in 

my constituency and many others since 1991, and I see no 

evidence in this budget that that destruction is going to be 

reversed any time soon. For that reason I am unable to support 

this budget and I urge all my colleagues in this Chamber to vote 

for the amendment put forth by my colleague, the hon. member 

from Melfort-Tisdale. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, I want to first start out by thanking 

my colleagues for the opportunity to address this House on the 

budget speech. I deeply appreciate their trust and generosity in 

asking me to speak. I will try to be brief. 

 

I want to say first off that my speech will not be the typical one 

of extolling the virtues of our budget and exposing the foibles 

and pettiness of the opposition parties in their feeble attempts to 

bluster against it. I find their comments passing strange and I 

will leave rebuttal of them to my more skilled colleagues. 

 

Rather, what I want to do and what I want to talk about today is 

the fact that I see in this budget and the accompanying throne 

speech a coming together of a redefinition of social democracy 

in Saskatchewan, a redefinition that will take this province 

proudly and confidently into the next century. 

 

As a political party, the New Democrats have come through a 

lot in the past decade. I think that it is only fitting that we stop 

and examine where we’ve come from, what we’ve gone 

through, and who we are now. 

 

Ten years ago, Mr. Speaker, we were in opposition in this 

House after then-premier Grant Devine made a frantic midnight 

phone call to bail out his sinking election so that he could 

continue to run up public debt. Ten years ago our party led the 

way to opposition to his privatization of SaskEnergy. Along the 

way we set new standards for bell ringing in this House and we 

also sharpened our reputation for defending the public 

ownership of utilities for the benefit of all, not just for the profit 

of a few. 

 

Some uncharitable souls have since twisted that to mean that 

our party wants public ownership of everything. Nothing could 

be further from the truth. As social democrats we understand 

and we accept the importance of the free market economy; 

however, we do not believe that it is the total or even partial  

solution to social ills. 

 

(1545) 

 

Much has happened to affect social democratic policies in the 

last 10 years. In the past decade, Mr. Speaker, the world has 

witnessed in 1989 the amply deserved fall of the Berlin Wall 

and the subsequent collapse of Communism. We celebrated, as 

did most people, the fact that finally a bloc of people might 

have the opportunity to participate in a free and democratic 

economic and political system. 

 

Curiously, Mr. Speaker, just as that year signalled the end of 

Communism, so too it appears did it signal the end of the brash, 

admit-to-no-alternate-solution system of the hegemony of the 

market. Reagan and Thatcher and their philosophies had about 

run their course. The world was starting to realize that their 

wilfully blind attack on the welfare state would no more solve 

the problems of poverty and distorted distribution of resources 

than would the blow to bureaucracy that had mushroomed 

under governments of all sorts. 

 

The ideals of Reagan and Thatcher were exposed as false 

promises, as full of social and moral bankruptcy as the 

communist system. 

 

In the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, governments all over the world have 

had to come to grips with runaway debt and crippling deficits. 

They have had to cope, just as we did here in Saskatchewan, 

with the sad reality that our children’s future was being 

mortgaged to pay for a bubble of false prosperity. But because 

the glib propaganda of the so-called “new right” is easier to 

repeat than is the notion of shared responsibilities and duties, 

the left all over the world, and particularly in Canada, has been 

in disarray for much of this decade. 

 

Against this background, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic 

Party of Saskatchewan, under the pragmatic and visionary 

leadership of the Premier, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, has been quietly, carefully, and thoughtfully 

rethinking and reshaping social democracy. This legislative 

session gives us a chance to brag a bit about the fruits of our 

labour. 

 

Just as Tony Blair in England took his party from a socialist 

party to a social democratic one, and along the way added the 

word “new” to distinguish his modern approach, in new Labour, 

so too we have added a new dimension to the NDP. Indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we could quite confidently call ourselves 

the “New Social Democratic Party” with a lot of pride. 

 

We believe in the mixed economy and the power of society 

through government and community to provide a hand-up for 

less privileged people. And we believe strongly in the notion of 

patient, democratic, participatory political reform. In short, we 

are roughly to the left of Liberals and Conservatives and very 

definitely to the right of the imaginary propaganda line they 

draw for us. 

 

We are social democrats, and here in Saskatchewan, I believe,  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

we are redefining in a practical and a successful way what it 

means to be a social democrat in the ’90s and beyond. 

 

And how are we doing this? The answer, it is clear, lies first in 

the realization and acknowledgement that government is not, as 

the opposition would have people believe, the enemy of the 

people; government is the instrument of the people. It is a tool, 

a means to an end; not an end in itself. That means that 

occasionally it needs to be reeled in, modified, adjusted. It 

means acknowledging that the state is no substitute, for very 

long or very effectively, for a just and caring society. 

 

It also means recognizing that the left of the post-war period 

was perhaps a victim of its own success. The social safety net, 

public ownership of utilities, quality public education, universal 

health care — all of these social democratic measures, as they 

became stable and institutionalized, led people to believe that 

they would always be there. The struggle was over and 

vigilance was unnecessary. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, that simply was 

not the case. Profligate, spendthrift governments, unfettered 

markets, and public fatigue with the demands of special interest 

groups all took their toll. So in 1991, we were elected with a 

mandate to deal with the deficit. And we did, Mr. Speaker, we 

did indeed. 

 

We are only now able to talk frankly about the immense horror 

of the fiscal debt crisis. Equally importantly though, I believe 

that it is now time for us to talk publicly about the many other 

sorts of deficits that we’re dealing with. 

 

Deficits aren’t only fiscal. That’s the most obvious sort and the 

one that’s caused so much heartache and sacrifice for the people 

of Saskatchewan. That’s the one that this budget attempts to 

ameliorate. That’s the one that this budget aims at in order to 

give back a bit of hope and optimism and a greater chance for 

our strong, mixed economy to grow, for our families to plan on, 

and for our communities to work with. That’s the fiscal deficit. 

 

But this budget and the throne speech also deal with other 

deficits and our approach to all these deficits is the foundation 

for a modern expression of workable social democracy. We are 

dealing with the political deficits built up by successive 

disdainful political administrations that believed governments 

were essentially bad and set out to prove the rightness of their 

hypothesis. We are dealing with the democratic deficit built up 

by years of cronyism, back-room dealing, and elitist decision 

making. Democratic involvement of people is messy, 

inefficient; and it’s right and it’s effective. 

 

We are also dealing with the deficit of values that has spread 

like a cancer into the hearts of our communities and our homes. 

Values that emphasize the isolated splendour of the individual 

— the “I’m all right, Jack, now the rest of you shove off the 

boat” approach — where the big dogs ate first and only scraps 

were left over for most of us; the values deficit where the notion 

of citizen rights somehow got divorced from the reciprocity of 

their duties. 

 

Believing that individual rights and entitlements are more  

important than collective responsibilities is a lopsided way to 

claim full and complete membership in a community. In this 

province, in this social democratic party, we believe that no one 

should starve or go homeless. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  No one should lack for essential medical care. 

The elderly must live in dignity and children must have the 

chances they need to participate fully in the life of their society. 

All people should have the opportunity for employment and the 

sense of pride that goes with knowing that they are making a 

productive contribution to their community. And these are 

things that the New Democratic Party, the new social 

democratic party of Saskatchewan — the government of this 

province — is seeking to achieve with as much haste as we can 

muster. 

 

We’ve dealt, as I said, with the fiscal deficit. We are dealing 

with the democratic deficit. We set up the Gass Financial 

Management Review Commission to bring government back to 

a state of open, honest, accountable measures. We’ve consulted, 

and together with the people of this province we, all of us 

together, decided that government surpluses should go 

one-third, one-third, one-third, to debt, tax relief, and social 

programs. We’ve worked to democratize government. 

 

A quick example: last year we held public consultations about 

parks in Saskatchewan. Our initial idea was to consider 

cut-backs in funding, close some, change the park structures in 

Saskatchewan. But along the way people told us very clearly 

that parks, open spaces, communal gathering places, and a 

clean, quality environment were a top priority. So we listened. 

This budget includes a $1.7 million increase to parks. That’s a 

solid example of proving our commitment to deal with the 

democratic deficit. 

 

As well as democratizing government, we are working to 

democratize society. That’s why measures in this budget to 

enhance the child action plan are so important. That’s why 

we’ve allocated money for increased wages for child care 

workers; for benefits and pensions; for people working in group 

homes; for redesigning social assistance; for enhancing home 

care, emergency services, and adult basic education. 

 

And what about the deficit of political mistrust? We are dealing 

with that as well. We could very easily have socked away 

money into an election goodie package. We could have 

cynically said that our own re-election was most important, but 

we didn’t, because our definition of new social democracy 

includes dealing with political deficits and public cynicism. We 

want to restore a sense of honour and decency to the political 

process. A tax cut today is right, it’s decent, and it’s fiscally 

sustainable. 

 

I should also add that it is the responsibility of all elected 

members to work on balancing the political deficit. The Leader 

of the Third Party said he would vote for this budget if it 

contained a 2 cent PST decrease. Now he has gone a long way 

to restore public confidence and trust in his party, and to back 

up his words with action. I congratulate him, and I hope all  



366  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

members of his PC caucus vote unreservedly for our budget, as 

he has indicated that he will. 

 

By the way, as important as our tax reduction measures are, I 

hope people notice that throughout her 40-minute budget 

speech, the Finance minister resisted the opportunity to go for 

the quick applause and ovation. As important and stimulative as 

the PST reduction is, it only makes sense in a just and caring 

society, such as we want in Saskatchewan, if it is coupled with 

a sense of hope and optimism for communities and families. 

 

The tax cut was the most flashy measure in the budget, but the 

most important aspects of this budget were the social measures, 

and properly so. The Finance minister gave them top priority in 

her speech and we give them top priority in our government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the left is not dead. Social democracy is not a 

spent force. Here in Saskatchewan we’ve demonstrated how it 

is realistic, relevant, and responsible. We’ve showed that social 

democracy is more than democracy and more, much more, than 

socialism. 

 

We don’t have any magical solutions, but we do have an 

abiding faith in a demanding, egalitarian morality that deals 

with deficits of all sorts up front, practically and effectively. 

Our morality isn’t based on repression. It is based on mutual 

respect, on rights and responsibilities. It is based on the 

optimistic notion that, with diligence and persistence, wages, 

standards, and benefits for everyone can be levelled up. 

 

We don’t have all the answers. We don’t have a magic blueprint 

for how do we organize a modern economy. But we do know 

that working together in partnership with business, with unions, 

with communities, and with families, we will all, together, have 

the confidence and certainty to make this flat piece of land a 

better place. 

 

I want to close by quoting words Carlyle King spoke at the 

memorial service for Tommy Douglas in 1986. He described 

his role as CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation)-NDP party president and the fortnightly meetings 

he had with Tommy, the premier. 

 

(1600) 

 

They’d debate, discuss, and occasionally disagree. But 

throughout it all, as he said, they’d light up their pipes, and 

“plot how to do good for the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

That’s our goal too. The means are different, the problems are 

perhaps larger, but the imperative to do good is the same. And 

this budget, this throne speech, and this modern social 

democratic party, is up to the job. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand in 

this House and lend my support to a budget which has given the 

people of Saskatchewan a feeling of hope, opportunity, and  

optimism as we approach the next millennium. 

 

This government, with the cooperation of its resourceful people, 

has moved this great province — the best province not only in 

Canada but in the whole wide world — from the brink of 

financial disaster, thanks to the felonious misuse of public funds 

by the former Tory administration, to a time when the budget 

has been balanced for four consecutive years. The debt is being 

reduced, and at a time when funds are available, to improve on 

social programs for those desperately in need. 

 

On Thursday a feeling of euphoria spread like a prairie fire 

through Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, there were a few 

notable exceptions. The Liberal members opposite, those 

purveyors of doom and gloom, sat in their seats, downcast, 

disconsolate, and in despair as the Finance minister unveiled a 

truly remarkable budget. Only the announcement of a complete 

economic collapse would have made them feel comfortable, for 

then we too would be like them — pessimistic, disorganized, 

disbelieving. Never. No way. Not us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a budget is a reflection of a party’s philosophy. 

This budget is about investing in people, about creating more 

growth and jobs, about reaping the benefits of our work 

together. Contrast this with the federal Liberal budget in which 

they use the tax system not to distribute wealth evenly amongst 

all people but to redistribute wealth for big corporations and the 

very wealthy. 

 

In one major piece of legislation, Bill C-9, which was passed in 

November 1995, the federal Liberals opted to create new 

loopholes for the rich rather than close them. Bill C-9 ensures 

that estates of rich Canadians with more than 600,000 in 

property in the U.S. are reimbursed with Canadian tax credits 

for estate taxes paid in the U.S. That means other Canadian 

taxpayers like you and I have to make up for taxes paid by the 

very wealthy to the U.S. government. And believe it or not, this 

tax gift is retroactive to 1988. The Liberal way. 

 

As well, Bill C-9 gives tax deductions to Canadians who donate 

money to American universities. Thus Canadian taxpayers are 

subsidizing Ivy League universities in the States, while the 

federal Liberal government is slashing money earmarked for 

Canadian colleges and universities, making post-secondary 

education inaccessible to many middle-class and working 

Canadian youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s budget provides for the training 

of our young people so that they will be prepared with the skills 

necessary to take their rightful place in the work world. Of 

course we would like to do more, and we shall as circumstances 

allow us to. 

 

Again, let’s take a look at the federal Liberal floundering in its 

job creation policies. The federal Liberals budget’s job strategy 

states: the government’s overriding economic objective has 

been job creation, and “the government’s jobs and growth 

strategy has been working.” I suppose if you say something 

often enough, you will accept it as the truth. 

 

However, the fact is that when the Liberals were elected in  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

1993 there were 1.5 million unemployed. Guess what? That’s 

how many are unemployed today. And the number of young 

people unemployed is up by 6 to 7,000. Their strategy is really 

working. 

 

Unemployment has been running over 9 per cent in Canada 

since 1993. Compare that to Saskatchewan with the 

unemployment rate of 6.6. And the forecast in December of last 

year projected that unemployment would remain above 9 per 

cent this year and next. 

 

I’d like to point out a clipping from the newspaper which has 

the following: 

 

We have seen the country producing net more than 

700,000 new jobs. More than, as I have said, Germany, 

France, Great Britain, and Italy. 

 

Prime Minister Jean Chrétien in the House of Commons on 

Monday. 

 

What has happened? Well Finance Minister Paul Martin has 

also sounded the same call on many occasions, often citing the 

Prime Minister as his source. It has become something of a 

mantra, but it is no longer true. And even when it was true, it 

was somewhat misleading. 

 

This government has been very . . . the federal government has 

been very diligent about reducing the deficit. It set deliberate 

targets, took aggressive and ruthless action to realize them, and 

made conservative assumptions about economic conditions to 

ensure their success. 

 

On jobs, the federal government has a very different approach. 

The Liberals have set no targets, have adopted a passive 

approach of relying on the economic fundamentals in the 

private sector to generate new jobs, and have made no forecast 

of their own as if they had no direct responsibilities for jobs in 

the country. The price of the government’s success in deficit 

reduction has been a jobs crisis and the dismantling not only of 

our jobs but also social services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area I would like to say a few words is 

with regards to the health system. Mr. Speaker, as the Finance 

minister stated, this year Saskatchewan commemorates one of 

its finest achievements. Saskatchewan gave Canada medicare to 

enable everyone to receive the best health care that we could 

afford and sustain. 

 

This budget provides an additional 51 million more to our 

health districts for 1997-98. One out of three dollars of this 

government’s budget will be invested in health. We will 

provide a stable, safe, secure health system for the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s look at the Liberal plan. Last year the federal government 

authorized a national forum on health. The report of the national 

forum on health was released at the beginning of February. 

First, the national forum shares many of Saskatchewan’s beliefs 

and philosophies. Everyone has the right to the best health care 

we can afford, regardless of their  

ability to pay. The single-payer approach is the best way to 

provide health services. 

 

Second, the forum proposes an emphasis on home care and on 

improving primary care. That reflects our experience in 

Saskatchewan. Third, the forum supports an integrated child 

and family strategy including a national child benefit. We have 

been calling on this for a long time. Reducing child poverty is a 

key to improving the health of our population. Progress on this 

issue should be a top priority for all governments this year. 

What has the federal government decided to do? We can wait 

until 1998 and then we will make a modest beginning. 

 

Fourth, the forum proposes comprehensive national coverage 

for drugs and medicine. As our Premier stated, I am generally 

supportive of the idea, with two caveats. Such a program would 

require a major stable and long-term financial commitment 

from the federal government. And such a program would likely 

only be sustainable if Ottawa meets its election commitment to 

amend drug patent legislation passed by the previous 

government, that is inflating drug costs. 

 

A great report. Super recommendations. But where’s the 

financing? Promises never paid for a single medical procedure. 

Promises never paid for a single home care unit. Promises never 

paid for a single drug prescription. 

 

We found out in a hurry where Chrétien’s and Martin’s 

priorities lie. In the budget speech, medicare was cut by a 

whopping $2.5 billion, this year alone, 2.5 billion — $7 billion 

overall. Oh, they set aside a hundred million in each of the next 

three years for pilot projects to explore how provincial health 

plans could expand to cover the cost of prescription drugs and 

home care. However, no mention of reform of the patent on 

prescription drugs. No mention on increased funding. No 

enforcement of national standards. What we need is a new 

direction for health care in Canada. 

 

It requires that we make heath and health care a national 

priority. It requires that we recognize that saving medicare is 

not a matter of imposing Ottawa’s will on the provinces which 

have the constitutional responsibility for health care, but a 

matter of national leadership and priority. A new direction . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  A new direction for health care in Canada must 

bring together all government policy and measures. That 

includes the replacement of the Mulroney drug patent 

legislation with new rules that fairly balance patent protection 

with the need for reasonable, lower prescription drug prices. 

 

Politicians and the public should be using the current and 

critical debate on medicare as an opportunity to consider major 

shifts in the system. That must include priorities in health care 

delivery away from large institutions towards community-based 

care that really does respond more effectively to people’s needs. 

It is essential that a new, integrated approach to health care 

recognize home care as an important and cost-effective part of 

the system on an equal footing with hospital and traditional 

medical care. And we have to invest in the research and creative  



368  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

pilot projects that can keep Canada’s health system at the 

cutting edge. 

 

Some of this, of course, requires money. And the Liberals, 

Reformers, and Conservatives will tell us there is no money. Do 

you think 10 billion would do it? That amount represents a tax 

of less than 20 per cent on the 51 billion corporate profits that 

have gone completely untaxed in Canada since the Liberals 

took power less than four years ago — 20 per cent, a modest tax 

on huge profits. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the point isn’t what per cent of corporate 

profits should be taxed. The point is that there is a source of 

revenue to support medicare. Why do the Liberals refuse to use 

it? I think you know the answer to that as well as I do. 

 

In total, the federal Liberal government is reducing its national 

commitment to health care by 40 per cent. The Liberal’s idea of 

health care reform is to cut, cut, cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget fulfilled this government’s promise to 

reduce taxes when we could afford it and only when the cuts 

would be sustainable. Mr. Speaker, this budget introduced a 

responsible, sustainable tax cut for all people, reducing the sales 

tax from 9 to 7 per cent, a tax cut made possible by the 

sacrifices of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Permission to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that 

you’ll be as pleased as I am to see that we’re joined by 

Lawrence Yew, previous MLA in this House for Cumberland 

from 1982 to 1986. And I’ll even confess that at that time I 

worked as Mr. Yew’s assistant, and I think we did some pretty 

good work together there on behalf of northern people. 

 

He’s joined by Greg Ross, the mayor of Pinehouse, and his wife 

Shirley. And they were telling me about a very exciting project 

called Challenge 2000 where they’re putting forward a 

development plan for their community to assist the whole 

community towards independence. So I wish them success with 

their new plan in getting it implemented. And they were here 

today to participate in the infrastructure signing. So I would ask 

everyone to join me in welcoming them to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, to add to the comments 

of the minister. 

 

Leave granted. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I wanted to welcome Mr. and Mrs. 

Ross here. I met them for the first time a few moments ago. I 

did want to welcome . . . I particularly wanted to rise to 

welcome Lawrence Yew here. Lawrence and I were desk mates 

where the member for Battlefords and the member from . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Humboldt, thank you, sits. We sat 

there for four years. 

 

Lawrence was not just a desk mate; Lawrence became a good 

friend. In a period of time when I say there was only 10 of us, 

we didn’t have a lot of good friends, and we deeply cherished 

those we had. 

 

Lawrence brought a civility and a sense of humour to the 

Assembly which left an impression upon all who knew him. 

And I think I can speak on behalf of the members . . . I think I 

could say on behalf of the members who sat in the Assembly in 

that time, welcome back, Lawrence. We very much appreciated 

your contribution when you were here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again this 

government has shown by its actions that a fair, equitable 

taxation system allows a government not only to reduce the 

debt, cut taxes, but more importantly allows a government to 

improve on social programs. 

 

Fair taxation is the furthest thing to the Liberals. The opposite 

members favour the harmonization of the GST, which would 

increase the base of items taxed — children’s clothing, services, 

books — while allowing big corporations further advantages. 

Perhaps we should just take a look, a brief look at the history of 

the GST. 

 

The Mulroney Conservatives brought in the goods and services 

tax in 1990. The Liberals said they would get rid of it. Lord, it’s 

still there. I’m not sure where they are. 

 

Before the GST, the manufacturers’ sales tax that it replaced 

was paid at the manufacturers’ level. And about half the money 

it brought to the government came from manufacturers 

themselves, while the other half was passed on to the consumers 

in the form of higher prices. Thus consumers and corporations 

shared the tax equally. 

 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

But big corporations did not want to share. They wanted a tax 

that only ordinary people would pay, so they successfully 

lobbied the Conservatives to bring in the new GST — a scheme 

in which all the money paid by big corporations would be 

rebated. 

 

In the mid-1980s, the MST (manufacturers sales tax) was 

generating about 14 billion in government revenue. When the 

GST replaced it, about 7 billion of that revenue shifted from 

corporations to consumers — that is to middle-class and 

working Canadian families. 

 

Since the Liberals came to power in 1993, big corporations 

succeeded in lobbying them to abandon their election promise 

to get rid of the GST. Then they pushed Liberal Finance 

Minister Paul Martin to promote the original Conservative plan 

to harmonize the GST with the provincial sales tax schemes — 

HST (harmonized sales tax) — and the first letter does not stand 

for happy, but refers to a member of the equine family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan budget is a great beginning, and 

more will be done as circumstances warrant it. I’ve briefly 

touched on a few areas. Other colleagues of mine will develop 

some of the other areas — education, transportation, social 

programs. 

 

Investing in people — that’s what the budget is about. Come, 

join with us in building a better future for our children and our 

grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be voting for the amendments 

but will heartily support the motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

after watching my son last night, and his hockey team win the A 

side championship in the Regina South East Minor Hockey 

Association in a very exciting game which they won in the 

second overtime period, I didn’t think I could ever get my head 

around to lesser matters such as the provincial budget. But I’m 

going to give it a try, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a special pleasure for me to participate in the 

debate on this particular budget. I’ve been a member now since 

the fall of 1986 when I was first elected, and I’ve participated in 

many budget debates and have been able to look critically at a 

number of budgets since that time. 

 

The first budget . . . And, Mr. Speaker, while I might, I was 

given this information a few weeks ago and I’ve been looking 

for an opportunity to read it into the record because I know it’s 

one of these matters of great importance that members will 

remember for ever. And it’s one of those little things that serves 

to clarify for those people who are watching at home what the 

term “budget” is all about. 

 

And I quote from the book, Parliamentary Procedure, on page 

124, and it states that: 

 

Budget is derived from the word budge, an obsolete word for  

a small bag (Mr. Speaker). Budge is itself an anglicized form 

of the French “bouger.” 

 

Now I assume that I am pronouncing that correctly and my 

friend, the member for Regina Sherwood, I’m sure will correct 

me if I’m wrong in that, but it’s an anglicized form of the 

French “bouger,” which has the same meaning. 

 

In a pamphlet in 1733, entitled The Budget Open, Sir Robert 

Walpole, the Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer, 

our Finance minister, when explaining his financial measures, is 

satirically pictured as a quack doctor opening a bag filled with 

medicines and charms. And the expression appears to have 

come into use about this time, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the . . . 

 

I know that my fellow colleagues here in the Legislative 

Assembly are only too well aware of the meaning of the word 

“budget” and where it comes from, but I thought that some of 

the people at home, and especially those who are joining us 

now from communities that were not formerly serviced by cable 

TV, are now, can also be made aware of the origin of the word 

“budget,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that’s a bit of a digression, Mr. Speaker, from the 

comments that I wanted to make, but I did want to find an 

opportunity and I didn’t want to lose the opportunity or forget 

the opportunity, to clearly read it into the record and to make it 

clear for the people at home the origin of the term “budget.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my first opportunities to participate in budget 

debates were as a member of the opposition, when I sat on the 

other side of the Legislative Assembly. The first budget year 

that I was involved in involved a budget in which I didn’t 

participate. That was the 1986-87 budget, which I think will 

probably go down in Saskatchewan history, if not in Canadian 

history, if not in Commonwealth history, as the all-time 

whopper ever. 

 

That was the budget, Mr. Speaker, that was . . . well, a whopper, 

a doozy, a — what shall I say — a budget where the truth was 

at great variance with the actual events, Mr. Speaker, or the 

truth of the budget speech was at great variance with what 

actually happened. 

 

There was what you might say, a wide discrepancy between the 

forecast budget and the actual events, Mr. Speaker. I know 

because I spent, I spent some fair amount of time — not 

participating in the budget debate, obviously, because I was 

elected afterwards — but participating in an exercise in the 

Public Accounts Committee where we scrutinized that budget. 

 

And that budget was remarkable because that was a budget 

where the original forecasted deficit . . . and that was at a time 

that every year we were forecasting deficits. This may seem like 

a long time ago, but it wasn’t that long ago. It was only 10 years 

or so ago that every budget was a deficit budget. And that year 

the forecasted budget was about $300 million. And that was 

also the budget which carried us into the fall, I think it was, 

October 1986 election. 

 

So the budget came down in the spring, and said, well the  



370  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

deficit will only be $300 million. And I believe there were also 

words in that budget, as there were in preceding budgets, about 

Saskatchewan people should not become too alarmed about 

these deficits because these were matters that were under 

control, and if they weren’t under control they would shortly 

come under control, and certainly no reason for Saskatchewan 

people to become alarmed. But that particular budget forecast a 

deficit of $300 million. 

 

Later during the course of that year, I think a few months later, 

the government revised its estimate, I think after the legislature 

quit sitting. They revised its estimate of what the deficit would 

be from approximately $300 million to then $500 million — I 

believe approximately half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe that was during the election campaign that the 

then Finance minister said there’s no reason whatsoever, none 

whatsoever, what were people thinking when they even 

suggested this, that we should become alarmed about the fact 

that this projected deficit, or forecasted deficit in the budget, 

would be increasing from 300 million to $500 million. 

Absolutely no reason for the Saskatchewan public to become 

alarmed about that, because things were firmly in hand and 

$500 million was it — that was it, it wasn’t going to go any 

higher. No reason for anyone to become alarmed. That’s what 

the PC minister of Finance said in 1986. 

 

Of course we know, and history tells us, that the actual deficit 

that year wasn’t 300 million, it wasn’t 500 million — in fact it 

came in at $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s what I meant when I said that there was a wide 

variation between the initial forecast and the actual deficit that 

did occur during that fiscal year. And it will forever remain in 

Saskatchewan history a budget which will be pointed to as 

being an example of how not to budget, because it was a budget 

that missed its mark and missed it badly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that was the first budget year that I was involved in as a 

member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Now that was followed by the PC budget of 1987-88 which was 

the budget in which they set out to correct, to correct a huge 

deficit from the previous year. And I think members will recall 

that budget came down with a number of Draconian measures 

the likes of which we had never seen before in Saskatchewan. 

Among other things, I believe it totally abolished the children’s 

dental plan. 

 

And the 1987-88 budget, that budget occasioned a mass march 

on the Legislative Building. I believe there was something like 

10,000 Saskatchewan people that felt strongly about the budget, 

that they marched on the Legislative Building and participated 

in a rally to voice their displeasure of that budget. 

 

That budget was also significant because it probably is the latest 

budget that we’ve ever had in Saskatchewan, I believe. Now I 

stand to be corrected on that, but it was a very late budget 

which was preceded by a government spending, by special 

warrant, money that should have been provided through budget. 

But because they were so late in coming down with the  

budget of course, they had to spend money, they had to get 

money from somewhere, and they spent it by special warrant. 

 

So those were the first two budgets that I participated in. One 

budget that was completely off the mark, like nothing we’ve 

ever seen before and I dare say hopefully . . . well hopefully, if 

that sort of cast of characters is never returned, we may never 

see again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then a second budget that I think was, oh, it was very 

tough. It was a very tough budget; it was Draconian. But I think 

in other ways it was also punitive. It was a budget that seemed 

to single out . . . and the government of that time seemed to 

single out and take delight in singling out groups that would be 

hurt by the budget, and especially groups in urban 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And they would take a delight in pointing out how tough the 

budget was. And you could tell how tough the budget was by 

the criticism coming from specific groups in urban 

Saskatchewan. These are in the main, groups that were 

associated with anti-poverty measures, community groups that 

were involved in trying to better the lives of the people they 

worked with and the communities they worked with in urban 

Saskatchewan. And whether it was funding for transition 

houses, I believe was cut from that budget, any number of 

measures, they took delight in pointing out, as sort of affirming 

for the people of Saskatchewan, just how tough they were. 

 

This was also a useful device for them for focusing attention, or 

drawing attention away from areas where they were spending 

more. Members will recall that in 1986 the government also 

promised, I think it was a production loan for farmers, and were 

quite . . . Well what can I say? The production loan meant that 

the government was prepared to commit many more dollars for 

that sector of the economy. They also had money, incidentally, 

for other areas that they increased spending on. But as a means 

of drawing attention away from that, they singled out groups in 

urban Saskatchewan for special consideration. 

 

(1630) 

 

That budget was followed by a number of other budgets where 

government spending seemed to increase again. And one could, 

I suppose, say that the PC government of the day, the Devine 

government, did not have the will or courage or strength to stick 

by an effective, long-term deficit reduction program. And I 

know they would have found that difficult because their deficit 

reduction program did not contain, to my mind or the minds of 

the Saskatchewan people, the element, the basic element of 

fairness, that is required of budgets. 

 

If you want to ask Saskatchewan people, or people in any 

jurisdiction for that matter, to make do with less, make do with 

less in order to provide for, in this case a balanced budget for 

the public good, if you want people to make do with less or to 

give up something on behalf of the public good, then I think all 

those who are contributing in that way have the right to ask and 

have the right to expect that all members of the public, all 

members of society, will participate in that way. With the 

exception of course of those who can’t, the poorest of the poor  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

— people on welfare, the disabled, and people who are in 

special categories that prevents them from giving more because 

their lot in life is just so poor that they’re unable to do that. 

 

But the Tories seemed to take a different approach. In fact 

they’d pick out the poorest of the poor, single them out for 

special measures, and say, see that’s our deficit reduction 

program and that’s why it’s working. But they were never able, 

they were never able in those successive budgets, in those 

budgets, to get the support of the Saskatchewan public because 

the Saskatchewan public did not perceive their budget measures 

to be fair. 

 

Which I think stands in stark contrast to some of the budget 

measures that we put forward in the early ‘90s in our budget, 

Mr. Speaker — tough budgets, very tough budgets, but I think 

budgets that were characterized by fairness. That is to say, 

asking all Saskatchewan people, asking all the people in 

Saskatchewan, to contribute to the public good by reducing 

expectations of what it is that government might provide for 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Tories were not able to do that. They seemed to have a 

very strange set of priorities. The Tories seemed to have no 

money in the ‘87-88 budget for children’s dental care, 

notwithstanding the fact that the children’s dental plan was held 

up by other jurisdictions, not only in Canada but throughout the 

world, as an exemplary program of public administration 

designed to, in this case, reduce problems of children’s dental 

health. 

 

It was a model program, an excellent program, and also a very 

cost-effective program, and a program which put, I believe 

some hundreds of dental nurses to work in rural communities 

throughout Saskatchewan. The Tories got rid of the program, 

right? They said it was a way to save money; although the 

actual savings by going to the program that they used to replace 

it — that is to say, children must go visit their dentist — didn’t 

really seem to provide any savings as such, or if there were 

savings they were negligible. 

 

But at the same time, at the same time that the PC government 

was cutting back on programs for children’s dental health, they 

seemed to find the money to put into the construction of rural 

hospitals. Whether or not there would be any patients to attend 

these rural hospitals didn’t seem to be very important, Mr. 

Speaker. And that was because the Tories felt trapped to 

another curious, curious, or not so curious I guess but a very 

harmful public policy, and which seemed to be predicated on 

the notion . . . And I was reminded today, listening to the 

member from Melville in talking about how successive budget 

measures have in his view impacted the city of Melville, there 

seemed to be a sense of that as long as you look after Melville 

the rest of the world will take care of itself. 

 

And that seemed to characterize Tory policy in the ‘80s — that 

as long as I get a hospital for my town, it will help me in my 

re-election chances and as long as we get that, nothing else 

really matters. That’s the important thing. 

 

And I think that, in retrospect, is one of the most harmful  

aspects of public policy of the ’80s. And that is what I would 

call an overwhelming need to play constituency politics to the 

exclusion of the overall politics of the province; that there’s less 

concern about the public good than there is about the electoral 

chances of certain members in their constituencies. And that is a 

policy, Mr. Speaker, for which we are still paying today — 

paying today through interest payments on the debt we have, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It didn’t work anyway. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And it didn’t work anyway. I mean in 

the final analysis Saskatchewan public was not fooled. 

Saskatchewan public was wiser than the Tories gave them 

credit for and they saw through what it was that the Tories were 

doing. 

 

Even this so-called Fair Share program which the Tories hauled 

out in their last budget when they said that we’re going to close 

down all the government offices in Saskatoon; we’re going to 

move these government offices out to small towns in rural 

Saskatchewan. Even though it’s a greater cost to the public as a 

whole, we think it’s better. You know, it’s going to help their 

electoral chances by seen to be giving a special help to specific 

constituencies. 

 

The people in those constituencies says no, you have to think of 

the public good as opposed to the good of the sitting members, 

as opposed to the constituency politics. That’s the thing that you 

need to turn your attention to, Mr. Speaker. That was something 

that characterized the Tories and, as I say, we are still paying 

for. 

 

In the last budget that I participated in as a member of the 

opposition was the budget of 1991-92. This was the budget in 

which the PC government of the day made it clear that effective 

April 1 of that year they were going to harmonize the provincial 

sales tax with the goods and services tax. 

 

As you know, just prior to 1991 the Conservative government 

in Ottawa took away the manufacturers and processing tax, I 

believe there was on certain items, and put into place a goods 

and services tax – the GST – of 7 per cent. 

 

Then the federal government went after provinces to harmonize 

their sales taxes with this goods and services tax. On the face of 

it, without any further analysis, I guess it seems like a good 

thing. But when we started to examine it – when we started to 

examine it, two things came clear: one is that there would be a 

massive shift in tax burden off of corporations and onto the 

backs of consumers in Saskatchewan. That was one thing that 

became clear. 

 

Secondly, to realize that the province would be realizing less 

revenue from the harmonized goods and services tax than it 

would be from its own narrowly based provincial sales tax, Mr. 

Speaker, because the money flowed directly from the tax to the 

government. But in the case of the goods and services tax, there 

was a big shift off corporations onto the backs of consumers, 

whereas the government, as a corporation, as an entity, needed 

to concern itself with revenues — and we think it’s important  



372  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

that you do that. You can’t be very loosey-goosey about these 

things, as the Tories were in their years. 

 

But nevertheless, it was for those two reasons that we opposed 

the harmonization of the goods and services tax with the 

provincial sales tax — because it meant a massive shift off the 

corporation onto the backs of consumers, and in the process the 

government would have less tax revenue at a time that the 

government was faced with burgeoning deficits, at a time the 

government needed to hang on to every dollar that it had, 

without incurring or increasing the deficits because it was 

getting to be a serious problem at that point. 

 

And of course, as we found out shortly after 1991, once the 

books were opened up, we found that the problem was a 

horrendous problem — a problem that we are attempting to deal 

with, attempting to control, but is still a major, significant 

problem for us. I think that in this year’s budget we are 

proposing to spend somewhere in the neighbourhood of $750 

million, I believe, on interest payments on the debt which was 

rung up during the Tory years. 

 

Now I might, as an aside here, I might as an aside . . . I want to 

draw the attention of the public, Mr. Speaker, and not 

necessarily the members of the Legislative Assembly because 

the members of the Legislative Assembly know full well what 

the facts of the case are . . . But this was the rather curious 

comments by the member for Moosomin a few days ago and 

again during his intervention during the budget . . . or the throne 

speech debate, when the member for Moosomin somehow took 

the position that well, there was debt when they took over 

government in 1982 — “they” being the Devine PCs. There was 

a debt there and if they hadn’t done anything the debt would 

have increased anyway. So there really wasn’t any major 

increase in debt during the Devine years that resulted from any 

policies or actions by the Devine government; that there was 

somehow some miraculous increase from $3 billion to $15 

billion during those years. And that didn’t result from any 

conscious decision by the Devine government to increase the 

debt. 

 

Well of course we know that’s just . . . it just kind of happened, 

you know, even if they hadn’t been there — any government — 

it would just kind of happened. 

 

Well of course we know that’s not the truth. But that’s, I think, 

some kind of political lines that they were feeding themselves 

in the late ‘80s and early ’90s as a means of trying to explain to 

their firmest supporters, their hard-core support, that the debt 

really wasn’t an issue that they had any handling in or any 

dealing with and we could rightfully blame on the NDP or the 

Liberals or blame on the weatherman or blame on anybody but 

blame it on the Devine government. 

 

Well of course we know that’s not the case. We know that the 

debt, the total debt of the province was roughly, I believe, $3 

billion in 1982, and that debt was primarily a debt of the Crown 

corporations; that is to say SaskTel, SaskPower, where 

SaskPower borrowed money as they did to provide for the 

construction I believe in those years of the dam at Nipawin. 

This debt to be repaid back by those people who purchase  

power from SaskPower — there’s the people of Saskatchewan, 

the businesses of Saskatchewan. And then through your utility 

bills, you pay off that debt. 

 

It’s called a self-liquidating debt. Not a debt that the taxpayers 

have to take money out of pocket to pay for, but those who 

purchase electricity from SaskPower have to pay for. It’s 

self-liquidating debt if you would. And that was the nature of 

the debt that we had in 1982. Not the debt occasioned by the 

taxpayers spending more than was being brought in in tax 

revenues and having deficits, but a self-liquidating debt in the 

Crown corporations. 

 

That debt, Mr. Speaker, in the Crowns ballooned during the 

Devine years from 3 to $5 billion, which is a curious, a curious 

happenstance when you consider the ideological mind-set of the 

Devine PCs and of the PCs now that they don’t believe that 

Crowns should be doing anything, that there’s no role for 

Crowns; that there shouldn’t be a SaskPower, there shouldn’t be 

a SaskTel. 

 

We know of course what they thought about SaskEnergy, and 

they tried to privatize that. They did succeed in privatizing the 

Saskatchewan Potash Corporation. But notwithstanding their 

ideological zeal about not investing anything into Crowns, 

nevertheless the Devine PCs somehow managed to increase the 

self-liquidating debt in the Crown sector from 3 to $5 billion. 

 

The rest of the increase was an increase in . . . some was in debt 

liabilities, that is to say the construction of an upgrader. They 

borrowed money to build the upgrader and the government 

guarantees that debt. Although the government may not be out 

the money, the banks may be, the government guarantees that 

debt. So there was also a tremendous increase in that kind of 

debt during the 1980s. 

 

(1645) 

 

But the major increase in the debt came of course from the 

deficits which were rung up by successive PC administrations, 

starting with their very first budget, their very first budget in 

1982. For the 1982-83 budget year, the PCs rung up deficits. 

That is to say every year — every year — they borrowed 

money; they borrowed money in the market-place to make up 

for the shortfall between what they were spending and what 

they were bringing in — what they were spending on health, 

education, highways, any number of things, and the money they 

had coming in through tax revenues. 

 

So every year, every year they had a shortfall, and all these 

shortfalls, including the $1.2 billion shortfall in the 1986-87 

fiscal year which I spoke about earlier, all these shortfalls 

combined, I think, added up to about $8 billion or so; $9 billion. 

Where there was no shortfall in 1982, by 1991 we had an 

accumulated deficit or debt which the taxpayers are responsible 

for of many billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the PC 

legacy. 

 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that all those budgets had a real 

air of unreality about them. We were never very convinced that 

what they were putting before the Assembly reflected fact,  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

whether it reflected some fiction on the part of the government. 

We were never entirely satisfied. There always seemed to be a 

great divergence between what they said they were going to do 

and what the actual facts were. They never seemed to have a 

handle on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was interested to hear in this context the attacks by the 

member from Melville on the New Democratic Party opposition 

from 1986 to 1991 that we would criticize the government of 

that day of not spending in the appropriate places. And I must 

say to the member, I think we’re entirely justified given the 

information that the Devine government put before us and put 

before the public, which would always paint some rosy view of 

what our financial situation was, misleading Saskatchewan 

people and misleading the members of the Legislative 

Assembly about what the financial situation was. But that was 

the figures that you had to go on. 

 

But I guess the thing that concerned me the greatest was their 

sense of priorities. Where they seemed to have money for some 

pet projects, but they didn’t seem to have the money for what I 

consider to be important priorities. 

 

So if the member is saying well, you were wrong to criticize the 

Devine government in any way, I would say, not so fast. I think 

we were right to criticize them on the elimination on the 

children’s dental plan. I think we were right to hold them to 

account for that because at a time that they were cutting back 

with very little savings, if any — very little savings, if any — at 

the same time, they seemed to be finding millions upon millions 

and tens of millions of dollars for other priorities that they had, 

whether it’s in health care or what have you. 

 

And I spoke earlier of them being able to find the money to not 

only maintain hospitals that no one was using, but to put extra 

money into improving hospitals that Saskatchewan people 

weren’t using. And they built new hospitals that no one seemed 

to go to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think we were right to attack them on their priorities. Those 

weren’t the appropriate priorities in our view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1991-92, budgets have taken on a different 

cast. I find that the budgets since the 1991-92 fiscal years have 

been realistic. I find that they’ve been more accurate in their 

forecasts. They have also — and I don’t want to underestimate 

this for one moment — I think they have been very difficult 

budgets, difficult in the choices that were put before 

Saskatchewan people; difficult in what we were asking 

Saskatchewan people to support. 

 

And we were asking them to support many things. We were 

asking Saskatchewan people to give up programs and services 

to which they had become accustomed. We were asking 

Saskatchewan people to pay more out of their pocket to the 

Saskatchewan government to support the services and the 

programs that were left, and to pay for some nebulous concept 

called interest on the public debt. That’s what we were asking 

Saskatchewan people to do in 1991-92. We continue to ask 

them to do that. 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, out of this whole exercise, I am 

just tremendously proud of the Saskatchewan people for 

standing by us through these years the way that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these were difficult budgets, very difficult 

budgets, and I well remember the anguish and concerns that 

people had about what we were doing. But I think 

Saskatchewan people came to understand very quickly that 

these budgets were, although difficult, they were also necessary 

to restore fiscal integrity in Saskatchewan. They knew that we 

were headed down, that we were headed into . . . and as it’s 

been found out in recent days, that we were on the verge of 

bankruptcy. 

 

Now I don’t know if provincial governments can go bankrupt as 

such. I don’t think that a provincial government would ever put 

up with that. I guess the worst that could happen is that the 

federal government would then begin to write the provincial 

budgets and tell you how to run your fiscal affairs. 

 

But in any event, the government, the provincial government 

was, at that point, on the verge of bankruptcy as a province, Mr. 

Speaker, where we had indications that those who loan us 

money, those who buy our bonds — that is to say, they buy our 

word as represented on a piece of paper that we’re prepared to 

pay back to them the millions of dollars that are outlined on the 

bond instrument — there is a real question as to whether any of 

those who were buying bonds would buy our word or buy our 

bonds about our ability to pay back in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that was the real crisis that faced us in the early ’90s, Mr. 

Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . From a hundred 

borrowers, I believe we were reduced to 20, because many of 

these borrowers have restrictions on what it is that they can 

borrow. 

 

All provincial governments are given a credit rating by 

credit-rating agencies in New York and in Toronto and 

Montreal who assess the ability of provinces to be able to repay 

the monies that they have borrowed. And to give you on a 

graduated scale from excellent to insolvent, they grade you on 

your ability. 

 

And many of those institutions or organizations that will buy 

your bonds or loan you the money, they will have criteria which 

makes it impossible for them to, for example, borrow money or 

loan money to organizations that have what’s called a B credit 

rating. If you have an A credit rating they’re prepared to loan 

you whatever monies that they want, but if you have a B credit 

rating then they may have bylaws. And in fact there’s one group 

in particular that was the public servants of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  The city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And the city of Saskatoon, but also the 

public servants of Saskatchewan and the public pension plan for 

the province and the public pension plan from Saskatoon. I 

think the city of Saskatoon pension plan outright prohibited the 

purchase of any bonds from any organization or institution or 

government that had a B credit rating such as Saskatchewan  



374  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

had. So the city of Saskatoon pension plan was prohibited from 

loaning money to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And at the same time I believe that the public servants pension 

plan — these are the public servants that work for the province 

— they have a restriction as to the amount of money that they 

can borrow from governments or institutions or organizations 

with a BBB credit rating. 

 

But that was the circumstances and the times that we found 

ourselves in, Mr. Speaker. And I think Saskatchewan people 

understood that even if they didn’t know all of the specifics, 

they understood the circumstances that we were in, they 

understood that the province’s financial situation was in dire 

straits and that something had to be done. And when they saw 

what we did they said, well we don’t like what’s being done but 

you’re doing it in a fair and balanced way, and that is something 

that we can support, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 

Saskatchewan people were saying. 

 

Now it is really a pleasure to participate in a debate on this 

particular budget, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a pleasure because for 

the first time we have a budget that provides a great deal of 

sustained good news, and good news across the piece, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had good budgets in . . . we had a good budget I believe, in 

 or a positive budget in 1995-96, but the expectations that we 

might have had in that budget year were quickly dashed by 

news from Ottawa that their calculations on equalization 

payments hadn’t been quite correct, and therefore the 

Saskatchewan government owed Ottawa many hundreds of 

millions of dollars. Now that’s not something that they told us 

before the 1995 provincial election; that’s something that they 

held back after the 1995 provincial election. 

 

Now why a federal government, a Liberal government in 

Ottawa would withhold that kind of information from the 

Saskatchewan people, and the Canadian public for that matter, 

until after the provincial election was over with, is something I 

just will never quite understand, Mr. Speaker, why that 

information was being withheld. 

 

The only question I have, the only question I have on that whole 

business is, did any of you members of the Liberal opposition 

know about those cuts from Ottawa? And if you did, why didn’t 

you tell Saskatchewan people? That is the question that will be 

asked, and I demand, needs to be answered at some point. 

 

Because I tell you, I would love to have run the last campaign 

against what proved to be the only effective opposition party at 

that time — oh, maybe not that effective; I give some credit to 

the Conservatives as well, doing as well as they did — but 

against what were perceived to be the major opposition to the 

NDP, which was the Liberal opposition, and a federal Liberal 

government in Ottawa withholding information, major 

information, information that had major consequences for our 

budgeting and our finances. 

 

That information was being withheld and my question is, sir,  

did you as Leader of the Liberal opposition in those days — no, 

he wasn’t the Leader of the Liberal opposition in those days; 

someone else was the Leader of the Liberal opposition — but 

did you, did you as a member of that Liberal Party, were you 

made aware of what it is that Ottawa intended to do and 

intended to tell us after that provincial election campaign? Did 

Mr. Paul Martin, did Mr. Paul Martin call you to let you know 

that this was coming, but that he was going to hold off until 

after the election campaign? 

 

You know, that reminded me too much, too much of the old PC 

way of trying to fool people about what was really taking place 

with respect to provincial finances. And that question, I suspect, 

that question will at some point be answered. And I suspect that 

it will show one of two things, it will show one of two things. 

Either Mr. Paul Martin and the federal government let you 

know that this was coming and you asked him to hush it up, or 

you have absolutely no relationship at all with Paul Martin and 

you have no influence at all with the federal government in 

Ottawa. Neither one is much of a ringing endorsement of the 

Liberal Party opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I suspect it’s the first. You people knew but you weren’t 

telling, because you feared the political and electoral 

consequences of letting the Saskatchewan people know after the 

election . . . or before the election was held, that Saskatchewan 

people were going to get dinged with something approaching 

$250 million in equalization cuts, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 

something that you told us at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see it’s close to 5 and I want to carry on, but I 

suggest at this point that we recess until 7 p.m. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member has called the clock, and it 

now being near the hour of 5 o’clock the House will stand 

recessed until this evening at 7 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 343 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 343 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 343 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 343 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 343 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 344 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 344 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 344 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 344 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 358 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 358 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 368 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 368 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Passing of Justice J.G. McIntyre 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 344 

 Fire at Grace Haven 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 344 

 Success of Durafibre 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

 Floods in Swift Current 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 345 

 Movies That Couldn’t Have Been Made In Saskatchewan 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 345 

 Country Music Awards 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

 Naicam Cadet Corps 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 

 Cooperative Program between Sherwood Co-operative Association and Regina Catholic North-west Schools 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Saskatchewan’s 1993 Budget Crisis 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 349 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 349 

 Provincial Auditor’s Budget Comments 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 348 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 348 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 349 

 Mandatory Union Membership 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 349 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 350 

 Swift Current Area Flooding 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

 Health Reform 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 40  An Act to amend The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 

 Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 351 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 



 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 356 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 359 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 360 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 364 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 366 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 369 

 

 


