



















































Hansard: May 16, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1743 

 May 16, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on behalf 

of concerned citizens from Bienfait, Melville, and Pilot Butte. 

And the prayer of the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

would like to present petitions today to do with the creation of 

regional telephone exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of a regional telephone exchange in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are from Choiceland and Nipawin. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area 

by declaring it an accessible, protected wilderness area 

where sustainable, traditional cultural values and activities 

are maintained. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Saskatoon. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise with a 

petition on the issue of northern housing. I’ll read the prayer for 

relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

development a plan that will address the housing needs of  

northern residents in a timely manner. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is mostly signed by residents of Uranium City, but 

also from other northern communities including Camsell 

Portage, and Fond-du-Lac. I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens in the 

northern part of our province, and their concern is that there is a 

need for housing that is not being met. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

development a plan that will address the housing needs of 

northern residents in a timely manner. 

 

The petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, and Amyot Lake. I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 

present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned with the 

inadequate housing in the northern part of Saskatchewan. And 

the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

development a plan that will address the housing needs of 

northern residents in a timely manner. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are from the community of Green Lake. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions as well 

to present on behalf of Saskatchewan people. And I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the law banning stripping and invoking the 

notwithstanding clause of the constitution to enact 

legislation banning all stripping in establishments where 

alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from my constituency of 

Kindersley; communities of Kindersley, Eatonia, Coleville, and 

Kerrobert, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition as well to 

present to the Assembly and I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action  



1744  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping, and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions I have are signed by individuals from the 

Kindersley, Coleville, Dodsland, Eatonia, and Plenty areas, 

communities in the province of Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

the following petition and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping, and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And this comes from people in the communities of Meadow 

Lake, Kindersley, Brock, and Major. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following four 

petitions have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they 

are hereby read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime in 

Saskatchewan; 

 

Of citizens humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may 

be pleased to cause the rebuilding of Highway No. 155; 

 

Of citizens praying that your Hon. Assembly may be 

pleased to urge the government to stop contributing to 

rising farm input costs; finally 

 

Of citizens humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may 

be pleased to enact legislation banning all stripping in 

establishments where alcohol is served. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and to the rest of the members of this House, a 

former member who served the people of Saskatchewan in a 

very honourable way — Mr. Wilf Gardiner — who is seated 

behind the bar behind the official opposition. I know that all 

members would want to join me in welcoming him to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Also Mr. Gardiner’s daughter and granddaughter are also sitting  

in the east gallery as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would 

ask that all the members of the Assembly welcome Mr. 

Gardiner and his family to the legislature this morning. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

pleased today to introduce to you and to all members of the 

legislature, a school group that’s travelled from Kindersley 

down to Regina in the last few days. They’ve been in the city 

touring all different kinds of venues in the city and I’m very 

pleased to introduce to you a group of 60 grade 7 students 

seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their teachers are Tracy Walker and Dave Burkell. And their 

chaperons today are Gordon Grainger, Marilyn Helgason, Peggy 

Holton, Lorie Kuervers, Janice Kydd. And the bus drivers are 

Jim Baker and Werner Krahn. 

 

And I’m very pleased to introduce to you and all members of 

the legislature and I’d ask everyone to please give them a warm 

welcome to the legislature here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have the 

honour of having two groups in the west gallery today. 

 

Swanson Christian School from Delisle, Saskatchewan has 16 

students from grade 7, 8 and 9 sitting in the west gallery, and 

their teacher, Ben Ginther; chaperons Ron Klassen, Walden 

Toews, Paul Regehr, and Ray Toews. 

 

And I would ask you to welcome this group as I will be meeting 

with them later today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would like to also ask you to extend a welcome to Maymount 

School. There are 10 students from grade 11 and 12 also sitting 

in the west gallery with their teacher, Austin Harphan. 

 

And I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

two groups. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d also like 

to introduce to the Assembly today, to you and through you, 19 

grade 8 students from Porcupine Plain, Saskatchewan. I’m 

delighted that they’re here today with their teachers, Anthony 

Lau, Gwen Levick, and Helen Kwasney. 

 

I’m going to be meeting with them between 11 and 11:30. And 

I look forward to answering any questions and we’ll talk to you 

later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

the member from Kelvington-Wadena in welcoming the 

students and teachers from Porcupine Plain. 

 

I don’t know if you know where Porcupine Plain is, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s in the north-east part of the province. It’s the 

home of Quilly Willy, the porcupine, and very close to 

Greenwater Provincial Park, a wonderful community. 

 

Enjoy your stay in Regina and have a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, I would like to introduce in the west gallery, Susan 

Saunders, who’s the president of the Saskatchewan Dental 

Assistants’ Association. Susan’s from my constituency, from 

the town of Watrous. And I’d like all members to welcome her 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you along with our colleague from Watrous, I would as well 

like to welcome Susan Saunders here today. Hopefully we’ll be 

able to get the issue on the table that she’s here to address and 

we’ll do everything we can to do that. And I’d ask the 

Assembly to welcome her again as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Institution of the Year Award 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with 

pleasure that I tell you that this evening in Charlottetown, P.E.I. 

(Prince Edward Island) our Education minister will be 

receiving, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Canadian Association for Community Education National 

Award for Institution of the Year. 

 

She receives this national award with Gillian McCreary, 

executive director of planning and evaluation branch with 

Saskatchewan Education, in recognition of their contributions 

to community education through Saskatchewan’s very 

successful community schools program. 

 

Faye Stupnikoff from the Saskatchewan Community Schools 

Association made the nomination. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our premier often says caring, 

compassion, and community values are the glue that bonds our 

country together. Community schools put these principles in 

action. 

 

The community schools program has been in operation since 

1980. Despite the constraints facing our government, we 

committed to a major expansion of the program in 1996, 

allowing us to reach more neighbourhoods, more schools, more  

children. 

 

I’m also very proud of the recent announcement respecting the 

establishment of an early intervention pre-kindergarten program 

in our community schools. This program will allow us to 

address the child’s needs during the critical early years. 

 

Last November the Government of Saskatchewan was awarded 

the Champions for Children Award for our action plan for 

children. Once again, Saskatchewan is recognized nationally for 

another successful program. This award shows our commitment 

to the education and well-being of Saskatchewan’s children . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order, The member’s time has 

elapsed. 

 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Fashion Show 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

Mother’s Day the Ile-a-la-Crosse Friendship Centre held a 

fashion show for the community. Forty young people 

participated in this show and it was enjoyed by all spectators, 

including myself and the participants’ parents. 

 

The fashion show was an inspiration of a group of young 

people who meet on a regular weekly basis to learn important 

life skills and personal development techniques. A visionary 

woman at the friendship centre identified a need in the 

community and formed this group to fill that need. 

 

Often, major department stores will conduct northern model 

searches but many youth did not have the necessary resources to 

acquire the professional photographs these companies are 

looking for. On June 7 the centre is bringing in a representative 

from She Modelling in Saskatoon to teach these young girls 

different modelling poses. At the same time a professional 

photographer will be there to take their pictures. Each girl will 

receive an eight-and-a-half by eleven photo to keep in her 

portfolio. 

 

It is important for us to understand the impact that such groups 

have on northern youth. It is not only about modelling; it is 

about providing these young girls with the strengthened sense 

of self-worth and hope for the future. 

 

This is a very healthy group that has a policy of zero tolerance 

of any kind of negative behaviour towards their peers. The 

friendship centre and these young people should be commended 

for the positive group they have formed. And I hope that similar 

initiatives are occurring and will be considered in other 

northern communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canadian National Institute for the Blind Letter of 

Acknowledgement 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A month  



1746  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

ago I was pleased to stand in this Assembly and acknowledge a 

unique partnership between the Regina Public Library and the 

Canadian National Institute for the Blind. I explained how this 

partnership would allow visually impaired and print-disabled 

individuals access to the information they want in the format 

they need. 

 

I noted too that the CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the 

Blind) library is the largest producer of alternative formatted 

material: Braille, tactile, audio, and electronic text. And I 

congratulate the community focus of both organizations as an 

example of working together and cooperating together in the 

best interests of everyone. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, recently I received a letter of 

acknowledgement from Mr. Euclid Herie, president and chief 

executive officer of CNIB, who had received a copy of this 

statement. 

 

In the letter, and I quote, he states: 

 

This approach has attracted considerable attention from 

other public libraries, and it is therefore a credit to Regina 

and Saskatchewan. This partnership model will hopefully 

be repeated in other Canadian districts since blind people 

and others needing access to print live in all these 

communities. 

 

The letter of acknowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 

typewritten and written in Braille. Since I’m sure this reply 

would be of interest to all of my colleagues in the Assembly, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased at this time to add this formal 

acknowledgement to the public record, and to table this letter 

here in the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Questionnaire to Farmers about Farm Marketing Board 

Changes 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Earlier this 

week the official opposition raised concerns about a Bill before 

this House in which the government is threatening the 

democratic rights of farmers. If passed, the government will be 

given the authority of wiping out marketing boards without 

allowing producers the right to ultimately decide the issue 

through a democratic vote. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a an unusual turn of events, the Premier 

himself spoke on this issue and offered advice to those of us in 

the opposition benches. He stated that, and I quote: 

 

You ask your constituents how you should be voting on 

this Bill. You want time to consult with your 

constituencies? We’ll give you the time to consult with 

your constituencies . . . but make sure you consult with 

them in fact and in substance and in all honesty. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this is good advice. And as 

a result I am immediately sending every farmer or rancher 

within my constituency a letter outlining the Premier’s  

suggestion and promise of time to consult. I’m asking each 

producer to fill out a questionnaire answering whether they 

support the principle of maintaining the democratic right of 

farmers to vote, and ultimately decide whether their marketing 

board should be dissolved. 

 

In closing, I await the responses and advice of my constituents, 

and it is my sincere hope that the Premier will make good on his 

promise. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dedication of Stuart Houston Ecology Centre 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday I took 

the Minister of Environment to Redberry Lake in my 

constituency where he dedicated the Stuart Houston Ecology 

Centre at the Redberry Lake migratory bird sanctuary. 

 

The minister has come, now I invite all members of the 

Assembly and of the public to make a trip to this centre as part 

of their vacation plans. It will be worth your while. I have 

mentioned the sanctuary in the House before. It was established 

in 1915 and has long been known for its nesting colony of 

white pelicans and for its scoter population. The lake provides 

an excellent eco-tourism site for the observation of these two 

species, and other rare animals and plants such as the 

endangered piping plover. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the dedication of the Stuart Houston 

Ecology Centre gave us an opportunity to pay tribute to the 

life’s work of Dr. Houston, a man of enough careers to satisfy 

any three other individuals. He is a doctor, a professor of 

medicine, a health activist, and on this day, pre-eminently a 

conservationist who has dedicated his life to the study and 

preservation of the birds of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, among his accomplishments was a study 

and a banding program of the pelicans at Redberry Lake. Dr. 

Houston has always shared his time and his knowledge with 

young naturalists . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has 

expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Can-Am Bowl set for Porcupine Plain 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We often 

think of international football being played in a city; however 

this summer the town of Porcupine Plain will host the first 

Can-Am Bowl featuring a six-man football game between the 

best graduating players from Saskatchewan and the best from 

the United States. 

 

The Saskatchewan team was picked at a one-day try-out at the 

Hilltops facility in Saskatoon. Coaches for this year will be 

Ollie Marciniuk of Hafford and Phil Guerbert of Outlook. 

 

Terry Andrusiak, a teacher and football coach at Porcupine  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

Plain High School, and Rocky Chysyk, teacher and football 

coach at Bjorkdale, participated in an exhibition game in 

Gordon, Texas and they’re the co-organizers of this event. 

 

Small town Saskatchewan once again proved that they can think 

big. The support from Porcupine Plain and Bjorkdale has been 

outstanding. 

 

Once the players get to Porcupine Plain they’ll be treated to 

small town hospitality with free accommodations which have 

been booked for weeks and meals catered in the community 

hall. Many pre-game activities have been planned for the 

football players and their visitors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the coaches for arranging this sporting event, the 

towns of Porcupine Plain and Bjorkdale for supporting the idea, 

and wish Saskatchewan the best of luck in the game. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Skills Champs 

 

Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 

take a moment today to acknowledge two residents from 

Nipawin who have just won the Saskatchewan Provincial CAA, 

the Canadian Automobile Association, and Ford Student Auto 

Skills Championship. 

 

On May 2, Jay Connant and Steven Rommel, students from L.P. 

Miller High School in Nipawin, along with their instructor, Tim 

Paetkau, travelled to Yorkton and demonstrated their 

automotive diagnosis and repairing skills against seven other 

high school teams. 

 

The team proved to be superior to the others as they quickly 

diagnosed the problem of their vehicle and then completed the 

appropriate repairs. The time limit for the contest, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, was 90 minutes. Jay and Steve completed repairing 

their vehicle in 35 minutes. 

 

Their next challenge will come at the national competition to be 

held in Vancouver next weekend. 

 

I want to congratulate both Jay and Steven for their efforts and 

wish them the best of luck as they prepare for the national 

championship. 

 

I also want to acknowledge their industrial arts instructor, Tim 

Paetkau, for the enthusiasm and dedication he has shown in 

encouraging L.P. Miller School students to consider learning 

these skills. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Youth Suicide 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Time and time 

again this session we have been pointing out the fatal flaws of  

the NDP government’s social policies. Today we have more 

evidence to show just how imperfect the system is. 

 

The 1989-1994 report of Child Injury in Saskatchewan found 

that 25 per cent of young women in this province between the 

ages of 15 and 19 were hospitalized because of self-inflicted 

wounds — 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five per cent of all 

young women in this province are trying to kill themselves. 

 

Will the Minister of Health explain what he feels, and the 

reason why so many young people in this province, especially 

the women, have lost the will to live? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, any time anyone attempts to 

take their life, it’s a very tragic situation. And all of us in 

society have to do everything we can to prevent that from 

occurring. 

 

We need policies at the governmental level that will encourage 

people to have good interaction with others and to have a happy 

life. We also have to be very kind to each other at the individual 

level. And we’ve got to have a lot of compassion in our society 

if we have these kinds of problems. 

 

I don’t know about the figures the member is citing, Mr. 

Speaker, but I have to say what we need to do at a societal level, 

in government, and in our own lives, is engender a lot of 

compassion and kindness to try to prevent people from being 

depressed and trying to take their own lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 

North, the situation is even more grave. And my question is for 

the Minister of Northern Affairs: 

 

Forty-five per cent of young girls between the ages of 15 and 19 

were hospitalized because of suicide attempts — 45 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, almost double the provincial average. These 

young girls are trying to kill themselves because they have little 

hope for the future. This is not surprising considering this 

government’s lack of commitment to social and economic 

justice for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time is running out for these young people, who 

often fall victim to drugs, solvent, and child abuse. If this 

government does not believe that these injuries are related to 

the lack of hope that these young women are obviously feeling, 

perhaps the Minister of Northern Affairs would like to share 

with us what he thinks is causing them to try and take their own 

lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, it is indeed always tragic 

when you deal with the issue of suicide, whether it’s one or the 

number that the member quotes. I think it’s very important to 

deal with this in a highly compassionate level. 

 

In my experience, when I looked at the suicide levels — and 

this is not only for young women but also young men as well  



1748  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

— I look at my experience in Cumberland House back in the 

early ’80s, you know, with the situation there being pretty 

grave. But I notice that there was about 13 that had committed 

suicide over a three-year period. And what happened was that a 

lot of the people pulled together at the community level because 

it required a community-based approach. 

 

And when we looked at it, there was a lot of families pulling 

together. And in that way, that is the approach that we try and 

take in working with the community to make sure that there is a 

compassionate process in dealing with this grave issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is time 

that this government face the consequences of its lack of action. 

The report indicates the leading cause of hospitalization 

amongst young, urban, northern, and treaty women in 

Saskatchewan is suicide attempts. In northern Saskatchewan, 45 

per cent of hospital admissions is a result of this. 

 

These young women are crying out for help and this NDP 

government remains deaf to their pleas and blind to their tears. 

 

The author of the report hoped the information would be used 

to determine the area’s greatest need in order to plan and 

deliver effective programing. And according to the Institute on 

Prevention of Handicaps, the report was to serve as a catalyst 

for injury control programing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say that the figures revealed on the North 

is one of the areas of greatest need. What commitment can you 

make today that’ll give these young people hope and a reason to 

believe in the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, there was three aspects, you 

know, to that question that I think I will deal with. One, the 

aspect of health, the other aspect of jobs, and the other aspect of 

community. I already touched on the community-based 

approach. 

 

I think in the aspect of health, we had put in 7.3 per cent more 

money. We built a . . . we’re starting with a hospital in La 

Loche. We are trying to as well, to get three more public health 

nurse positions in the North this year, another million to help a 

doctor stay in the North. And also teen parenting programs. We 

had a budget in the social services sector moving from 12 

million to 25 million, which it will impact the North as well. 

 

So we’re doing approaches in that sense, and working with the 

community to try and help people. This week I was there with a 

member trying to get the student games in the North to try and 

get a sense of well-being for students, because people want 

hope for the future. 

 

Our job strategy is in the mines — 1,000 new jobs in the mines 

gives a lot of positive feeling for people in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s how we are dealing with it. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For the past 

two days in this House the Liberal opposition has questioned 

why Justice department officials have interfered with the Chief 

Electoral Officer’s release of a report into political fund-raising. 

The former Justice minister says he’s not aware of any policy 

which would prevent Mr. Kuziak from releasing his report at 

this time. However, the current Justice minister says there is 

such a policy. But neither minister has yet explained why there 

are such differing views or why there has been interference. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer released two 

reports yesterday on provincial party spending during and after 

the 1995 provincial election. For all we know, the findings in 

the Kuziak report may not be any more or less controversial 

than the reports which were tabled yesterday. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice or his designate explain why his 

department would not advise Mr. Kuziak to withhold reports 

detailing election spending results, but has advised against 

releasing his report on election fund-raising. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that he is not accurate when he says the 

minister hasn’t responded to him. In fact from the Hansard 

from yesterday I believe, when the member that asked the 

question today was asking questions, and I want to quote, he 

said: 

 

Thanks (Thank you), Mr. Minister. So I take it that there 

would be no discussion with your officials to see if they 

would reconsider the direction that they gave (to) the Chief 

Electoral Officer? 

 

That’s the question you asked in the House a few hours ago. 

And this was the response that the minister then gave. He said: 

 

. . . I have to reiterate that my officials did not give a 

direction. 

 

He said that to you yesterday — that they did not give a 

direction. And he went on to say: 

 

And . . . (that) I think (is) the difficulty here, is that . . . 

(there are) some assumption that anybody can direct the 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

As you’re assuming we can do or should do. Now I know that’s 

not the way it was back in the ’60s when Ross Thatcher 

gerrymandered the boundaries, the electoral boundaries in this 

province . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here we go. We’re 

living back in the past again. This is something that happened a 

year ago. There’s been an investigation. We can’t get this 

government to come up with a report that they should demand 

be released as well as us. What’s wrong with it? For all we 

know all three Saskatchewan major political parties could be 

implicated in this report on fund-raising, and so too could the 

official agents who oversaw the fund-raising efforts of these 

parties during the years in question. 

 

The Minister of Justice told this House last evening that a factor 

in advising Mr. Kuziak to withhold his report was the fact that, 

and I quote to the Deputy Premier: 

 

. . . within the Department of Justice . . . you look at 

whether the release of a report would affect an election . . . 

 

Will the minister explain if this might become an election issue 

because one of these official agents I have referred to and one 

who could possibly be implicated, is now a federal New 

Democratic candidate? Shouldn’t people know if there’s been 

any wrongdoing; and if there has been no wrongdoing, 

shouldn’t the shadow of suspicion be lifted off the shoulders of 

our political parties and all our official agents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member opposite continues to 

insist that the Minister of Justice or someone should influence 

and make the release come today. The fact of the matter is that 

this is an independent position. And I want to go on to continue 

the quote of the minister last night, because I think it’s 

important to realize that this question has been answered, and 

what you’re doing now is trying to rev up for your political 

friends in the Liberal Party, who all the polling would indicate 

are doing very, very poorly in this election, and to try to get 

some of the Reform back for the Liberals. 

 

And this goes on. Yesterday it was the Conservatives asking 

questions on behalf of the Reform. Today you’re asking on 

behalf of the Liberal Party. I would argue that why don’t we 

finish up the business of the House today and go out and 

legitimately campaign, instead of using the platform of the 

Assembly, of question period, to try to bolster the support for 

the Reform Party or for your failing Liberal efforts here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that this is an independent position. 

The report will be released at his discretion, not at the political 

advantage of the Liberal Party. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. Next question. 

 

Health Care Worker Injuries 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday the 

1996 annual report of the Workers’ Compensation Board was 

released and it revealed some telling facts about what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan’s health care system. 

 

Saskatchewan health care workers are overworked, and the  

burden caused by this government’s wellness model has had a 

startling effect. 

 

In 1992 the Workers’ Compensation industry code for health 

care in Saskatchewan showed a $3.3 million surplus. Last year, 

after the effects of this government’s health care cuts had taken 

their toll on health care workers, the increased number of injury 

claims caused a $14.8 million deficit in the health workers 

injury pool. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you admit the wellness model is having a 

detrimental effect on our health care workers, and will you tell 

the Assembly what you’re doing to reverse this alarming trend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member should know that 

as a result of the recent budget, there is funding made available 

to the health districts to look into the problem of workplace 

injuries in the health sector, which are a problem that have not 

arisen this year as the member suggests. This is an ongoing, 

serious problem in the health care system. Any time there is an 

increase in workplace injuries we should take it very seriously 

and look into it very carefully. 

 

That in fact, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what we’re doing. We’re 

working with the management and with the unions to try to find 

ways to combat workplace injury in the health care sector. 

We’re going to continue to make every sincere effort to do that. 

This is a very serious issue. It’s not an issue that we should play 

politics with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope that meant that 

he’s actually going to do something not just look at doing 

something. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Workers’ Compensation Board annual report 

also shows that hospital and nursing home care workers had the 

highest number of claims settled in 1996, while nursing aides 

and orderlies were the second highest of all occupations in 

terms of injuries suffered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the so-called wellness model imposed by this 

government is not only causing an increase in injury for health 

care workers, it’s also leading to dangerous situations for 

patients because nurses are overworked. 

 

Our office has had a call from a woman whose husband was a 

psychiatric patient at Regina General Hospital. Not once, but 

twice last week, this gentleman was discovered wandering 

around outside the hospital. His wife said the nurses told her 

there was simply too much work and not enough workers to 

provide adequate supervision for all patients. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it going to take a tragedy before your policies 

are changed and before you stop endangering the residents of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1750  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered the member’s 

question and said that we are taking direct action at the present 

time. 

 

But I want to say to the House that coming from the Liberal 

Party, Mr. Speaker, this is complete hypocrisy. Because what 

that party is doing in this province, Mr. Speaker, this year is 

cutting health care spending by $53 million, which is being 

completely back-filled by this New Democratic Government. 

Which is why, Mr. Speaker, in the April, Canadian Medical 

Association News there’s this headline. It says: “Ottawa fails to 

protect medicare”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Liberals failed to fund medicare. New Democrats 

are properly funding medicare. We are dealing with the 

problems in the health care system that exist across the country 

because of the federal Liberal government. It is complete 

hypocrisy for the Liberal opposition to get up and suggest that 

they’re not the source of the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Protection Services 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. 

Minister, your government’s statements about the children who 

have died in your care aren’t very reassuring. You say there is 

an internal review process going on, but for six of these 

children the cause of death is listed as undetermined. 

 

What good is your internal review process when six children 

die and you can’t even figure out why they died? Can you 

answer this question, Mr. Minister: how can six children die in 

your care and you don’t even know why they died? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, because of the significance 

of this issue, when this government was elected in 1991, one of 

the first initiatives we undertook was to institute a review policy 

for child deaths in this province, well and years before other 

provinces have determined that they too must follow this 

course. 

 

When a child dies in this province, there will be an 

investigation by the coroner. We share those results in the 

review with the child advocate. There are internal reviews 

conducted within the Department of Social Services. 

 

In the last five years, Mr. Speaker, in the last five years in 

Saskatchewan, with children who have had some involvement 

— either directly or with their families — to the Department of 

Social Services, there have been 55 child deaths in five years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of those, 15 were accidental, 28 were natural, 1 was a suicide, 

5 were homicides, and 6 to date are undetermined. And we have 

had, of course, the medical expertise, the coroner and others 

involved, and they are not able, simply, to determine the cause 

in these six deaths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A further 

question to the minister. Mr. Minister, how many of these 55 

children have died as a result of neglect or abuse? 

 

And one would see where you might have trouble answering 

that question if your review process is not working as well as 

you would like it to. And I would just ask you, Mr. Minister, if 

you could answer that simple question. Has there been anything 

that would show that a number of these children have died as a 

result of abuse or neglect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in my absence 

from the House, as I was signing with the Beardy’s Reserve a 

child and family services agreement to even strengthen the 

process of dealing with children in the province, Mr. Speaker, a 

member of this legislature made accusation about abuse and 

neglect. 

 

If members of this legislature are going to make such public 

accusations, I believe it is incumbent on members therefore to 

share the evidence they have — the evidence that they must 

have to make such accusations — with the senior officials of 

the Department of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that, I think, is incumbent upon each and every 

citizen of the province and particularly incumbent on public, 

elected officials who have platforms on which to speak from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have considered each of these deaths over the 

last five years through the policy that has been put in place. 

There have not been charges of abuse or neglect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Apology for Remarks about Reform Leader 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier or for his designate. Mr. Premier, your NDP 

members continue to be unrepentant and arrogant about your 

back-bencher’s Nazi comments. You throw a stone in the dark 

and the dog yelps, you know you hit the dog. That’s what the 

Minister of Agriculture said yesterday. Obviously the 

Agriculture minister thinks the member for Regina South hit the 

target when he compared Preston Manning to a Nazi. 

 

What’s wrong with you people? You just don’t seem to get it. 

You don’t seem to understand the line that you’re crossing. 

Your members continue to cross it again and again — arrogant, 

intolerant, and offensive. 

 

Mr. Premier, on Wednesday you made the member of Regina 

South apologize. On Thursday the Minister of Justice had to 

apologize. Are you today going to make the Minister of 

Agriculture apologize? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what 

comments the member’s referring to. All I know is that the 

individual member from Regina South who made the initial 

comments here in the Assembly, on which the members of the 

Conservative Party continue to try to rev this up for some 

purpose, has apologized here in the Assembly — has  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

apologized here in the Assembly. 

 

I think if you’re legitimately concerned about the issues that are 

being raised in the campaign and where the campaign is going, 

which is obviously what you’re doing, you should be asking 

your friends in the Reform Party why they want to do in the 

Canadian Wheat Board and why they want to destroy medicare. 

That’s the issue you should be raising here if you want to be out 

campaigning. 

 

The member from Regina South has apologized. It’s my 

understanding when members of the legislature apologize here 

in the House, the apology is to be accepted. I think that’s the 

rule of the Assembly and I would urge you to do that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  To compare the Canadian Wheat Board 

concern with Nazi concerns is an insult to those individuals and 

you know it. We’re talking about the last two on this issue, not 

the first one, and you know that too. 

 

Mr. Premier, it must make you very proud that it’s the NDP, 

your NDP that is now known as a party of intolerance in this 

federal election. I know it makes me happy to see the NDP 

showing the voters their true colours at last time. Mr. Premier, 

at least the member for Regina South has the rightful spot in 

your government, in the very back bench with the rest of your 

NDP. Not exactly a Mensa convention back there is it, Mr. 

Premier? 

 

Will you be asking the ministers of Justice and Agriculture to 

join him by removing them from the cabinet? Or are you simply 

going to condone this level of arrogance and intolerance within 

your NDP government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think the Premier has dealt 

with the issue in saying that he didn’t condone the comments 

but that he accepted the apology of the individual involved. 

And I would encourage that member to accept the apology as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Avon Brochures in Government Mailboxes 

 

Mr. Boyd:  My question this morning is for the Deputy 

Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, as you know, I’ve always liked to 

encourage people to start new business ventures here in 

Saskatchewan, but I don’t think people should be running 

business out of the legislature on government time. This 

morning our office received an Avon catalogue in our mailbox. 

It came from the NDP caucus office administrator and it gives 

the NDP caucus office number as the business number. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, your NDP caucus administrator is selling 

Avon products out of the NDP caucus office and she was good 

enough at least to put one of their catalogues in our mailbox 

this morning. 

 

Mr. Premier, I know all of us probably could use some more 

personal grooming products, but do you think, but do you think 

it’s appropriate for a government employee to be selling Avon  

products out of the NDP caucus office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The old adage, “Avon calling.” I 

don’t know why they would send it to the Leader of the Third 

Party. I could understand if it were to some other members. 

 

But seriously, I say to the member opposite I’ll look into it. I 

have no idea how it ended up in his mailbox or if you picked it 

up somewhere else or how you got it. I want to apologize if 

you’re insulted by the fact that an Avon brochure was sent to 

you. But on a serious note I will look into and get back to the 

member as to how it happened. 

 

On the other hand, there are members who work in caucus 

office who are even on the payroll of government while they 

run political parties, i.e., Melenchuk, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party, collects a paycheque from the taxpayers at the same time 

as he’s out campaigning in the election. And I noticed him on a 

number of podiums with federal candidates. One can argue that 

he shouldn’t be doing that while he’s on the payroll. 

 

But I will check into the issue for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regional Park Funding 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan minister in charge of 

Environment and Resource Management issued a new release 

yesterday announcing the provincial park season has officially 

begun. The news release also notes, in addition to offering a 

recreation for the whole family, our parks provide an important 

economic stimulus to the province’s hospitality industry. And I 

agree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister appears to recognize how important 

our provincial and regional parks are to tourism, but fails to 

recognize the need to properly fund our regional park system. 

Will the minister explain why a regional park budget of $2 

million only a few short years ago is now only $75,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

thank the hon. member for the question. We have been working 

with both the provincial park system and the regional park 

system for a number of years. The provincial park system we 

are able to maintain, along with fee increases. 

 

Also a lot of the regional park funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

was capital infrastructure work and this has been carried out. 

The funding has been completed for these projects. And as the 

capital infrastructure work projects have wound up they have 

not been renewed. No new capital structure funding has been 

provided. 

 

I’ll be meeting with the regional parks people very shortly to 

discuss ways that we can work together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1752  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 236  The Chief Electoral Officer 

Accountability Act 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

stand today and move that Bill No. 236, The Chief Electoral 

Officer Accountability Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Drew 

Johnston, who is the senior health professions analyst with the 

policy and planning branch of the Department of Health. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a brief 

comment on this Bill. Certainly all parties affected are very 

happy that this legislation is proceeding, and certainly all the 

groups have indicated that to me. However, they have also 

indicated that there is an amendment that they’d like to see 

brought forward to this Bill, Mr. Chairman. And at the 

appropriate time, which will be in clause 43, I will be 

introducing that amendment. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Before I recognize the minister I would 

ask all members to very much quieten down the hum of 

conversation. I know that . . . I think the point has been made. I 

hear one hon. member saying, I can’t hear you, Mr. Chairman. 

Point made. And I ask all hon. members to allow the 

consideration of Bill No. 17 to carry on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to 

thank the member from Arm River for his comments. I 

understand the member from Arm River will be proposing an 

amendment to section 43 of the Bill when we get to section 43, 

and we will not be supporting that amendment. I want to 

explain to the member and to the House our reason for not 

supporting it. 

 

I understand and respect the member’s point of view as well as 

some of the professionals’ points of view, but I don’t think that 

they’re really the correct way to go, and the reason is the Bill as 

it’s drafted, as other professional Bills are being drafted these 

days, says that if you are a person that takes part in the 

professional body then you cannot be sued for actions that you 

take where you may have made, you may have made a mistake,  

as long as you’re acting in the best interest. 

 

So that any individual member of the profession, whether 

they’re a dental therapist or a dentist or whatever, cannot be 

sued; they’re protected unless they do something in bad faith. 

But the legislation does not protect the association itself, that is, 

the professional body. 

 

And I support that view and I’ll tell you why. This is not unique 

to this dental profession statute; this occurs now in a number of 

professional statutes we have where the association can be held 

responsible. The only circumstance in which an association 

would be held responsible would be if it did something either 

maliciously, that is in bad faith, or negligently, that is in a 

manner that it shouldn’t, and careless with respect to the 

individual member’s rights, and it caused some member some 

damage. 

 

And my argument in answer to those in the profession that 

would want protection for the professional association is that if 

any of their members are damaged and suffer loss because of 

the negligence of the association, it is better and more fair that 

that loss be absorbed by the association than by the individual 

member. So I think that it is more fair to the member of the 

association. 

 

It is only when an association itself is negligent or acts in bad 

faith that they might be responsible to the member, but in such 

a case we have to ask ourselves, who should suffer. Should it be 

the individual member who has been wronged or should the 

association, where appropriate, give some compensation to the 

individual member? I don’t think it will arise that professional 

associations will act in bad faith or will be negligent. But if they 

are, I don’t have any trouble with the concept that the individual 

member may have the right to seek some kind of redress and 

compensation from the association. 

 

So I respect the opposition’s point of view and I understand 

where the amendment comes from. At this point in time the 

policy of the government is that it is not a bad thing to allow 

individual members who have been wronged to seek redress 

against associations. We’ll certainly continue to examine that 

policy, but I have to say to the member, for the reasons that I’ve 

tried to articulate in as fair a manner as I can, we won’t be able 

to accept that amendment today. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. To the 

minister and to his official. Mr. Minister, I understand this Bill 

is just opening up the door for a method and means of 

providing additional services and certainly bringing the dental 

professions under one Act, if I understand correctly. 

 

I think you’ve also talked about the fact that it will allow some 

dental services to be conducted in special care homes. And I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, in your consultations in regards to 

bringing forward this Bill, were there some concerns raised by 

the dental professions, the dentists themselves, regarding 

additional services, or are you looking of ways of allowing and 

giving dental assistants more of an opportunity to practise and 

where they practise? What was the process that was followed? 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

And when you talk about services in care homes, will this be 

under the supervision of a dentist as well, or will these dental 

technicians or assistants be operating on their own? I think 

that’s maybe a concern out there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised by the department, Mr. Chair, 

that there was consultation with all the professional groups, 

including the college of dental surgeons, the dentists, in 

particular. And they were not concerned about the provision 

which allows dental therapists, hygienists, and assistants to 

compete with dentists. Well not to compete with dentists, but to 

be . . . I should say specifically what they are allowed to do. 

 

They’re not allowed to compete with dentists, but they will be 

allowed to practice with various public health employers such 

as health districts’ special care homes without having to be 

supervised by a dentist. This will permit the health employers 

interested in improving public access to dental services to 

provide some dental services with the therapists, hygienists, and 

assistants. 

 

For example, a special care home operated by a health district 

could arrange for a dental hygienist to come in occasionally to 

treat its residents since they may have difficulty getting out to 

visit the dentist. But I’m advised that this is supported by the 

dentists themselves. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Toth:  You mentioned, Mr. Minister, that it’s supported 

by the dentists. When you talk of . . . and I think you made a 

comment of dental assistants or hygienists being able to provide 

their services I take it, to a health district. 

 

I’m taking from that that there may be a number of individuals, 

who may not be actually working in a specific dentist’s office, 

that you would be recognizing as having a level of expertise, 

and that health districts, if they want, would be able to hire 

those persons to come and work, such as in the case of a special 

care home. On that basis, Mr. Minister, they really wouldn’t be, 

say, working with a local dentist. 

 

Who then is responsible for their actions or how they apply the 

expertise or the training that they have received? Who’s held 

accountable? Is that individual held accountable at the end of 

the day, or the health board? 

 

Or how do you address that concern if there’s some 

complications may arise, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The therapists, hygienists, and assistants in 

the situation the member is talking about would not be directly 

supervised by a dentist. They, however, would be regulated by 

their own associations pursuant to this legislation. 

 

The association would have to ensure that the person concerned 

was competent to perform the duties that we’re talking about. 

And if the member performing the duties of the dental therapist, 

hygienist, or assistant went beyond that which that person was 

competent and licensed to do, then they would be subject to 

discipline by the professional body which is created by this  

legislation. 

 

And of course they would also be accountable to the health 

district itself which would be employing the person. And if the 

person went beyond what would be proper for that person to do, 

that would be really a breach of his or her professional 

responsibility, which his or her colleagues would regulate by 

means of their council under this legislation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does this open up the door as well 

or broaden the base of providing services to . . . well you’re 

talking about special care homes. With this legislation, does it 

then open up the door for possibly offering services like this 

back in local schools, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, this service could be provided by a 

school board as well, I’m advised. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying, it’s like the health boards 

would have the ability to set up a service in a care home; a local 

school board could certainly take a look at if a request was 

made and if they felt it might be a benefit to their school 

division, that they could set up a program or indeed hire dental 

assistants or some professionals to come in and provide the 

service directly in the school board. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, in fact by section 25 of the Act, the 

employers could be the Government of Saskatchewan; the 

federal government; a district health board; an association 

incorporated under The Mutual Medical and Hospital Benefit 

Associations Act; a municipality; an Indian band; an operator of 

a personal care home within the meaning of The Personal Care 

Homes Act that is approved by the minister — that would 

require ministerial approval; a board of education or a conseil 

scolaire or the conseil général under The Education Act; the 

University of Regina; the University of Saskatchewan; the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College; and SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 

 

So there’s various public bodies and personal care homes 

approved by the minister, Indian bands, that would be allowed 

to employ one of those three professionals. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, who covers these services, the cost 

of the services? Would it be each of the individual groups? Or 

would the coverage be based on any level of support that may 

be already out there for dental work and services provided 

that’s already available through your dentistry programs that are 

available? Or would the health boards or educational boards be 

forced to pick up the cost of this service at the end of the day, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That would vary from circumstance to 

circumstance. And it would be determined at the local level; it 

wouldn’t be determined by the province. They could employ 

people and simply have them performing that service. They 

could contract with them to provide the service for a certain 

amount of money. They could have a fee that the person 

receiving the service would receive. So that the consumer might 

be paying the service as opposed to the health district, for 

example. Or it could be a combination. There could be some  



1754  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

payment by the health board to the professional and also a 

co-payment by the individual to the professional, as occurs with 

chiropractic services. 

 

And part of the difference of course, is these are not generally 

insured services under the Canada Health Act. As part of the 

medicare system, dental services have by and large not ever 

been a part of that, which is another issue. 

 

So that there would be quite a bit of flexibility and I guess 

whatever would work for the local area would be provided. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think 

and I believe that at the end of the day, by bringing all of the 

professionals in the dentistry profession under one Bill, you 

certainly . . . everyone I think will have a better understanding 

of what the rules are and the guidelines as far as them practising 

their profession. I think that’s positive. 

 

The fact that you’re opening up the doors . . . or making 

allowances so that services can be provided or extended to 

patients who may not have direct access, I think is certainly 

positive. 

 

And on that note I really don’t have any further questions. And 

I want to thank you and your official for being here this 

morning and responding to these concerns. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 43 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I of course am 

disappointed to hear that the government opposite won’t be 

supporting our amendment today on this Bill. It lends one to 

believe that maybe the government has an I-know-best attitude. 

And the reason I say that is it might be appropriate that I quote 

from a letter from the concerned groups that would indicate 

that. 

 

This letter, this correspondence that I have received expressing 

the interest that we would bring forth this amendment, is of 

course supported by the Saskatchewan Dental Assistants’ 

Association, the Saskatchewan Dental Hygienists’ Association, 

the Saskatchewan Dental Therapists’ Association, the Dental 

Technicians’ Association of Saskatchewan, the Denturist 

Society of Saskatchewan, and the College of Dental Surgeons 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if this number of groups, including their membership, Mr. 

Speaker, that they represent, believe that this would be a 

worthwhile amendment to make to the Bill, I find it a little 

difficult that the government opposite would not accept it. 

Maybe as well as the reasons that they’re asking for this I might 

just as well, Mr. Chairman, go ahead and quote from the letter 

as well that would indicate why they’re asking for this, and I 

quote: 

 

These Associations/Colleges represent all of the disciplines  

identified in The Dental Disciplines Act that is currently 

being introduced, and all of these Associations/Colleges 

support the recommendation that Section 43 of the Act be 

amended to include Associations in the “acting in good 

faith” . . . 

 

I think that’s where it lies, Mr. Chairman, when we’re talking 

about acting in good faith. I go on to quote: 

 

. . . (and) protection provided under this Section. It is the 

unanimous opinion of all the disciplines that this 

protection is required in order to properly fulfill their 

mandate to protect the public and actively investigate 

complaints against their members. 

 

I think that kind of outlines, Mr. Chairman, the seriousness that 

these groups have identified as one of the problems with this 

Bill and that’s why they have asked for this amendment. And I 

would just once again ask the government opposite to rethink 

their position on this amendment. I do believe that the 

government has already . . . has a problem, and it’s in some 

other statutes, with some legal challenges and we certainly 

don’t want to see that becoming a trend as opposed to the 

abnormal. 

 

Mr. Chairman, therefore I would move that we: 

 

Amend clause 43 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words “No action lies or shall be instituted 

against” where they occur therein the following words: 

 

“an association or”. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I just want to say, Mr. Chair, that I’ve 

given the reasons why we don’t accept the amendment already 

to the member and I won’t repeat them. But I want to say that 

the House should be aware, and I’m sure most members are, 

that the professions have done a great deal of work with respect 

to this legislation. The professional groups the member 

identifies support this legislation. 

 

It’s true that in one particular matter, the professions would like 

the legislation to say something different than it does; however, 

this legislature has to decide what is the appropriate public 

policy. We’ve made a decision that in this one instance happens 

to be a different opinion than the professions, but it’s our 

responsibility to pursue the appropriate public policy to protect 

not only the public but to protect the members of the various 

associations. That’s what we’re doing. 

 

There’s been a great deal of cooperation between the six 

professional groups and the government; we’ve been very 

receptive to the ideas of the professional associations. It’s true 

that there’s one particular area where we don’t accept the idea 

of the association, but I just wanted to say that it shouldn’t be 

thought that there hasn’t been a lot of discussion and dialogue 

and indeed agreement with respect to most of these matters, 

because there really has been. 

 

There’s one minor matter that we have a different point of view  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

on but there’s been a very cooperative and open relationship 

with the professions and all are agreed that this legislation is an 

improvement over what we had before. 

 

The division bells rang from 11:16 a.m. until 11:18 a.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

McLane Gantefoer Osika 

Bjornerud Hillson Julé 

Aldridge Toth  

 

Nays — 18 

 

Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Lautermilch 

Crofford Calvert Bradley 

Renaud Scott Cline 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

 

Clause 43 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 44 to 63 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 

opposition for their cooperation and I’d like to thank Mr. 

Johnston for his assistance here today. And with that I move 

that we report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister, to your official for being here today. We’re 

disappointed the amendment didn’t go through but thanks for 

your frank discussion. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 67 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have some comments to make about this Bill and I’d 

like to start off by saying that we should put The Agri-Food 

Amendment Act under the microscope and take a real, good, 

close look at clause no. 7 which introduces a new version of 

section 14 of The Agri-Food Act. 

 

This new section will allow cabinet to pass a regulation 

discontinuing the operation of a number of marketing boards in 

the province. In essence the amendment will give this 

power-hungry cabinet even more power by giving it the right to 

close down operations of marketing boards without a vote. 

 

The amendment will affect many marketing boards, including 

the Saskatchewan Pork International, the Sheep Development 

Board, the Vegetable Marketing and Development Board, the 

Canola Development Commission, the Broiler Hatching Egg 

Producers’ Marketing Board, the Chicken Marketing Board, the 

Commercial Egg Producers’ Marketing Board, and the Turkey 

Producers’ Marketing Board. 

 

The members opposite continue to reveal their Jekyll and Hyde 

tendencies with this amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On the 

one hand they crow about how open and accountable the 

government is, then they turn around and say they will deal with 

producers’ futures, their livelihood, behind the closed doors. 

 

Will the real NDP government please stand up? Is it for 

openness and accountability or for secrets and dictatorship? 

 

Talk about hypocrisy. Talk about an abuse of the very 

fundamental democracy under which the voters elected this 

government. 

 

Even if the NDP government decides to allow producers a vote 

— and that’s a big if — there does not appear to be any 

requirement to follow the wish of the producers in the event the 

vote favours preserving a marketing board. 

 

This is a new low for democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this 

amendment gives the NDP government the right to trample over 

producers and their legitimate wishes. Ironically this is 

supposed to be a social democratic government. Somewhere, 

sometime, the members opposite must have taken a wrong turn. 

 

If cabinet decides to hold a vote, the parameters are also to be 

decided by order in council, including the minimum of 

producers who must cast a ballot in order for the vote to be 

valid. Secondly, the percentage of the total potential producers 

who must vote in order for the vote to be valid. And thirdly — 

and this last key point is very significant as it opens the door for 

a very low threshold vote to give the government justification to 

disband a marketing board. 

 

The Bill also opens the door to major, fundamental changes to 

marketing plans operated by marketing boards and 

commissions. And the changes can be made — surprise, 

surprise — without votes by producers. 

 

The portion of the Bill that I’m referring to is clause 7, the  



1756  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

rewriting of sections 12 and 13 of The Agri-Food Act. The 

changes could be anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker — smaller 

quotas, new pricing structures, longer averaging, shorter 

averaging. Almost anything could be done to the plans by the 

minister acting alone through an order in council without any 

vote. 

 

Major changes can occur as a result of a vote if — another big 

if — cabinet decides to hold a vote. Again it appears these rules 

are heavily weighted in favour of this government, with very 

little or no regard for the producers. 

 

Of course this government has not solely shut out producers. 

They can indeed suggest changes to the operation of the 

marketing programs. They do this by taking them to the 

minister. That’s right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The producers who 

make their living in these industries have the right — just the 

right to make suggestions. They can make suggestions. The 

gratitude they must feel is overwhelming. 

 

This arrogant government says we need the power to make 

arbitrary decisions, and the producers, the ones directly 

affected, just have the right to make suggestions. I’m surprised 

that their office has not yet been snowed under with thank-you 

cards from all the producers throughout the province. 

 

(1130) 

 

But I digress, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister can refer the 

suggestions to the Lieutenant Governor in Council immediately 

or he can refer them to the Agri-Food Council. The council can 

study the changes and hold public hearings to seek further 

input. The council then reports back to the minister. The 

minister can then make recommendations to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council as to whether the changes are a good idea 

or not. The Lieutenant Governor in Council then decides to 

either hold a vote among producers or simply enact changes 

through an order in council without a vote. 

 

But — and this is a big but — the government does not have to 

follow the results of the vote. This is just another example of 

this government’s arrogance and sheer contempt for the people 

of this province. If producers decide to put up a fight against 

the dismantling of a marketing agency, this government has 

taken steps to tie their hands. 

 

Clause 9 of the Bill allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

to pass an order in council stating that the minister can step in 

and exercise all powers of the marketing agency and that duly 

elected officials of the agency shall not carry out their usual 

powers during the time when the minister has stepped in. 

 

This government is preparing itself very well to strong arm 

producers. In effect the minister could walk in the door, send 

the staff and board officials packing, and say to the producers, I 

don’t care about your decisions and your office staff. 

Essentially the minister could say, hey look gang, it’s my way 

or the highway. This is just another nail in the coffin for 

democracy in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Going on to clause 10, it permits the Lieutenant Governor in  

Council to impose levies on producers when he thinks the 

producers would benefit from the work of one of the agencies 

established under the federal Farm Products Agencies Act. This 

new provision will allow cabinet to order a vote to see if 

producers in any particular group wanted to be subject to these 

levies to support the work of these federal agencies. But once 

again this government can pass an order in council requiring 

payment without a vote. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the producers of this province have a right 

and deserve a government that will look out for their concerns 

and their interests. But this is obviously the last thing on this 

government’s mind. 

 

Any legislation that can wipe out marketing boards without a 

producer vote, with a single stroke of a pen, is not our idea of 

looking out for someone’s best interest. In this case the 

government has again proven the old adage, the pen is mightier 

than the sword. And the swords we see in this legislation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are the swords stuck in the backs of 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in an unusual turn of events, the Premier 

himself spoke on this issue and offered advice to those of us in 

the opposition benches. He stated that, and I quote: 

 

You ask your constituents how you should be voting on 

this Bill. You want time to consult with your 

constituencies? We’ll give you the time to consult with 

your constituencies . . . but make sure you consult with 

them in fact and in substance and in all honesty. 

 

Therefore at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move 

adjournment of this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 69 — The Police 

Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would just like to continue off where I left 

off when we adjourned the other day with a few more points. 

 

I once again would like to reiterate that the intent of the Bill, 

from what we can see, we agree with. 

 

Where the problem comes in . . . and from the number of 

municipalities that have contacted our office in the last couple 

of days, I think brings to light the same concerns that we talked 

about the other day. 

 

And a number of the concerns brought to us this time are from 

the small towns of under 500 population and the RMs.(rural 

municipality), who are not all that pleased with what this Bill is 

doing, but are very unpleased to not be able to look at the Bill  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

and say this is what it’s going to cost my municipality, this is 

what it’s going to cost per capita. And the Bill itself does not 

have any numbers in it at all that we can, and they can, take a 

look at and see whether they agree or disagree. 

 

I think where the small towns and the RMs are having a big 

problem with this is the $29 million cut that we had this year, of 

which 17 was urban, 12 million was rural. But then on top of 

that, the cuts that have come from this government since 1991 

when they have came to power have added to the problem now 

that these people are having to raise their mill rates, without the 

policing Bill. You dump this on top of it and there is just no 

way these people cannot be asking their local ratepayers for 

many, many more dollars just to function. And they’re 

definitely not happy with that. 

 

The towns of 500 and over and the bigger centres naturally 

want this Bill to pass, but they also would like to see the 

numbers because they’re really worried that it’ll be watered 

down. So yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a very 

controversial Bill here. 

 

I would like to talk for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a task 

force that was set up. And actually it was municipal-provincial 

round table task force. And some of the comments in here, I 

think are somewhat interesting. 

 

One of the comments is that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) supports the principle of 

redistribution of policing costs. The principle is also supported 

by the provincial participants. 

 

But SUMA I know for a fact has somewhat . . . many qualms 

about what will be in this Bill because I think they also would 

like to see the numbers before they pass judgement on it. 

 

The report also goes on to say that the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) representatives are not yet 

prepared to accept this position. SARM has participated in the 

discussions for the purpose of obtaining the best position 

possible for its members. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is very understandable. I think I 

understand where SARM is coming from. 

 

Naturally, number one, they do not agree with having to pay for 

policing. But on top of that, they go back to the same thing — 

the funding cuts that the SARM members have had to endure 

from this government, and now being asked to pick up the tab 

at the same time as we are having these large, large 

downloading cuts. 

 

We have reassessment, which is confusing, causing a great 

distress for many administrators and councils out there, and 

now we’re going to have to turn around, after realizing they had 

to raise their mill rate to counteract the downloading, they’re 

going to have to raise their mill rate much higher to pay for 

policing. So you can understand where SARM is coming from. 

 

I believe SARM also though, would be a lot more comfortable 

if they could take this Bill, look at the numbers, and judge it by  

its content, not by what is not in the Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the points we are trying to 

make today, that it is really hard to support a Bill . . . Although 

we support the intent of the original Bill, it is really hard to 

judge this Bill unless we get numbers in. 

 

Why would . . . This government seems to have to bring 

something forward like this and not include these numbers, but 

add later in regulation — and we have seen this in the last two 

years constantly, and before that even. 

 

All the meat and potatoes of every Bill that we see in here is 

brought in after the fact. I would suggest this time there is a real 

reason for this though, being that it will be after session is over 

and after the federal election is over, not to create any waves 

out there for the government of the day. 

 

On top of this, the cuts that the RMs and the towns and that 

really cannot handle. Number one, one of the reasons that they 

can’t is because — and I think we’d brought this up earlier in 

question period — is the downloading of the regional park 

money onto the municipalities. 

 

Where the government funded as high as $2 million a year to 

regional parks, now they are down to $75,000. There is no 

alternative for the RMs and towns but to dump more money on 

top of which they already are dumping to keep these parks 

alive, when really everyone, including the government of the 

day, is getting the benefits of tourism. Just another form of 

downloading that the local governments have to pick up. And to 

do this, they’re also going to have to raise their mill rates to 

cover the regional park funding. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that’s all I would have to say 

at this time and I’m willing to pass this on to committee 

because we will have many more questions at that point. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 66 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 

certainly a gap in our law that I’m pleased to see that the 

minister has moved to fill. And in point of fact, this was going 

on in this province in any event and now there’s an attempt to 

regulate and regularize it. And that is correct. 

 

But this is, as I said last day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very 

personal and sensitive matter which touches or at least 

potentially touches each and every resident of this province. In 

other provinces when it has been brought in, there have been 

broad public hearings and public consultations in order that all 

persons in the province, especially those working in the area of 

the terminally ill and in our health care facilities, have some  



1758  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

input into how we deal with the terribly difficult issue of the 

rights of patients or their proxy to determine what medical care 

they receive in terminal and life-threatening situations, 

particularly for those persons who may no longer be capable of 

giving direction. 

 

And of course the problem becomes more difficult when we 

consider that it is very difficult for us to give direction 

beforehand in the sense that you cannot know the full 

prognosis. 

 

For example, if I was asked whether I wanted to be resuscitated 

following a crisis, a heart attack or something, frankly in my 

own personal case, that would depend entirely on the quality of 

life following resuscitation. If I could be back and up and 

around again, of course that’s what I would want. 

 

If in fact the resuscitation would mean that I would live 20 

years totally debilitated, totally incapacitated, as a virtual 

vegetable, my personal answer would be, no thank you. 

 

But it’s very difficult to say this before the fact because we 

wouldn’t really know what the prognosis is. And after the fact 

the patient may be in no condition to give those directives. 

 

So I understand the reasons here. But I say I think this is an 

issue which really affects each and every person in the 

province, and I’m sorry that this legislation came up before us 

in the dying days of the session because I think it really 

deserves more care and attention than perhaps what it is 

receiving. 

 

I think there should be more of an education component in this 

legislation. I think the people of this province have to clearly 

understand that the medical treatment they receive is their 

decision. It is not the decision of the health care professionals. 

It is the patient’s decision as to what care he or she wishes to 

receive and what measures he or she wishes to be undertaken 

on their behalf. 

 

And I think that there needs to be a serious education 

component here so that people understand their rights and 

understand how their wishes can best be put into effect, if not 

by them themselves personally, then of course by their loved 

ones. 

 

I have some specific questions I would like to put to the 

Minister of Health. For example, have they considered the 

impact of this on The Wills Act? It seems to me that The Wills 

Act should be looked at together with this legislation because 

the two of course do relate to one another. And other provinces 

have amended their Wills Act at the same time that they have 

brought in the health directives or the living wills Act, if I might 

call it that. 

 

(1145) 

 

We are somewhat concerned that the legislation says that in the 

event of disagreement between siblings, that the word of the 

elder sibling will prevail. That strikes us as somewhat arbitrary. 

Is there another way of dealing with the issue of when siblings  

don’t agree as to what care a parent in crisis ought to receive? 

 

How do we deal with the thorny issue of where someone may 

. . . some member of the family may have religious objections 

to, say a blood transfusion? How are we going to deal with that 

if the patient is unconscious? If the patient is unconscious and 

requires a blood transfusion on an urgent basis or some other 

medical treatment on an urgent basis, if it’s the elder sibling 

who doesn’t want the treatment to take place, there may well 

not be sufficient time to warrant legal intervention . . . or to 

allow a legal intervention, I mean. 

 

So these are serious issues that I wish the minister would 

address and tell us if they have been anticipated in the drafting 

of this legislation. 

 

I have also mentioned, and wish again to bring to the minister’s 

attention, that the fine of $1,000 for putting undue pressure on 

someone for changing their living will to prevent their survival, 

the $1,000 fine strikes me as very inadequate given the size of 

most estates today. And obviously one of the issues we have to 

address when we look at living wills is the issue that the family 

who are the closest to the patient are also presumably the 

people who will inherit from an estate, and we can’t close our 

mind to that obvious fact. 

 

In the province of Alberta the fine is $10,000 for putting undue 

pressure on a patient to sign a living will and to name oneself as 

a proxy. There’s a fine of $10,000; our fine is $1,000. I wish to 

ask the minister why we settled on the figure of $1,000, say 

one-tenth the figure we have in Alberta. It strikes me as simply 

too low and it should be higher, given the size of estates. 

 

Also I’m concerned that undue pressure for a person making a 

living will, while it might disinherit the person making the 

undue pressure, it does not disinherit that person’s spouse. 

Under The Wills Act, undue pressure on someone to make a 

will disinherits not only that person but that person’s spouse. So 

this leaves open the possibility that an in-law could place undue 

pressure in the making of the living will and if that in-law puts 

on that undue pressure to get what they want and to get at the 

estate early, that would not disinherit the in-law’s spouse. 

 

So I’m concerned with that. I say in this case the living will 

section now before us is in conflict with The Wills Act. And I 

personally think The Wills Act makes more sense than this 

living wills Act now before us, and I would like the minister to 

address that. 

 

So the principle here we do not object to, but I think it has to be 

looked at with great care. I want to know from the minister 

what consultations have taken place. I think broad hearings and 

consultation are warranted in this case. It touches everybody; it 

touches all of us. And then there are the matters of the specific 

issues that I’ve brought before the minister that I would like 

him to consider. 

 

Finally, I note that in the province of Alberta the public 

guardian has administration of living wills. It strikes me that 

makes a lot of sense because it is the public guardian who is 

ultimately responsible for the persons and estates of those who  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

are incapacitated. So it strikes me that that’s a sensible place to 

put it and again, in my view, more sensible than the drafting of 

this legislation. However these are all matters which may be 

considered more fully in Committee of the Whole, but I would 

ask the minister to have another look at these specific 

objections. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 68 — The 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The Department of Health was last 

before this . . . or pardon me, was before this committee on 

April 7 and then last on May 8. I invite the minister to introduce 

his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is Mr. 

Steve Petz, who’s the associate deputy minister of Health, and 

to his left is Ms. Cathy Langlois, who’s the executive director 

of finance and management services. And behind Ms. Langlois 

is Ms. Carol Klassen, who is the executive director of acute and 

emergency services. And behind Mr. Petz is Ms. Lois Borden, 

who is the executive director of the district support branch in 

the Department of Health. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 

not sure where to start today, but I think maybe I would like to 

first ask you a couple of questions if I can in relationship to the 

provincial coroner and autopsies. And I think your department 

has received some concerns about the timeliness of autopsy 

reports, Mr. Minister. And I just wonder if we could address 

those today. 

 

I too have received some calls from some constituents that have 

some concerns about the lengthiness of the time frame that it 

takes to get these autopsy reports back so — and to use I think 

some of the families affected words — is that so that they can 

put their loss to rest so to speak. 

 

We’ve had some indication from within that office that there is 

a concern of staff shortages there, basically due to budget 

restraints imposed by your government. And I’m wondering if 

the minister could elaborate a bit today to us and tell us what 

he’s doing to encourage these reports to come forth in a more  

timely manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should advise the member, Mr. Chair, 

that the coroner’s branch is under the jurisdiction of the 

Department of Justice. So with respect to that matter, these 

questions would be better put to the Minister of Justice in the 

Justice estimates. 

 

The Department of Health does not run the coroner’s branch. 

We do pay pathologists, but in terms of autopsies performed 

under the jurisdiction of the coroner’s branch, those would be 

under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 

However, we were led to believe through your department that 

indeed you were looking into these concerns and had done 

some work on that. If that’s not the case then I guess we need to 

clarify that, and certainly I’m most happy to talk to the 

appropriate minister about this. However, we were led to 

believe — and some contact with your department — that that 

was the case. 

 

If not, we’ll move onto another issue. And it’s one to do with 

our health centres in the province, I guess, Mr. Minister. And 

it’s an area of which I’m almost certain that you have 

jurisdiction over. And it’s regards to the 24-hour time frame for 

evaluation that you placed on beds in these health centres. 

 

Time and time again we’ve seen problems in the rural areas 

where we’ve got people that are best served and can be served 

in these health centres. And sometimes it’s not possible to do 

that in the 24-hour time frame, in terms of keeping, in 

particular, elderly people in their home communities to receive 

the initial treatment that they need, which can be provided from 

these centres. 

 

And I’m wondering why you’ve imposed such stringent 

guidelines on these centres with a 24-hour period. And how 

many centres are actually following those guidelines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The 24-hour rule applies to observation for 

assessment as opposed to palliative care or some other matter. 

Observation and assessment is used to determine whether a 

person requires acute intervention — in other words, whether 

they should go to a hospital. And the opinion of the people that 

work in clinical areas who advise the department and the 

districts with respect to this matter is that you should make a 

decision within 24 hours as to whether somebody requires 

admission to the hospital. Therefore the 24-hour rule exists. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess maybe we need to . . . maybe your 

advisers should be talking to the actual people affected by these 

decisions. I’ll give you an example — I guess maybe to clarify 

our point — is an elderly person that takes, as we know, takes a 

lot of medications. As we know, in today’s society, that drugs 

are an integral part of recovery from illnesses and diseases. And 

quite often elderly people are on a lot of medications and 

sometimes they have adverse effects of these. 

 

What happens in a lot of scenarios, Mr. Minister, in these health 

centres is that these people can come in. They’re in their own  



1760  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

community. They have a problem, first of all, getting out of the 

community to go to another area to receive the acute services 

that you're referring to, but can adequately be treated in these 

health centres and get their drugs stabilized in a safe and . . . a 

safe environment with the care of professional people. 

 

And most often . . . And I’m sure that if you talked to many of 

our doctors in rural Saskatchewan they would tell you that this 

can’t be done in 24 hours. Sometimes it takes two or three or 

maybe even four days to do this, to stabilize these people. 

 

And what your 24-hour evaluation time does is causes these 

people to be booted out of their own community and their 

health centres and forced to either go home . . . most often it’s 

back home, because they’re reluctant to go to a neighbouring 

hospital which may be 40 or 50 miles away. And they want to 

be treated there and they can be treated there — and safely 

treated there — by professional staff, both doctors and nurses. 

 

So I’m wondering why you’ve imposed this and again, you 

know, how many health centres are able to comply with this 

rule? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  With respect to the situation that the 

member’s describing, there is no such rule. That is not an 

observation assessment situation the member’s describing. If 

somebody needed their medication to be adjusted and the 

district health board or the physician wanted to keep them in 

longer than 24 hours, there’s no rule that the person couldn’t be 

kept in longer than 24 hours. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, that’s what I wanted 

to hear you say. Now is there, is there a time limit that those 

people can be kept in the health centres then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Is Long Lake Valley Integrated 

Facility, which still uses that name, is it a health centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Recently in the last 

couple of weeks, you’ve made a number of announcements 

regarding capital construction around the province and I’d just 

like to talk for a couple of minutes about those, and in 

particular the announcement that was made in Melville. Can 

you tell us, Mr. Minister, what your plans or what your 

department’s plans are for capital construction in Melville? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  My plan is first of all to consult with the 

local community. Or to put it more properly, I think, to allow 

the district health board to consult with the local community. 

Because as the member will know, generally speaking for a 

capital project as may be contemplated in Melville, which is an 

integrated facility, to integrate the hospital services with the 

special care home, with other services in the community, 65 per 

cent of the funds are provided by the province, 35 per cent of 

the funds are provided at the local level. 

I want to . . . My understanding is that the people at the local 

level have been interested in having an integrated facility 

constructed in Melville. I want that to be confirmed now, as is 

the usual case, with the local municipalities, both the city of 

Melville and the surrounding RMs, any towns or villages that 

may be involved, to indicate whether they want this kind of 

project to go ahead; whether they see the funding for it as being 

a priority that they would have. 

 

And I also would expect that the district health board would 

consult with the local governments to see what kind of facility 

they think should go ahead. Because obviously if the local 

people don’t support it, they won’t want to fund it and it won’t 

go ahead. 

 

The hope of local people — this is not a government plan or my 

plan; it’s a plan by people that have got together in Melville and 

area — is for a new, integrated facility whereby the hospital 

would be replaced by a health centre that would be integrated 

with the special care home and perhaps some other services that 

are provided in the city of Melville. 

 

But as I said, as far as I’m concerned that requires a plan to 

emerge from the local community itself, both the district health 

board and the local governments. And I will wait to see what 

they say. I will listen to them. And then the government will 

work with them to proceed in a fashion that the community 

supports. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Have you set a time frame, Mr. Minister, 

when construction for this project would start? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there is no time frame contemplated. 

 

I would like to hear from people at the local level as to the type 

of facility they would like to see as to their ability to raise the 

local portion of the funds. And I would think that the district 

health board will be doing some planning, dialogue, and 

discussion, but very much involving people at the local level. 

 

And when there’s a consensus locally as to how we should 

proceed, I would expect that we’ll all be marching down the 

same road together. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. You also made an announcement 

regarding La Loche? Can you tell us what is going to be built at 

La Loche? And I think you gave an indication in a press release 

of a time frame for the construction of that institution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I should explain that the situation in 

northern Saskatchewan is slightly different than below the 

North, in that in northern Saskatchewan, like Saskatoon and 

Regina, the province provides basically 100 per cent of the 

funding with the exception of Health Canada’s involvement in 

some instances with respect to their first nations jurisdiction. 

 

And in La Loche I expect that the planning of the facility will 

be proceeding this year; so that the community will be 

consulted. The new district health board will be consulted. 

Other communities outside of La Loche will be consulted. 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

The plans, hopefully, will be drawn up this year. I would hope 

that construction would proceed in 1998 or 1999, and that the 

facility would be operational in the year 2000. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that if you 

were going to make an announcement on a capital expenditure 

of a health project, the first thing that would happen is, of 

course what you’ve alluded to — your department in 

consultation with the health districts and the communities, and 

the municipalities . . . and all the people affected by it would be 

involved. And that’s necessary and right. 

 

However it would seem to me that you would go out and you 

would do this consulting and then you would decide what was 

going to be built. If it’s indeed going to be an integrated facility 

in Melville, that’s what it would be, and at that time is when 

you make your announcement. 

 

I would think the same thing would apply in La Loche. That 

you would have the discussions, decide what the people want 

and need, and then go out and make your announcement. I’m 

wondering if the people in these communities are being misled 

a bit by your government, and that you’re playing politics with 

these announcements, Mr. Minister. 

 

As you’re well aware of, we’re in the midst of a federal election 

campaign in this province and across Canada. As well as when 

you talk about building these institutions in ’98 or ’99, it’s 

going to be just previous to a provincial election, and I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if there’s a lot of politics involved in 

this. You make the announcement now, the middle of the 

federal election; the project will then begin to proceed, if they 

indeed do, saying to the people of the province, okay vote for 

us, we’re going to build you an institution in La Loche, in 

Melville, wherever it may be in Saskatchewan, and then away 

you go. 

 

Seems to me you’ve got the process a little mixed up, and 

you’re playing politics once again with health care and the lives 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’m afraid it’s the member that 

doesn’t understand the process, Mr. Chair. It is not in fact 

myself or the government directly in a political way that make 

decisions with respect to priorities for capital construction. 

There is a committee which is comprised of people from the 

health districts from around the province who are very sincere 

people, who in good faith look at the requests for capital 

construction — which come from the districts, not from me — 

and priorize which ones they should do. 

 

And when we make a list of capital construction, that list 

doesn’t come from my office or from myself in the first 

instance — certainly the announcements do — but we consult 

the people at the local level. We involve people from the 

districts, in terms of what should be built. 

 

And the Capital Evaluation Committee evaluates projects on the 

basis of health renewal direction and principles, district needs 

assessment, program requirements, and current facility status. In 

other words they look at what the community needs,  

which communities have the greatest needs, and then they 

proceed accordingly. 

 

These are not decisions that are made by the Minister of Health; 

they’re not decisions that are made on a political basis. They’re 

decisions that are made by the local people themselves. The 

member should know that. It is not me who is playing politics 

with this process, Mr. Chair; unfortunately, it is the member. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Last fall, a few 

days before the North Battleford by-election, The Battlefords 

Health District announced that the Health department had 

approved the construction of a $25 million nursing home in 

North Battleford. I realize that announcement came from the 

health district and not from your department, but I would like 

the minister to please tell me what he can about the status of 

that project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there is no such project at the 

moment. I am aware that representatives of The Battlefords 

District Health Board made an announcement that they had a 

plan to replace two special care home facilities with one new 

special care home facility, which I believe they said would cost 

20 to $25 million, something like that. 

 

That has never been approved by the Capital Evaluation 

Committee which, as I said, is comprised of local people. It has 

not been approved by the Department of Health. It has not been 

approved by myself. 

 

In the future, will we look at a request . . . Now in fairness to 

the district health board, I assume what they’re saying is that 

this is what they would like to do down the road. They may be 

saying that. Somebody’s saying it. The member’s saying they’re 

not saying that. 

 

Well I didn’t make the announcement; the district health board 

made the announcement. The member said that himself. Now 

I’m saying that may be their wish, and he’s saying they didn’t 

say it. So the member can get up and clarify himself. 

 

But what I’m saying to the member is that there may be some 

desire at the local level that the special care homes be replaced. 

That request can come forward to the Capital Evaluation 

Committee and the people from around the province will look 

at that request. 

 

I can also assure the member — who I think made some issue 

perhaps of the idea of a new special care home in The 

Battlefords in the by-election — if the member and others at the 

local level do not wish a new special care home in The 

Battlefords, that wish too will be respected. 

 

This is the same as the Melville situation. Any request for 

capital construction has to come from the local area. The wishes 

of the local people have to be respected. They come up with 35 

per cent of the money. And if the people wish to proceed with 

the new project, that will be looked at. And if the people don’t 

wish to proceed with the new project, that will be looked at as 

well. 

 



1762  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can assure the 

minister that I’m sure everyone in the Battlefords would be 

pleased with the construction of a new facility. The issue 

became whether or not there would be a loss of beds as a result 

of the construction. 

 

However, if I may come back to it —and I believe the minister 

has already made his position clear — the health district 

announcement was that the Department of Health had approved 

a $25 million nursing home for North Battleford. Are you 

saying that never happened? No such approval has been given? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. No such approval has been 

given. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Do I further understand from you that no such 

request has come before you from Battlefords Health District 

for approval of a $25 million nursing home? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The local health board is part of a 

province-wide review of the regional health centres, which 

includes the Battlefords facilities; so that it wouldn’t be fair to 

say that there’s no such request, in the sense that at least there’s 

been an expression of interest in rejuvenating or replacing the 

special care home facilities in the Battlefords. 

 

So I don’t know if there’s been a formal request, but certainly 

there’s been a lot of discussion around the issue and I think it’s 

well-known that they’d like something to be done. 

 

But in terms of whether there’s been a decision as to anything 

specific to be done, what should be done, no, there’s been no 

such decision. That’s being studied at the present time and I 

would anticipate that somewhere over the next year we will 

come to a decision in conjunction with the local health board 

about what to do. But what will be done will be something that 

there is some community support for. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank the minister and I say, please 

understand that I take no objection to anything you have said. 

But the announcement was that the Department of Health had 

approved it; you have said definitely you had not approved it. 

 

There may have been some informal discussions, but have you 

in fact had a formal application from The Battlefords Health 

District for construction of a $25 million nursing facility, 

nursing home facility? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that the local health board has 

requested approval of some kind of construction to replace the 

special care homes, but I’m not sure that the exact project is 

described. 

 

I think what they want is . . . The first stage that occurs when 

something is approved is approval for planning, which of 

course implies that what you do is say: yes, go ahead and plan 

the facility, because when you come up with the plan, we’re 

prepared to pay for it or pay our portion of it. And the first thing 

they would do is apply for approval in principle, and I  

think they have made their interest in some kind of approval to 

plan a new system or a new facility well-known to the 

Department of Health. So in that sense, they’ve made an 

application. But in the first instance, it’s approval for planning 

that they have to receive. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And that approval has not been given? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, when it came to your attention 

that The Battlefords Health District was saying that you had 

approved a $25 million nursing home for North Battleford, did 

you communicate with them that this was not the case, that you 

had given no such approval and they shouldn’t be saying that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well it’s not for me to tell people what 

they should or should not be saying at the local level. The 

situation as between the health district and the Department of 

Health and the Capital Evaluation Committee is well-known to 

the people at the local level and has been well-known to them 

throughout the entire process. 

 

But as I said, they have indicated a desire to replace their care 

centre in North Battleford, and also they are involved in a 

committee which is looking at all of the regional care facilities 

in Battleford, Melfort, Swift Current, and Weyburn with respect 

to their long-term plans. So this is a matter that they’ve 

discussed at the local level. They obviously were expressing 

their long-term plans to build a new facility in Battleford or 

North Battleford, but as the member knows, that has not been 

formally approved — or informally approved, I suppose — by 

the Department of Health. We’re certainly open to discussing 

that with the local health board and in fact are doing so on an 

ongoing basis. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, though, my concern isn’t that the 

health district would want approval for this. My concern is that 

the health district announced that you had granted approval for 

a $25 million nursing home and you have stated flatly that is 

not true. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well if the member has concerns, Mr. 

Chair, with any statements made by anyone in his local 

community or the health district, he should take those concerns 

up with the local people, with the Chair of the health board, 

with the health board itself. I invite him to do so. He’s a 

resident, I believe, of North Battleford. He has a member for the 

area in which he resides who’s on the local health board. It is 

not for me to answer for any statements that the member may be 

concerned about. I invite the member to communicate with 

people in his own community about any statements they may 

make with which the member may be concerned. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — However . . . yes, thanks, Deputy Chairman. 

When I do communicate with these people, I take it that I can 

tell them that the minister flatly denies that he ever gave 

approval for a $25 million nursing home for North Battleford. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The member will have a copy of Hansard, 

which is a record, as the member knows, of what was said in  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

this House. The member is free to use Hansard in any manner 

that he deems appropriate. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But are you saying you never gave approval for 

a $25 million nursing home in North Battleford? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I have answered that question more than 

once. My words will speak for themselves and the record will 

speak for itself. The member can make whatever use of the 

record that he wishes. That is his right. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — We are concerned that the Rabbit Lake health 

centre is to close. That announcement was made prior to the 

announcement by the federal government of $65 million 

additional funding for health care and CST (Canadian Health 

Social Transfer) transfer. Can that decision be revisited? Can 

something be done to save the Rabbit Lake health centre? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  First of all, there is no $65 million money 

for health care from the federal government. There is this year a 

$53 million cut in federal funding to health care in the province 

of Saskatchewan and Liberal cuts to health care funding in 

every province in this country. 

 

What the Liberals have said, Mr. Chair, is that next year — not 

this year, next year — they will not cut health care as much as 

they said they were going to cut health care. However what the 

Liberals will do, as they have done each and every year, is cut 

our health care budget again next year, and the health care 

budget of every province in the country. But what they have 

announced, which the member somehow thinks is new money, 

is that they’re not going to cut health care quite as much next 

year as they said they would. 

 

So first of all we have to proceed on a common understanding 

about what the federal Liberals are doing to health care and not 

misrepresent what they’re doing. 

 

Secondly, with respect to Rabbit Lake, that is a local decision 

that has been made by the district health board. It has not been 

made by the district health board for purely financial reasons. 

It’s been made by the district health board because they think 

it’s the best decision in terms of how to deliver long-term care 

in the Parkland Health District. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the health district has 

clearly said this is a funding decision. They have very clearly 

said that it is strictly a monetary decision. We know from the 

population of Rabbit Lake, particularly the number of seniors, 

that there will be no problem filling the Rabbit Lake centre in 

the event it remains open; that these people do need care. The 

number of persons requiring care certainly justify the present 

facility, if not a larger one. And that in order to close down the 

facility, these seniors from Rabbit Lake are going to be 

parcelled out over a wide radius, and where they will be living 

now two hours from the community. So this is not a case that 

it’s been decided that the demand isn’t there; the health district 

says the money isn’t there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s not the information that has been 

provided to me, Mr. Speaker. The district conducted a needs  

assessment and following that, the district felt that the number 

of beds available for long-term care was higher than the number 

they required. 

 

Often people’s needs can be met without institutionalizing 

them. The district wants to improve their home care, their 

respite care, improve other options for people. The district has a 

different view of the world than the member does. And I 

appreciate that the member does not agree with the decision 

made by the local district health board. I respect the right of the 

district to make the decision that they made. And I will support 

them in that effort. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Does the Minister of Health not acknowledge 

that the issue facing our health district is not how much health 

care they want, how much health care they need, but rather how 

much health care they can afford within the financial 

constraints you have placed around them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. The district had a surplus last year, Mr. 

Chair. There’s no shortage of money. There is a different view 

than that member has. One view of taking care of older people 

is that we should put all our eggs in one basket and have lots of 

nursing home beds and institutionalize everybody. That’s not a 

very progressive view. We need to have a range of options 

which includes home care, adult day care, respite care, as well 

as nursing home beds. And if we play our cards right, we’re 

more likely to keep people active and independent in their own 

homes and require fewer nursing home beds. 

 

That’s the view that the district health board has. The member 

may disagree with the district health board. I think the board 

should be congratulated for doing a needs assessment, 

identifying the number of beds they need, and making decisions 

that they think are in the best interests of the district as a whole. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, I’ve received communication 

from a number of seniors who tell me that the purchase of 

oxygen cylinders is becoming a real hardship for them. Now 

that was previously covered; it’s no longer covered. Can the 

minister tell me anything about plans by the Department of 

Health to assist people who require regular oxygen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the Department of Health, through 

the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program, 

assists hundreds of people in the province with respect to their 

oxygen needs. There used to be three methods of payment for 

oxygen, there is now one method of payment. The majority of 

people pay less for oxygen than they used to. Some people pay 

somewhat more. 

 

If people need special support, then they get that through the 

SAIL program. And most people are telling us, and they’re 

surveyed I believe by the lung association, that they’re satisfied 

with the changes that have been made in the area of oxygen; 

and that they’re satisfied with the oxygen program that is 

delivered through SAIL. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials, welcome. Thank you for the opportunity to 

clarify some of the issues in health care. What my colleagues  



1764  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

had alluded to with respect to certain announcements that are 

made, whenever the minister or Health department has 

mentioned, the optics of it for the general public is that, well if 

the Health department or the district health boards have made 

an announcement, it’s with the approval and the support of the 

Health minister, the Health department. 

 

And I guess those are the optics. And I guess we need to clarify 

a little more for people when these announcements are made 

that this is not a promise of a project, it’s merely a blessing 

from the Department of Health for the local organizations and 

district health boards to start consultations on what they need 

and what they require. I believe that’s what my colleagues were 

alluding to. 

 

That the impression people get when the Minister of Health 

arrives on the scene and there’s an announcement that there’s 

discussion about a health facility in the near future, they take it 

as good, that Health minister is supporting the building of 

something for our community which we desperately need. Do 

you not agree with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The announcement, Mr. Chair, that we 

make when we say a project is approved for planning is that we 

want you to plan this, we’re willing to put up 65 per cent of the 

money; that’s what we’re saying. But now as in any project, the 

community puts up 35 per cent. So in terms of the details, we 

have an obligation to listen to the community in terms of what 

they think should go into the plans. Because when we say it’s 

approved for planning, we want to include local consultation. 

 

So I’ll ask the member two questions. Number one, does he not 

think that we should ask the local rural municipalities and the 

city of Melville what their opinion is? Because all I’m saying is 

we should ask them for their views. Number one, does he agree 

with that or not? Number two, does he agree that there should 

be a new integrated facility built in the city of Melville? I think 

there should be. 

 

I want to know from that member, does he think we should 

consult with the local people, number one; number two, does he 

agree with me that we should have a new, integrated facility in 

the city of Melville? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Well, Mr. Chair, it’s evident the minister has not 

been around very long or doesn’t know my history or 

background. I was on a committee that was raising funds to 

build facilities in Melville over the last decade. 

 

So the answer to that is definitely yes, we need that. And the 

people there have been working hard towards that goal and they 

don’t want to have just merely some optic saying, well yes, go 

ahead and plan. They’ve been doing that. 

 

Anyway, I just want to shift gears here a little bit. And, Mr. 

Minister, there’s a desperate need . . . there are people that have 

needs in the area of addictions counselling, as you’re well 

aware — alcohol, drugs, smoking, and gambling, out-patient 

treatment, drinking while intoxicated screening, assessment 

treatments, counselling for . . . and on an on. You’re well aware 

of that. 

And, Mr. Minister, I was just wondering, there was a request 

made by the Saskatchewan Association of Boards of Addiction 

Services, there was a request made to you in 1996 and again in 

March of this year to recognize a number of these 

non-government organizations. And I have a whole list of them, 

and you have them as well because the documents were sent to 

you. What they want to be recognized as, is affiliated agencies 

to the health districts. And I was wondering if there was any 

move in the immediate future to do so? 

 

These are people that operate as volunteers in a large number of 

cases. They’re counsellors are such that are qualified, 

underfunded and . . . but those services are desperately needed 

in small communities throughout Saskatchewan. And I would 

just like to hear whether or not you will support their request to 

recognize them as affiliates. 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that their request is under 

review at the moment. It would be something that obviously we 

would want to talk to the health districts about, because these 

organizations would be affiliates of the health districts 

themselves as opposed to the Department of Health. And we 

certainly have an open mind about the issue and we’ll continue 

to discuss it with the various groups. 

 

I think the member will know that as a result of the recent 

provincial budget, there was some funding to begin correcting 

some of the inequities in salary on an incremental basis, which 

has been quite well received in terms of the feedback I’ve got. 

 

So we’re making some steps those organizations are happy 

with. There are some other steps they would probably like to be 

taken; those would have to be taken with the approval of the 

district health boards. And we’ll review the matter along with 

the boards and arrive at a policy decision in due course. 

 

But right now it’s still under review. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It would be really 

encouraging if there was a time line, at least something in the 

immediate future to offer these people who continue to do 

everything they possibly can in their communities despite the 

fact that they are seriously underfunded. I mean . . . and I 

appreciate there needs to be consultation. But is there any way 

that you might be able to . . . since this originated way back in 

1996, can this not be . . . can the process not be speeded up and 

at least give some hope that within a certain period of time there 

will be a decision made and give these people some 

encouragement and some hope? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member that these 

groups that provide counselling, generally speaking, have got 

more and more funding each and every year from this 

government through the districts. And it’s a far cry from what 

we have got from the Liberal Party, because of course the 

member cries all these crocodile tears about people wanting to 

provide health services at the same time when the party which 

he is associating himself with is cutting health care funding 

across the country, trying to gut the system. 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

Notwithstanding the efforts of the Liberals in Ottawa, we’ve 

provided more money each year for mental health counselling, 

for drug and addiction counselling. That’s part of the health 

reform model which the member and his party have opposed all 

along. And we can always do more and we’ll try to do more, 

notwithstanding the efforts of the member and his party. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m just a little 

disappointed that the minister would bring into debate issues 

that are of a federal nature. This is a provincial problem we’re 

talking about, and continuously during the entire session it’s 

always laying the blame some place else. We could do that for 

ever. 

 

We have the situation that needs to be dealt with here rather 

than pointing fingers of blame. Accept some responsibility and 

deal with the issues that are the responsibility of this 

government in this province. It’s like people that you tax to 

death. They do the best they can with what they have and they 

have no place else to go and complain and stand up and 

grandstand and say, oh it’s your federal cousins and on and on 

and on. I’m just disappointed that that’s constantly brought into 

this House. 

 

I believe that that’s not becoming of a government of any 

province, to continue to lay the blame elsewhere when people 

who are in desperate straits as a result of being suppressed with 

. . . oppressed with taxes and difficulties in making their daily 

payments for utilities that are increased in price and on and on. 

And they have nobody else to cry to and lay the blame on. And 

the blame has to be accepted by the government opposite. 

 

That doesn’t give much encouragement for these people who 

are asking and pleading for some assistance to help folks that 

do have some problems and difficulties; but I have no further 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I just want to respond to that by 

saying that in terms of finger pointing and blame, we know 

where that comes from, Mr. Chair. It usually comes from the 

other side. But what I’d like the member to acknowledge is that 

this year this government put into health care $56.3 million new 

money plus $53 million to back-fill federal cuts. 

 

Now the member may say that we’re not supposed to talk about 

that. But when the member says we’re not funding health care 

and we’re not doing enough and I get up and say look, the 

federal government has cut back $100 million out of health care 

spending in Saskatchewan in the last two years, which 

everybody knows — everybody knows that, Mr. Chair — the 

member complains that we point it out. 

 

If the member wants to get up and say we’re not funding health 

care, I have to get up and inform the member that the Liberals 

are cutting back; we’re back-filling it. It embarrasses the 

member. He’s associated himself to the Liberal Party; he’s 

embarrassed. I can’t help that. But I’m going to keep telling the 

truth and putting the facts out to the public, Mr. Chair, about 

the record of the Liberal Party, which is a record that does not 

speak to the issues that the member continually gets up and says 

that the Liberals represent. 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Chairman, I just . . . when I started out, I 

started out by outlining what the services . . . the addiction 

counselling for alcohol, drugs, smoking, and gambling — 

something that his government introduced into this province 

that involves some of these people that need that kind of help. 

You don’t say anything about all the gambling money and the 

VLT (video lottery terminal) money that you’ve put into your 

general coffers and you don’t return back to the communities to 

help the very people that have now become addicted to some of 

these problems that you are responsible for. 

 

So you talk about back-filling but you never say anything about 

all this extra money that you’ve got from your gambling 

policies in this province. Give us a break. I mean let’s talk 

about where all this extra money is going. Oh it’s going into the 

General Revenue Fund and to all the communities in 

Saskatchewan. This is an issue that people who are dealing with 

some of the problems that you’re responsible . . . your 

government’s responsible for having created are begging and 

pleading for a little bit of help to address those and to help 

those people. That’s the point I was making. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I thank the member for his point of 

view and for pointing out the money does go into the General 

Revenue Fund, which then goes into health and education in 

every community. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, I have a number of questions to the minister and I’ll 

try to move my questions along. It all depends how long the 

minister wants to stand and debate. If he comes straightforward 

and responds, we’ll move along. If he wants to debate, we can 

be here all afternoon. 

 

First of all, in the area of capital projects I would like to know, 

Mr. Minister, how many capital projects is the Department of 

Health currently involved in? What’s the cost of the projects? 

Where are the projects being undertaken at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The capital projects recommended for 

approval in principle are as follows: the Bengough nursing 

home renovations; Carlyle nursing home addition; Cudworth 

Health Centre, addition to nursing home; Grenfell Health 

Centre renovations; Hafford Health Centre and nursing home 

addition to Care Centre; Hudson Bay Pioneer Lodge 

replacement with nursing home addition to Hudson Bay 

Hospital; Meadow Lake, replacement of Meadow Lake 

hospital; Moose Jaw Pioneer Lodge nursing home renovation to 

upgrade existing light care beds to heavy care standards; Moose 

Jaw, urgent fire safety upgrade at Moose Jaw hospital; 

Pangman Health Centre renovations and ambulance garage; 

Shaunavon, nursing home addition to hospital. 

 

Now those are approved in principle so those would be going 

ahead. 

 

Then there are capital projects recommended for planning, and I 

think the member will be familiar with that process. And they 

are: Balcarres, replacement of Parkland Lodge and Balcarres 

Hospital with a combined long-term care and acute facility; 

Davidson health centre, addition to the nursing home; Kamsack  



1766  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

hospital/nursing home link and nursing home bed addition; La 

Loche, replacement of St. Martin’s Hospital; Leader, acute 

addition to nursing home; Melville, St. Peter’s Hospital 

replacement with hospital addition to St. Paul’s Lutheran 

Home; Unity, nursing home addition at hospital; Wynyard, 

replacing existing nursing home with project as part of existing 

hospital; and Yorkton, long-term care rationalization. 

 

So those are approved for planning. There’s some work to do in 

terms of the scope of the projects and so on in the normal 

course of invents. 

 

The capital budget summary is . . . the proposed capital budget 

for this fiscal year is $42.1 million. This includes 26.8 million 

for projects approved last year which are still in progress. And 

also $12.9 million for projects to be approved in principle and 

for projects recommended for planning this year, and 2.4 

million contingency funding for project developments yet to be 

determined. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you mention that 

figure of 26.1 — and I take it there’s construction certainly 

going on in Regina and Saskatoon; if I’m mistaken, maybe you 

could clarify that — but what amount of funding is involved in 

capital projects ongoing in the two major centres of the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Actually in the $26.8 million, I don’t think 

there’s any construction going on in Saskatoon. But of that 

figure there would be 25,065,000 — so you might say 25.1 

million — related to the Regina project; 640,000 related to the 

Athabasca health centre, which is in the far North; and 1.1 

million related to the Fort Qu’Appelle health centre. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, could we have a copy of the 

projects that you mentioned? I can certainly go from that and 

get some of the other numbers that I had asked for. 

 

I would take it then, Mr. Minister, of these projects that are 

approved, all of these projects were approved in conjunction 

with requests made by the district health boards, that there isn’t 

any capital construction that can take place without the district 

health board suggesting and then coming to the department for 

final approval for a project, even if that district health board 

would have all of the necessary funds available at its own 

disposal before the construction of a project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well generally speaking, yes, a capital 

project would proceed with the approval from the Department 

of Health on the recommendation of the local district health 

board, but with the exception of the North, in the sense that 

there is no district health board and that’s a slightly different 

situation. 

 

I think that if the community had the money, the local district 

health board or the community could . . . they can build 

whatever they like. So they can always, if they have their own 

money, go ahead and build it. Where they would run into 

difficulties if they didn’t have some kind of coordinated plan 

with the district or the province, would be that the facility 

would have to be licensed as a hospital, special care home; so  

some cooperation from the province would be required. 

 

Plus, as the member will know, it isn’t simply a matter of the 

construction of the facility, that is, the capital cost, but it’s the 

operation. And the government and the district health board 

would have to come to some agreement with respect to 

operating the facility on a year-to-year basis, so that . . . I mean 

on one level, yes, people can build whatever they like if they’ve 

got the money; but on another level we have to cooperate with 

each other because of the licensing and the operating cost 

aspects. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So based on your comments just a moment ago, if 

the district health board can see their way into providing a 

service, if it needs some capital construction and they do have 

the funding available, and if there’s an opportunity even in the 

board to provide that service, what you’re saying is they could 

certainly go ahead, in consultation . . . that you wouldn’t 

interfere, or you wouldn’t say no, simply because they may add 

another service to the district. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well that’s correct. But I just want to be 

clear that we also would say to them, in terms of the 

year-to-year operation, if you want any additional money from 

the province to operate it, you have to come to an agreement 

with us. We have to approve it just because otherwise, you’d 

have people building things and then saying to the province, 

well now you have to pay for the annual operating funds. And 

obviously you can’t do that. 

 

But beyond that, if somebody wants to build something, they 

have the money to build it, and they’ve got . . . say they have 

the money to provide the service and operate it without any 

additional money, I think that they can go ahead and do that at 

the local level. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, an issue 

that just came up a moment ago, and I called a local resident 

regarding another concern, and it comes back to the debate we 

had the other day, and the fact of providing elective services 

through local districts. And a question I would have relates to 

offering dialysis services in a local district, in a local hospital. 

 

I understand in one of the communities in my constituency, 

there are currently I believe, five if not six individuals that must 

travel to either Yorkton, Regina, or Saskatoon for dialysis 

depending where they can get the service, where it’s available 

at the time. Which, Mr. Minister, might be fine and dandy to 

say well they’ve got access to the service, but if they have to 

stay over, it’s at their own expense and cost. It’s a cost incurred 

to them. 

 

We do have, in one of the communities, we do have a facility 

that was . . . some work on it; the community does have a 

substantial budget to provide the equipment. We do have a 

number of professionals currently operating or working in the 

community, including a surgeon, a gynecologist, a couple of 

individuals who have their anesthetics services. And it would 

seem to me, Mr. Minister, if the district . . . I guess the question  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

I would like ask, if the district feels they can provide that 

service and in consultation with other districts make that service 

available to other district or communities or other individuals, 

rather than . . . and it’s closer for them — would the district be 

able to do that? Would your department, in conjunction with 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association, give them a licence to 

provide that service? 

 

And as I indicated earlier, Mr. Minister, it certainly wouldn’t be 

a capital cost because a number of communities have done a lot 

of fund-raising and do have funds set aside for, certainly for 

equipment. Now is it possible for a district to provide that 

service and to indeed receive a licence to provide the service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to preface this by saying to the 

member that as far as I’m concerned, and I want to be very clear 

about this, people that have to undergo kidney dialysis need all 

the support that they can get and that we can give them. And if 

there’s any way that we can give them the dialysis service they 

need in their local community, that’s what we want to do. There 

are 300 people in Saskatchewan that receive kidney dialysis and 

100 of them are now on home dialysis. They can have their own 

machine and they can do the dialysis. And we want to 

encourage that. And we’ve been putting more money into that. 

And anybody that can have home dialysis, we want to get a 

machine to, so they can do the home dialysis. 

 

The problem is not the machine, as has been represented by 

some people in this legislature — not the member — there are a 

hundred of these home dialysis machines and if we need more, 

we’ll get more. 

 

The problem is that the people that can’t have home dialysis 

require the services of nephrologists, which we don’t have in 

very many centres because they’re highly specialized, and the 

renal dialysis nurses. 

 

And so when somebody who isn’t a candidate for home dialysis 

says well, they want to go to, you know, Yorkton, and have 

their dialysis, well they can have their dialysis in Yorkton if 

they don’t need the nephrologist or the renal dialysis nurse. The 

problem is if we need the nephrologist and the renal dialysis 

nurse. And we only have them in Saskatoon, Regina, and 

perhaps some services in Prince Albert and Lloydminster; 

they’re supervised in those centres. 

 

It’s a problem of personnel, not machines. And you can’t send a 

nephrologist out to a community that might have, in a large 

area, five people that need renal dialysis because it wouldn’t 

make sense. 

 

So I’m sorry to be long-winded about the answer, but I’m trying 

to say to the member, we will do anything we can do to assist 

people that need renal dialysis. The problem, when we say that 

you have to go to Regina or Saskatoon, Prince Albert or 

Lloydminster, is not one of money, it’s not one of a lack of a 

machine, it is one of the fact that in a smaller centre, if they 

need the expert assistance of a nephrologist or renal dialysis 

nurse, we may not have it there. 

 

Having said that, what we’re trying to do, as I’ve indicated in  

the House and in the media, is to examine whether there are 

some other centres in the province in addition to the four 

centres where we’ve got the nephrologists and renal dialysis 

nurses that could have those services on a supervised basis. And 

we’re trying to analyse the numbers and see if we can extend 

them. 

 

But I have to say to the member that wouldn’t necessarily mean 

that every community where somebody needs dialysis would 

ever get a dialysis centre right close to their home, because 

we’re talking about numbers like this: in the north-eastern part 

of the province there’s a potential of 10 people that need this 

kind of service. There would be more people that get home 

dialysis. 

 

In North Battleford area, 9 people; Lestock, 8 people, 

Lloydminster, a potential of 11 people. Actually they are being 

served in Lloydminster, I believe. Yorkton, a potential of 6 

people in the area that might not have to travel. 

 

So I think the member — I hope — can understand that it isn’t 

a matter of a lack of will, it isn’t a matter of a lack of money, 

it’s a matter of organization and personnel. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 

that’s basically what I was asking you. If a district . . . And I 

happened to use dialysis because that was something that was 

just brought to my attention just a few moments ago, Mr. 

Minister, and I just brought that . . . used that, but . . . that 

specific procedure. 

 

But I think there are other procedures that certainly could be 

developed and could be enhanced and it would certainly take 

some of the pressure off the large urban centres, especially with 

the reduction in beds. 

 

And I guess what I’m specifically looking for, Mr. Minister, is 

the fact that as people throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, and district health boards working in 

conjunction with local communities and the taxpayers of their 

area, find innovative ways to provide procedures, if they can 

find qualified personnel who would like to practise in their 

area, practise in a community, maybe working together with 

another district and sharing some services, if they can do that 

and provide the personnel that are needed, the fact that the 

department would certainly take a serious look and the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association as well would acknowledge 

and would indeed grant a licence to provide . . . 

 

And we’re not talking of the very extensive procedures. But, 

Mr. Minister, every time you open up a bed, you allow for 

somebody with a highly more sensitive procedure to get into 

that bed quicker. Like one I’ll just raise in a minute that just 

came to my attention. But that’s the question. 

 

What I’m asking, Mr. Minister, if . . . (inaudible) . . . districts 

even . . . because some of these things, ideas that people have, 

one district can’t do it alone. But have districts working 

together, and maybe sharing medical profession and staff, 

would be able to offer that in what they have, facilities already 

that certainly do have a fair bit of the equipment. 



1768  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

And just the assurances that that’s something that certainly 

would be looked upon positively and that they would be able to 

offer that service based on the fact that it would work in 

conjunction with the funds that are already there or the fact that 

if the service isn’t provided here, if they can provide it locally, 

that means . . . it doesn’t necessarily . . . it’s taken away from 

the funds, but it’s just that you’re finding areas of certainly 

utilizing the professional staff that are already out there. Is that 

. . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I think what the member says is 

correct — that we should explore ways to have the districts 

cooperate and to try to provide services maybe they don’t 

provide now. And if those can be done on a sensible basis in 

the local area, that’s what we should be doing. 

 

And many districts actually are doing that kind of thing now so 

that they’ve . . . some of them have hired additional specialists 

that they didn’t have before. I think we heard about the 

orthopedic surgery in North Battleford that they’re going to 

have. 

 

Some of them have a lot of itinerant surgery. They have the 

specialists coming out, and the local doctors are participating 

and cooperating in that. And to the extent we can do that, we 

definitely should. And I agree with the member in that regard. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, two specific cases that just came to 

my desk, so I haven’t had the time to chat with you about them. 

But in one case, an individual who has been waiting since last 

fall for, it appears to be bypass surgery. How should I get back 

to this person as to the process they should follow? They 

understand now . . . Actually the wife had called me, quite 

concerned, because her husband’s been told not to do anything. 

That within a year, unless something is done fairly quickly, 

there could be major, drastic circumstances. What process 

should they follow with this concern? 

 

And I’ll throw one other one at you that is a different related 

matter. It has to do with the use of syringes and insulin vials — 

needles, in regards to insulin, and the safe disposal of. Do we 

have places where individuals can certainly dispose of vials and 

insulin needles, rather than just throwing them in the 

waste-basket to be thrown out in the local dump, Mr. Minister? 

Is there a format that can be followed for safe disposal of this 

equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  With respect to the first question — the 

man waiting for bypass surgery — I would want . . . I know that 

people are actually getting bypass surgery on a very rapid basis, 

if they’re classified as emergency or urgent. There are three 

categories that the physician and the specialists will categorize 

people as. They are emergency, urgent, and elective. And I 

don’t know anything about the man’s case or how he’s been 

classified. 

 

But they should do two things. They should talk to the 

quality-of-care coordinator in the health district, who will look 

into the concern for them and see why it is that they’re still 

waiting. And they should also talk to their physician about 

whether the case needs to be reclassified. Because usually we  

find that when somebody complains that they’ve been waiting 

for quite some time and we check into it, normally the physician 

and the specialists have classified them as an elective case. But 

if their condition has worsened, perhaps they should be 

reclassified as an urgent case or an emergency case. And people 

are sometimes reclassified and they receive their surgery faster. 

And of course, if it’s urgent, they would receive it right away. 

 

So I think they should do two things: talk to the quality-of-care 

coordinator, and also talk to the physician about how they are 

classified and on what list they are. 

 

On the disposal issue, I don’t believe the government or the 

health districts have any system for disposal of the things that 

the member has talked about. The pharmaceutical association 

has a project whereby at certain times they encourage people to 

bring items into the drugstore. They have these “clean out your 

medicine cabinet” days. And then they would, on a voluntary 

basis, take some of these things and dispose of them. I don’t 

know whether that’s an entirely satisfactory answer, but it’s the 

only answer that I have at the moment with respect to safe 

disposal of some of these items. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I certainly will be 

getting a note off that will reach you the first of the week, just 

be a little more specific so you can respond to it. I just wanted 

to bring it to your attention this morning. 

 

And on the question regarding the disposal of syringes and 

needles — the concern came from an individual who had 

moved from Alberta and apparently they did have a program in 

Alberta where you could take it to the hospital, take this 

equipment back to the hospital and they would safely dispose of 

it. And I guess I would ask if your department is looking at, 

down the road . . . or looking at some ways of making sure that 

there’s safe disposal of this type of equipment. 

 

The second thing, Mr. Minister, what is your department doing 

regarding syringes and test strips for individuals who must take 

insulin? Is there any coverage for that yet or is that totally the 

cost of the person who needs the service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think we should explore the member’s 

suggestion of other ways to dispose of some of these items; so 

we’ll follow up on that. 

 

With respect to the test strips and syringes, the test strips are 

treated as any other drug. There may or may not be coverage 

under the drug plan, depending upon a person’s income and the 

cost of their drugs. The syringes are not covered at all. That 

would be the expense of individuals, other than individuals on 

social assistance or who may get supplementary health coverage 

because they’re very low income people. 

 

(1300) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. On another related 

matter, I just had a concern raised by an individual locally in my 

constituency as well. And this is actually a federally related 

concern but I’d like to get a response from you. 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

A number of people in our area have certainly, over the past 

number of years, looked more and more at natural herbs and 

medicines and found that in many cases, as they’ve used some 

of these medicines, they have found certainly a direct help in 

their lifestyle and in their lives in correcting some of the 

problems that they may be facing. 

 

And specifically one individual that I talked to just recently has 

gone on some natural herbs and medicines and this individual 

happens to be a person suffering from multiple sclerosis. And 

he’s informed me that, versus the drugs that he was prescribed 

with, he’s found that his response and his ability for a more 

wholesome life has certainly been improved by it. 

 

My understanding is that the federal government is proposing 

. . . or looking at proposals of taking these natural herbs and 

spices and moving them into the area of being administered just 

like any other drug. And I think that’s the major concern. I 

believe that that’s the question that’s coming. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what the Department of 

Health has been doing; if this is something that you’ve had 

knowledge of, whether you’re raising some concerns about it, 

and whether or not we should continue to allow these 

medications or these herbs to be available in their current 

format. 

 

In many cases people are actually paying a lot, a fair bit, for 

some of the drugs and the natural herbs that they are taking, and 

it’s coming out of their own pocket. But I’d be very concerned 

if all of a sudden we moved this and put it under the drug 

protection . . . or a drug law that basically says you must get a 

physician’s prescription, because there are many physicians 

who do not agree with using natural herbs and medicines. 

 

There are other physicians who are beginning to look at the 

broad spectrum and realizing that there may be a base . . . and in 

fact are starting to use it in their practice. And I think that’s a 

concern that people have. 

 

So I’m just asking what, if anything, your department has done, 

or some of the considerations that may be given in view of 

some of the changes that the federal government might be 

looking at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We really haven’t been taking any steps 

just because, as the member indicates, it’s a matter of federal 

jurisdiction. 

 

I think that it would be important to have some regulation with 

respect to anything that is harmful to people. There is an issue 

of public safety involved. But beyond that, beyond situations 

where the public safety would be jeopardized, I think we tend to 

think that there should be a lot of room for freedom of choice 

by the consumer. 

 

So we want the federal government to pursue the matter with 

respect to any legitimate issues of public safety. And if they 

have to regulate some natural occurring substance in the 

interests of public safety, then we have to respect that. 

 

But in terms of generally do we see a need to require 

prescription of naturally occurring substances, I think the 

answer would be that we would want to preserve a lot of 

freedom of choice on the part of the consumer beyond that 

category of things where a public safety issue concern may be 

identified. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I trust and I hope 

that certainly your department will keep tabs on this and follow 

it through. 

 

And if it does become a major debate, if the federal government 

department of Health certainly decides it’s going to really get 

involved and curb the use of this, that your department would 

make a presentation. So at least ask for the government to be 

very open in its consultation process and not just jump on the 

bandwagon, because say some drug companies would like to 

see this because maybe their drug sales are being affected by it. 

I think you would certainly acknowledge that there could be 

pressure coming from the drug companies to indeed put these 

types of drugs under a prescription mode. 

 

So I’m asking you on behalf of theses individuals to at least 

keep that in mind. And if the question is raised, to make sure 

that you stand and call for a real, open dialogue and 

consultation in regards to the concerns raised . . . that may be 

raised and no doubt will be raised. But if there’s a broad, open 

process, I think we’ll be able to determine what is justified and 

what isn’t. 

 

Another question I’d like to move to and that’s, in regards to 

the Dorsey report, a number of former SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union) on permanent disability have 

been told they will be cut off because the Dorsey report forces 

SGEU members to join CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees). 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we raised this awhile back. We had asked 

you what will happen, transpire, with regards to individuals 

who are members of SGEU who are under permanent disability. 

As a result of the Dorsey report, their status as a union member 

changes. 

 

But does that mean that their ability to receive compensation for 

an injury that had occurred awhile back, and they’re, in some 

cases, taking rehabilitation . . . We brought the case of an 

individual from the Wascana Rehab Centre. I’d like to know 

what has happened to date, what your department is doing to 

address this problem that may arise and where a few people 

may fall between the cracks as a result of the report. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I am familiar with the issue the 

member is raising, and it has been raised before. There is no 

requirement per se as a result of the Dorsey report that SGEU, 

you know, cut the people off who are on disability. SGEU 

certainly has the ability to continue the coverage, and indeed 

that’s what they’re still doing. 

 

But we recognize that we have to find a long-term solution 

whereby we determine who the payor should be, if it’s SGEU 

or otherwise. And we’re just presently involved in a process  



1770  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

whereby we’re trying to . . . well we’re having discussions 

between SGEU and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations) and the Department of Health, and I 

believe the Department of Labour have some involvement in 

that. We’re trying to it bring to a resolution. There’s been no 

resolution made as of yet. 

 

But everybody has the same point of view, which is at the end 

of the day we have to ensure that the people that are entitled to 

coverage get coverage, and they’re getting it now and we’re 

going to work to make sure that they continue to get the 

coverage that they need to have. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. On that note, your last 

comment, that you’re going to work towards it, I think it’s 

imperative that initiatives be taken and that people don’t lose it 

simply because there was a change in policy as a result of a 

report. 

 

I think we certainly acknowledge that by working to cut down 

the number of bargaining units in the health districts certainly 

simplifies the process, and we agreed with you on that. It’s just 

that it’s imperative that we certainly protect people who as a 

result of changes may be left out in the dark, and we work 

towards certainly working through those situations. 

 

Another concern we raised was the Sharon Schriener case — 

the woman in need of jaw implants. And you stated at the time 

that you would review that matter. Mr. Minister, where are we 

today in regards to Ms. Schriener? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is still under review. I think, as I told the 

member from Rosthern, it was actually some weeks before we 

received any kind of medical information in that particular case. 

And that has been received. It is currently being reviewed by 

the Department of Health, but I was advised the other day that 

there was some other information that the Department of Health 

is currently asking for that it hasn’t received yet. I’m not saying 

asking that particular individual, but asking other sources. And 

they’re in the process of gathering information, looking at the 

policy, and then they will proceed accordingly. 

 

But it hasn’t been a case of simply delaying the matter. It’s been 

a case of some time taking place to get the information to the 

department. And I was advised just two or three days ago when 

I made an inquiry, as I said to the member from Rosthern that I 

would, that the reason they hadn’t made any recommendation to 

me was that they were asking some other parties for some other 

information, which presumably they’re still waiting for. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. We look forward to 

further dialogue and certainly consultation and communication 

of any . . . how this has moved along and where we’re at. And 

I’m sure the member from Rosthern would appreciate that as 

well. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ve raised on a number of occasions how 

district health boards report. And I notice the Provincial Auditor 

certainly raised some questions as well. One of the questions 

we have . . . and I’ll throw this out and I just want to  

know exactly where the department is coming from. 

 

But as you know, you and I, as members, have full disclosure of 

everything that we’re paid — from our travel and all the areas 

of remuneration that we’re responsible for. Government 

departments have to list out who all is in the department and 

what they’re paid as a salary, their cost and remuneration. 

 

Unfortunately, in the district health boards we’re getting broad 

. . . we’re just getting a broad report of . . . the administration 

costs so much or the board costs were at such a level. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is being done to make sure district health 

boards follow the same example that all other levels of 

department, including your department, in regards to each 

individual in an administrative level, their salary and the perks 

that they would receive such as travel and what have you, and 

certainly all board members, their individual per diems and 

travels and travel costs and all costs that would be associated? 

Is your department following up on this, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes we are. I want to say in a general way 

that our view is that matters which involve public finances 

should be reported as openly as is proper and possible. 

 

And of course secondly, we want to comply with the 

recommendations of the Provincial Auditor, and the Provincial 

Auditor has said that the health districts are actually making 

quite a bit of progress in that regard. 

 

In terms of the reports and specifically answering the question 

about what are we doing, we’re trying to get a common format 

together that all district health boards will comply with in which 

they will list their suppliers and payees. And I’m working with 

the Health Districts Advisory Committee to come up with a 

format that some are already using, generally speaking, and 

others could use; so that all the information that should properly 

be made public is in fact published by the boards. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recognize the Minister 

of Economic Development wants to get on the floor as well. 

There’s a number of questions here, so I’ll try to move through 

some of them quickly and allow you to respond either . . . in 

writing. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many Saskatchewan seniors are on 

waiting-lists for nursing home spaces and how many are on 

waiting-lists for home care? How many long-term beds have 

been cut from government-run nursing homes since 1991? 

 

And there’s another question here in regards to gynecology 

services at the Regina General. Is the Regina General Hospital 

the only hospital in the city of Regina currently delivering 

babies, and are there enough delivery rooms available? We’ve 

had some individuals who have called concerned about the fact 

that in some cases they’ve ended up having to wait in hallways 

because of the fact that maybe at different times there’s just 

been a lack of rooms available. Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think, Mr. Speaker, the answer in terms  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

of the number of nursing home beds would be roughly this — 

not necessarily exactly because these figures are the number of 

long-term care clients in ’91-92 versus ’95-96 — in ’91-92 

there were 10,162 long-term care clients; in 1995-96 there were 

9,605. So that would be a difference of roughly 557. So we 

might assume that the number of beds has gone down by about 

5 per cent. 

 

And I won’t go into a long-winded answer about other services, 

like home care, respite care, adult day care, and so on. I think 

the member knows the arguments. 

 

(1315) 

 

And we don’t have figures about the number of people on 

waiting-lists. Those would be kept at the district level. But I can 

tell the member that as a result of some of the other things that 

are being done, the waiting-lists have generally got shorter. 

 

And I can refer to Saskatoon, for example, where before they 

started actually reducing the number of beds and increasing 

home care, they had a list of about 400 people. And I believe 

that list is down to less than a hundred now, even though they 

have fewer beds, because they have more home care, respite 

care, adult day care. And the waiting time has gone down from 

several months to usually less than two months to get into a 

long-term care facility. So there’s some improvement there. 

 

In terms of the issue of gynecological surgery that the member 

also raises, I share the member’s concern. I think there have 

been some problems with respect to waiting times in 

gynecological surgery. And the Regina Health District, the 

Saskatoon Health District, and the Department of Health are all 

working together to try to improve that. And they’ve taken 

some steps that should shorten the waiting times for 

gynecological surgery. But this is in fact a legitimate concern 

that the member has. I share it, and we’ve been trying to work 

with the districts to address the problem for, actually several 

months, I think. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One question that may 

have just alluded you as you were talking to your officials is the 

concern about the lack of maybe enough maternity beds at the 

General Hospital, as I believe the service has been certainly 

amalgamated into the one facility, and the fact that at times 

where patients have actually been on . . . just waiting in the 

hallways for delivery. And it’s a concern that’s been raised, and 

what’s being done to address that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised by the officials that there was 

one-time period where there was no space available in the 

neonatal unit, but that that is no longer the case. And that in the 

obstetrical unit, this generally has not been a problem. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, without getting into a lot of details 

. . . and certainly an issue that I can raise with you — I’ve raised 

it with the Minister of Social Services — as a result of the 

development that took place in regards to a recent delivery in 

the General. And one of the big concerns that came, as far as 

the medical part of it, was there seemed to be a very real lack of 

communication between the staff at the General and the couple  

that had had this new arrival come into their lives. 

 

And rather than getting into details, I’ll certainly write you 

about it and get you to certainly look into it as well, and just 

check into what may have happened and why this couple may 

have felt, or are feeling that they really didn’t have enough 

communication. There are certainly some tragic — I shouldn’t 

say real tragic, but some real concerns that arose as a result of 

it. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ve had a number of private care homes and 

services through private care homes provided in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We brought in regulations to certainly set some 

guidelines, and to make sure that private care homes meet a 

certain standard. What is the department doing to follow up and 

make sure that indeed private care homes are providing the 

services that they have indicated that they would provide, in the 

fact that we are indeed . . . individuals are receiving the same 

type or close to the same quality of service that they would 

receive in a publicly funded care home? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The personal care homes are inspected 

each year and licensed each year. And I’m advised that our 

statutory and regulatory requirements are probably higher than 

the rest of the country. I think, as the member indicated, these 

homes were not licensed and regulated prior to the last small 

number of years. 

 

And so we’re taking some steps to make sure that they adhere 

to certain standards. And the standards have certainly improved 

quite considerably in the last short while. I know that on a few 

occasions unfortunately we have denied licences to personal 

care homes, and those have come to my attention. So I’m aware 

of the fact that where there have been deficiencies in care, that 

we’ve been prepared to take steps to . . . and actually shut a few 

of the personal care homes down. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, a while back you talked about 

certainly bringing in regulations that would allow midwifery 

into the province of Saskatchewan. I think there’s been a push 

for quite awhile to allow that, midwifery to be available, and 

based on some of the changes that have taken place, where are 

we today with regards to midwifery in the province? Is it a 

procedure or a service that is available? Is this service . . . and 

what’s the cost in relation to a normal process of delivery in a 

hospital with the services of an obstetrician? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  At the present time the status of midwifery 

in Saskatchewan is that it is not a licensed and regulated 

practice. And before we can have licensed and regulated 

midwifery, we would have to pass a law in this legislature 

making midwifery legal and providing for the licensing of 

midwives and regulation. 

 

And so there is a transitional committee that is going to advise 

the government in terms of what the legislation should say, and 

I hope to bring the legislation before the House next year, or 

later this year if there is another legislative session. But 

realistically, it might take until next spring to develop the 

legislation, these things going as they do. 

 



1772  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

And then once we pass the legislation, we would have to wait 

awhile to proclaim it so that we could have the proper 

regulations in place, which of course we should start working 

on now simultaneously with the legislation. And after that 

midwifery would become licensed and regulated in the 

province. 

 

So you’re likely looking at one or two years to complete that 

process. Obviously next spring being the first realistic time 

where you might get that kind of Bill through the House. 

 

In terms of the system beyond that, we heard from a lot of 

people over the last few years. One of the things we heard was 

that most women were satisfied with the maternity services they 

were receiving, although they also felt people should have the 

option of having a licensed and regulated midwife if they 

wanted to. 

 

In terms of the cost, that’s a difficult question for me to answer. 

Because if you talked to the advocates for midwifery, they say 

the costs are a certain amount; if you talk to the obstetricians 

and the physicians, they say it’s a different amount. And they 

seem to have different points of view about which one is more 

cost effective. And I can’t give you a specific answer about the 

costs. 

 

But I will say that we do want women to have the option of 

having midwives. They would now pay for that themselves. 

However, we will allow the health districts to employ midwives 

and provide that service if they feel that there’s a need for that 

to be done. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well just one comment in response. I think a lot 

of people had anticipated that with the announcement you had 

made a while back that there was certainly aggressive 

movement in this area. And from what I understand, we really 

. . . while it was announced we’d be looking at it, we really 

haven’t moved that far in regards to that service at the current 

time. 

 

I have a question here; actually two questions that basically are 

funding questions. And if you want, Mr. Minister, you can 

certainly take the time to send me a response in writing. 

 

What has been the total cost of renovations needed to be 

undertaken to the General and Pasqua hospitals in view of the 

imminent closure that it seems that your government is quite 

intent on doing with regards to the Plains health care centre? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we’ve also sent across a list of global 

questions. I’m wondering, are those global questions available? 

Do they include ministerial travel; who are your ministerial 

assistants and salaries over the past number of years? Where are 

the global questions today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  In answer to the question about the amount 

of money spent so far on the General and the Pasqua, I don’t 

have those numbers in front of me, but I certainly will provide 

them to the member. 

 

The global questions, our understanding is that the answers will  

be provided . . . we were under the impression they would be 

provided today. But they are being provided through out House 

business office, I believe. And certainly they’re prepared and 

ready, and if not today then we would think early next week. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. As you can 

appreciate, the global questions are a series of questions that, 

based on what’s taken place in the past, it can certainly be time 

consuming and we just want your assurances that we will have 

those questions. 

 

Most times we’d certainly prefer that we had them prior to any 

wind-up of the session, and so I thank you for your assurances. 

 

One more question I would like to ask, Mr. Minister. And this 

is a result of Carol Crame, a Saskatoon resident who has 

cerebral palsy, is a client of Saskatchewan Social Services, who 

lost her husband last year. And I believe she was looking for 

some help in contracting attendant care service so she can 

remain living in her own home. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if this is an area that your 

department has looked into, whether home care is able to 

provide a service to meet the need of this specific individual. 

And I won’t get into a lot of details or questions about it, but 

maybe if you can give me your assurances that we’ve looked 

into it or that the department is indeed looking into it and where 

we are today with this specific concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We’re in the process right now of 

examining the question of self-managed care. And there’s a 

working group that involves some people from the department 

and from other agencies that are looking at the concept and I 

would hope that we would have something specific to say about 

it in the not-too-distant future. 

 

In the meantime we would want to also work with the 

individual in terms of their home care needs and try to provide 

them with the level of support that they need, and I assume that 

some of that is going on. 

 

These are issues that in the last number of years have almost 

exploded in terms of the things that we do in society that we 

didn’t used to do, and in some ways I think we’re still learning. 

Of course we should always be learning in these areas. And I 

think there is some improvement to be made, which is why 

we’re currently examining the question of self-managed care. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I think your 

comments are certainly true. And the unfortunate part in society 

with the changes, there are cases, and this happens to be one, 

where it’s not totally Social Services nor is it Health; it’s an 

in-between. And I think we need . . . departments certainly need 

to work together to address the issues in relation to a person’s 

well-being and quality care. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your officials for their 

attendance. I thank you for the responses and for any responses 

that we’ve asked that you’ve offered to give. We look forward 

to receiving those in the near future. 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to 

the minister and his officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a few questions surrounding the Central 

Plains Health District and I would appreciate some answers for 

you. 

 

I had mentioned in this House before to you and through 

correspondence, that there were some pretty grave concerns 

expressed through the audit of the Central Plains District and 

also the Provincial Auditor regarding the internal control 

process of Central Plains Health District, and I guess I would 

refer to that as the management. 

 

And I’ve asked you to respond, to personally investigate these 

problems. And I’d like to know if you’ve done this. 

 

(1330) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The auditor’s reports for the 1995-96 fiscal 

year do indicate that the Central Plains Health District does 

have reliable financial statements. 

 

There’s always room for improvement and that’s one of the 

reasons why of course audits take place. The audit is a useful 

tool to point out any deficiencies, but it’s sort of like the 

question of the glass being half empty or half full. 

 

In the case of Central Plains, like the other health districts, the 

glass is mainly full in the sense that the auditor finds that they 

have reliable financial statements. But they have some 

deficiencies and it’s good to point those out in the sense that 

that enables us to then make improvements. 

 

And of course the auditor has said that over the last number of 

years the districts have been working to improve their financial 

situation, their financial accountability, and that’s good. And 

certainly the issues that the member raises and the auditor 

raises, we have to take those issues very seriously. And I’m 

committed to, as I’ve indicated to the member, to ensuring that 

the district health board is aware of the issues and responds to 

them and makes a commitment to deal with any deficiencies 

that there are. 

 

And I think we have to move forward in a very positive and 

proactive way to deal with any deficiencies identified in an 

audit. That’s what an audit is for. And I certainly welcome all 

of the member’s suggestions that she’s made and I assure her 

that it will be my expectation that any deficiencies will continue 

to be corrected as time goes on. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have 

some documentation here from the Provincial Auditor that tells 

me that there are some serious concerns regarding the amounts 

of money spent and how things are done. So my concern is with 

the management. 

 

For instance, the Provincial Auditor mentions that the board did 

not approve board members’ expenses amounting to $10,029. 

The board did not approve executive directors’ expenses 

amounting to $5,106. The staff did not use receiving reports  

and purchase orders. The boards did not approve a severance 

payment amounting to $42,757. Supervisors did not always 

approve employee time sheets. And the Provincial Auditor did 

recommend that the board should establish written rules and 

procedures to safeguard and control its assets and to ensure 

compliance with the law. My concern, Mr. Minister, is not that 

there has not been proper policy guidelines given to the district, 

but that the district is not following policy guidelines laid out 

by Saskatchewan Health. 

 

I could go on. The Provincial Auditor also speaks of written 

operating agreements, and he states that the board’s written 

operating agreements with the affiliates that provide services 

for the board should be done, and there has been no written 

agreement at the time of this audit between the district health 

board and the affiliates. 

 

I find that really something that needs to be looked at 

immediately by the minister who is responsible. The 

recommendations stated the boards should have written 

operating agreements with affiliated organizations that provide 

services for the board. 

 

And then in complying with authorities, the Provincial Auditor 

states that the board paid directors $69,372 during the year for 

pay and expenses without adequate authority. The Department 

of Health obtained an order in council appointing the directors, 

but the order did not specify the pay and expenses for the 

directors. In our opinion, an order in council must specify the 

pay and expenses. 

 

That brings me also, Mr. Minister, to one other point that the 

audit had to do with and that’s the accountability, not only by 

the management of Central Plains Health District, but by the 

cabinet of which you are a part. And this is surrounding the 

issue of remuneration and reimbursement rates paid to board 

members. It states that . . . it does state in government health 

policy that remuneration to district employees is to be approved 

by an order in council. And it also states that this was not done. 

 

Now I’d like to know why not. It seems to me that you should 

have recognized that Central Plains Health District’s statement 

of remuneration was absent from cabinet scrutiny. It must have 

been missing when you were reviewing this, and I presume that 

cabinet should be scrutinizing this carefully. If not, I would 

have to ask why they’re not doing that and why they’re not 

paying close enough attention to what comes across the cabinet 

table. 

 

Can you please reply to those comments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I think that the value of the audit, as 

I’ve said before, is to point out those things which are not being 

done correctly. That is what the auditor has done. 

 

And of course what the district is doing and what we’re doing is 

to take steps to rectify those things that aren’t being done 

correctly; so that where the auditor said that approvals should 

be done in a certain way, the district is taking steps to do the 

things in the way that the auditor recommends. And where the 

auditor said that an order in council is necessary from the  



1774  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

cabinet, such an order in council already was passed. 

 

And of course in the future we want to try to make sure that 

there isn’t any other situation where an expenditure isn’t 

properly authorized. 

 

So that the member’s concerns are very valid. The concerns of 

the Provincial Auditor are very valid. And it’s my responsibility 

and that of the district health board to correct any deficiencies 

that are identified. And I thank the member for raising the 

matter, and I assure the member that what we want to do is to 

rectify these concerns. And that’s what we’re doing. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just have 

another couple of questions surrounding St. Elizabeth’s 

Hospital in Humboldt. 

 

It was noted that the hospital was facing a shortfall of $400,000 

and it would have to be cutting about $400,000 from its 

1997-98 fiscal year. In view of the fact that there has been no 

accounting I guess, by the provincial government or the district, 

or whoever is responsible for inflation, etc., their budget has 

remained the same for the last two years. And that has put them 

in a very awkward position as far as being able to maintain 

funding for full servicing. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you were talking at one point with the 

mayor of Humboldt, and you did make the comment that, as far 

as you could see, that that hospital should have full services 

considering the population around the area, and the services 

provided were necessary. So with your new budget that you’ve 

put forward this year, there is some money coming in; although 

it’s not as much as last year. 

 

And St. Elizabeth’s still faces $168,000 in shortfall even with 

this additional money. This $168,000, where will it come from? 

If you in fact believe that that hospital is providing the services 

necessary for the area, will the provincial government back your 

feeling on this and help out that hospital with the $168,000 that 

they will need to provide full services as are now in operation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the funding from the hospital . . . or 

for the hospital will come from the district, and the district will 

receive its funding from the provincial government 

 

I understand that there’re discussions ongoing between the 

board and the hospital as to the level of funding. And as 

Minister of Health, I don’t take the side of one or the other in 

terms of how much money one should have, and the other 

should give. This is a usual case of an institution wanting more 

money, and the board wanting to give less money. And neither 

is right, and neither is wrong. It’s just a case of coming to a 

satisfactory agreement, which they’re working on. 

 

I think we . . . this isn’t directed at the member, but generally I 

think it’s always important to be accurate and careful about our 

language. And there have been some people in the community 

that have suggested, as a result of a funding dispute between the 

hospital and the board, that the future of the hospital is at risk 

or there won’t be a hospital. 

Well St. Elizabeth’s Hospital is in fact, as the member knows, 

the largest facility in the health district. It will continue to 

provide a very important service to the people of Humboldt and 

area. I have every confidence about that. And I also have every 

confidence that the health board and the hospital are both 

comprised of people who are good people who want to serve 

the public and proceed in good faith. 

 

And I’ve met with both representatives of the hospital and the 

board, and I have every confidence that in a very positive and 

public-spirited way, they will achieve the resolution they need 

with respect to the amount of money that the hospital needs. 

 

The Deputy Chair:  Why is the member for Regina 

Sherwood on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  To request leave, Mr. Chairman, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my pleasure 

on behalf of my colleague, the hon. member for Regina 

Northeast this afternoon, to introduce to you and to my 

colleagues here in the legislature, 12 students of the adult basic 

education program here at SIAST in Regina. They’re here for a 

tour which they are about to go on. I met with them for half an 

hour ago to handle a few questions and we had a very, very 

good discussion. 

 

And I would just like all of my colleagues here this afternoon to 

recognize these students and the course they are representing. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 

some questions surrounding the Central Plains Health District 

home care budget. Now in the House last week I believe, I 

brought up to you the concern I had regarding the cuts to home 

care service hours. At that time I mentioned to you that there is 

a problem with giving service to severely disabled people 

because of cut-backs. And other people are suffering from these 

cut-backs also. 

 

It is my understanding that Saskatchewan Health and your 

government’s policy is to improve home care. You and I had 

some discussion about this problem behind the bar here one 

day, and I noticed that you said more money was being given 

for home care. And in fact when we look at the budget for 

Central Plains, there is in fact $61,000 more going into 

community-based, I believe it’s stated, and home care. 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

So if there is that much more money going in, I have to ask you 

to sort of help to explain to the people in that district why there 

would be 6,000 service hours being cut. It doesn’t seem to 

make sense to me. Somewhere there was something amiss, and 

this money is obviously not being utilized properly or 

something. 

 

So if you could comment on this. Because I know when I spoke 

with you, you felt that this was not right in some way or other, 

that there should be the service hours provided, because there 

was more money going in. And I agree with you. Could you 

please comment on what you think might be the problem? And 

I’d like to know if you have contacted Central Plains home care 

coordinator to get an explanation for this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  With respect to the individual’s problem 

that the member raised in the legislature, I believe the district 

held a conference with the family and some other service 

providers to assist and support the family about the need for 

respite services. The member sent me a letter, which I don’t 

have in front of me, but it dealt with numbers that were 

somewhat dated, in the sense that it dealt with last year’s budget 

but not this year’s budget. 

 

And my understanding is that the district is in the process of 

finalizing their budget for this year — that is the ’97-98 year. 

And the district is planning for an increase in services and 

budget. So that as a result of the budget of March 20, the 

district will be putting more money into home care, in terms of 

both the amount of dollars and the amount of services. I think 

the member will recall that she sent me a letter which dealt 

with, I think, what had happened in the ’95-96 fiscal year — or 

was it ’96-97? 

 

But in any event, with respect to the current fiscal year, the 

district is planning for an increase in services and budget. But 

the district hasn’t announced its budget yet. So this is no 

criticism of the member, because she can’t know what the 

numbers are if she doesn’t have them. They’re still in the 

process of finalizing. But I can say that any new money going in 

through the most recent provincial budget will indeed, I’m told, 

result in an increase at the district level. 

 

(1345) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

just move to a different line of questioning here. If I could ask 

the minister and his officials, possibly within the next day or 

two, to give me a listing of all of the hospitals, stated as 

hospitals, in the province, and also all the health care facilities 

in the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you some questions 

surrounding St. Joseph’s Hospital in Macklin. Is that hospital 

designated as a hospital right now? Or is it designated as a 

health care centre? Or what is it designated as? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’d be happy to provide the member with 

the list that she has asked for within the next few days or early 

next week. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, we have a problem with St. Joseph’s 

Hospital in Macklin. On May 12, St. Joseph’s Hospital 

administrator received a letter dated May 5, 1997 from Revenue 

Canada stating that they in fact were . . . Here’s the letter. It 

says: 

 

This refers to a letter that we received from Mr. Kevin 

Veitenheimer, financial consultant, Saskatchewan Health, 

on October 8, 1996, in which he requested that the 

Greenhead District Health Board be designated as a 

hospital authority pursuant to subsection 123 of the Excise 

Tax Act for the purpose of the goods and services tax. 

 

Now we have been advised by Saskatchewan Health that 

the St. Joseph’s Hospital in Macklin, which is affiliated 

with the Greenhead District Health Board, is no longer 

recognized as a hospital effective October 1, 1993. 

Therefore the hospital status previously granted by the 

Department of National Health and Welfare to St. Joseph’s 

Hospital in Macklin is hereby revoked effective October 1, 

1993. 

 

Mr. Minister, first of all I understand that Macklin, the St. 

Joseph’s Hospital in Macklin, complied with The Hospital 

Standards Act. 

 

They have put a great deal of money into building their new 

facility, I believe $4 million, most of which was raised by the 

local people; 80 per cent was. The other 20 per cent came from 

infrastructure money. Due to this letter retroactive to October 1, 

1993, they will have to pay around $150,000 back in taxes. 

 

Now I need some explanation of this because these people are 

asking about it. Could you please comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think that we’re in discussion with 

Revenue Canada. We don’t agree with the approach Revenue 

Canada is taking in that whether somebody donates to a hospital 

or a health centre, shouldn’t make any difference in terms of 

their ability to get a tax deduction. And we’re also concerned 

about the way that this is being approached. 

 

And we’re having discussions with Revenue Canada to try to 

convince them that if people give money towards a health 

project generally, they should be able to get a deduction. And 

we think that the Revenue Canada rules haven’t really kept up 

to date in terms of what people are doing, not just in 

Saskatchewan, but across the country. And so it’s very much a 

concern to us as well. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my question to 

you surrounds the provincial government’s stand on this. 

 

It was Saskatchewan Health that forwarded this letter to 

Revenue Canada stating that this was no longer a hospital or 

recognized as a hospital. And so that brought to the attention of 

Revenue Canada, steps that they had to take in accordance with 

what they do regarding GST (goods and services tax) rebates, 

etc. 

 

Now St. Joseph’s Hospital in Macklin exists by statute  



1776  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

corporately as a hospital under its own corporation. And so I’m 

wondering, if they have complied with The Hospital Standards 

Act, if they exist as a hospital by statute, why would this letter 

go from Saskatchewan Health to the federal Revenue Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  From the point of view of provincial law, 

the health centre can be considered a hospital, as far as we’re 

concerned, for the purpose of taxation. 

 

What occurred was, we think that the federal government 

required the province to advise them what were health centres 

and what were hospitals for the purpose of GST treatment. 

Because if it was a hospital, they got a higher rebate than a 

health centre. That’s why the information was given. The 

government was required to provide that information with 

respect to the GST. 

 

And then, if the information was then interpreted for another 

purpose by Revenue Canada, that’s what they did. But they did 

not do so at our suggestion or with our support. And as far as 

we’re concerned, for taxation purposes, the health centre can be 

considered a hospital. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just want 

to make note of the fact that St. Joseph’s Hospital indeed does 

comply with every statute. They provide emergency services, 

short-term admissions, some acute care services, convalescent 

care, palliative care, observation beds. 

 

Now if in fact this is happening to St. Elizabeth’s in Macklin, it 

seems to me that the same problem is going to happen to all 

facilities that offer those same services in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think many of those facilities would like to know whether 

they’re going to be subject to a cut in the rebate from GST — I 

think it was from about 83 per cent, now down to 50 per cent. 

This is going to put them all in very stressed financial straits. 

And so, can you please comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I would comment by saying that this 

is of concern to us as well, and we would like to see consistent 

treatment by Revenue Canada of both the hospitals and the 

health centres. This isn’t something that we’re encouraging. 

We’re providing information when we’re required to. But as far 

as we’re concerned, there should be consistent treatment as 

between the hospitals and the health centres. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Just one more question, Mr. Minister. But isn’t it 

the provincial government here who determines whether, by 

statute in one way or the other, whether or not a facility is 

classified as a health centre or a hospital? And if it is, it would 

be up to you then to inform Revenue Canada that this indeed is 

a hospital. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Health centres are still designated as 

hospitals under The Hospital Standards Act. That’s the 

provincial law. Revenue Canada makes their own rules with 

respect to what they consider to be a hospital. We have not 

asked them to change their rules or suggest that they change the 

rules. They apparently are doing that. 

 

Our policy is that we think they should treat the health facilities 

consistently. We have not made any change that has required 

Revenue Canada to do what they're doing. We’ll continue to 

discuss with them our views, which I think are the same as the 

member’s views — that we think there should be consistent 

treatment as between the health centres and the hospitals. The 

health centres are still designated as hospitals under The 

Hospital Standards Act. I can’t put it any differently than that. 

We are in agreement with what the member is saying and in 

disagreement with what Revenue Canada is doing. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just look 

at this as something that the Saskatchewan Health has 

designated itself, because it is clear that Revenue Canada states: 

 

We have been advised by Saskatchewan Health that St. 

Joseph’s Hospital, Macklin, which is affiliated with the 

Greenhead District Health Board, is no longer recognized 

as a hospital, effective October 1, 1993. 

 

Now why would . . . advised by Saskatchewan Health means 

that Saskatchewan Health told them that this is no longer a 

hospital. So it is in fact the province that is determining whether 

this is a hospital or a health centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That is the interpretation of Revenue 

Canada in what they say. I’m advised that what the department 

advises them in response to their request for information is that 

whether or not a health centre provides certain types of services, 

including in-patient acute care services, which as we know, they 

don’t. 

 

The Department of Health advised Revenue Canada in which 

facilities there were in-patient acute care services and in which 

there weren’t. The Department of Health did not say these are 

no longer hospitals under The Hospital Standards Act because 

in fact, by provincial law, they still are recognized as hospitals. 

 

The rules with respect to the taxation are made by the federal 

government. We do not agree with those rules. We did not 

suggest to the federal government that they not recognize the 

hospital in Macklin as a hospital. We answered their questions 

with respect to what services are provided, and then the federal 

government makes a decision as to whether they wish to 

recognize that as a hospital or not. 

 

We don’t agree with what they’ve done. We are in agreement 

with the member that this isn’t the way they should approach it. 

We’ll continue to express that point of view to the federal 

government — that there should be consistent treatment for tax 

matters whether it’s a health centre or a hospital. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess . . . you know, 

I’m hoping that you will speak with the people at Macklin in 

that hospital — the administrators, etc. there — to encourage 

and to assure them, I guess I’d say, that you’re going to do 

everything you can to back them and to hopefully have them 

retain their hospital status. Because without it, as we well know, 

that hospital may have to be given over to the provincial 

government and we will no longer have that hospital as is. And 

I think that’s a pretty serious concern for many of the affiliates  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

around the province right now. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all, and I thank you and your 

officials for answering these questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you. Well we will continue to make 

representations to the federal government as the member 

suggests. And in fact we’re doing that through the Department 

of Finance, I’m advised, and every province has the same point 

of view. 

 

I want to thank the member and the opposition for their 

cooperation and also the officials for their assistance to the 

House today. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

(1400) 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invited the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, if I could I’d like to 

invite three of my staff who are with me here sitting nearby, 

some are in the back. I will introduce only those who are sitting 

in the front, and as others join us if needed, I’ll introduce those. 

 

Clare Kirkland of course, is deputy minister. The committee 

will be aware of Clare’s involvement as deputy. David 

McQuinn, acting executive director of policy, is sitting directly 

behind me now. And Donna Johnson, director, administrative 

services, is sitting behind me to my right. 

 

And I invite questions from members of the opposition. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you and welcome to your officials. I’m 

delighted to see you here on this gorgeous afternoon. I imagine 

you prefer being in here than outside. 

 

Maybe you could give me an idea, Mr. Minister . . . I was 

delighted to see that the cooperatives were given more money, 

but I guess my question to you is, the $285,000 that was added  

to the budget this year, is it going to be aimed towards your 

traditional type of co-op or is it the new-age type of co-op like 

the Wheat Pool? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the member raises a good 

point and that is that there is more money in our budget for 

cooperatives and cooperative development. I think almost more 

important to the cooperatives is the fact of the name change of 

the department from the Department of Economic Development 

to the Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 

 

This means that the role of co-ops in our province is going to be 

elevated within our government by changing the name and 

putting much higher emphasis on the role that the co-ops play 

in our economy. And the member will know that that is very, 

very extensive. 

 

But the extra money will be spent mostly on new-gen co-ops, 

new concept co-ops, some of course for traditional co-ops that 

are already existing. But we are working very hard and 

diligently, especially in rural Saskatchewan but not limited to 

rural, on the establishment of new co-ops, whether it be for the 

new hog barns that are springing up around the province, or 

other endeavours. 

 

We think that there are more opportunities to work with co-ops 

in the creation of new co-ops. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, does that mean that there’s going 

to be a change in some of the rules under the Securities 

Commission, making it easier to form a co-op, less 

cumbersome, less bureaucratic red tape? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well we have haven’t heard a lot of 

complaints from people establishing co-ops about the 

regulatory structure, but of course the way the structure works, 

the Department of Justice is responsible for the co-op Act and 

those elements that apply to the regulations. And they are 

constantly under review, especially now with the Lynn Minja 

committee that is looking at regulations in general with our 

commitment in Partnership for Growth to remove 25 per cent 

of the regulations in the province over the next now nine years 

— because we’ve been working on this project for about a year. 

 

So that will be reviewed and we’ll see whether or not changes 

need to be made. But we have not seen or heard a lot of 

concerns being expressed about regulatory structure, within the 

department, of co-ops. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m sure your department must 

have heard some of the concerns about the bureaucratic 

run-around you get when it comes to starting a business, period. 

I’m just wondering if your committee that’s working on the 

review of regulations, what number are you starting at when it 

comes to regulations? And have you actually started cutting 

back anything on the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member will know that the 

commitment was made in 1996 with the release of Partnership 

for Growth. So that’s a starting point for the 25 per cent 

reduction. I can get for you some of the regulatory changes that  



1778  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

have been made that have shown reductions already to this 

point. I don’t have them here with me, but we’re absolutely 

committed that that huge pile of regulations that we have in our 

province, that is probably no more and no less than there is in 

terms of Alberta or Manitoba, but we’re going to be 

streamlining our government to remove those regulations that 

impede economic development and job growth to make it easier 

for businesses and easier for companies to invest and to create 

employment in our province. 

 

Ms. Draude:  There are a number of different government 

departments and books out about starting businesses in 

Saskatchewan, and the calls I’m getting in my office are from 

people who are saying that they still find it very cumbersome 

and that they really don’t have a . . . even the list of things that 

they do and do not have to do. I’m wondering if your 

department is working on those items right now to make it easy 

for the smaller businesses, not somebody who can afford to 

have three corporate lawyers already on staff, to actually start a 

business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think it’s fair to say that there’s a 

new spirit of cooperation between the local communities and 

the provincial Department of Economic Development as well as 

the federal government’s agencies as it would relate to 

economic development. 

 

In Saskatoon, for example, we’ve collocated with your friends 

in the federal government where we run Economic 

Development out of one centre, for example, which helps have 

a one-stop shopping for federal and provincial programs, which 

is appreciated very much and is fed into very carefully by the 

Saskatoon Economic Development Authority. 

 

So we’re finding that one of the things driving small business 

and small business development is in fact the work, excellent 

work, being done by economic development authorities. And I 

think in that sense Saskatchewan’s growth in jobs that we saw 

last month, where April over April we had an increase of 

11,000 jobs, which is a record number for as far back as we can 

see between those two months, is largely due . . . at least in 

large part, due to the fact that the economic development 

authorities are really starting to kick in. 

 

And if you look at new businesses incorporated in the province 

of Saskatchewan in 1995 and 1996, you’ll find some interesting 

numbers. And I just want to go back over the short period since 

1990; let’s say 1990. 

 

In 1990 there were 2,200 — and I’m rounding these off — 

2,200 new businesses incorporated; 1991, 2,100; 1992, 2,000; 

1993, 2,400; 1994, 2,700; 1995, 3,100; and 1996, 3,600, which 

is the highest number of new incorporations that we have in our 

records. 

 

But it shows you the growth. And when you track the 

employment, interestingly enough the employment growth, the 

population growth, and the in-migration is directly affected and 

directly follows those same graphs that would show 

incorporations have a lot to do with new jobs being created. 

 

So I think Saskatchewan is really making its mark on new 

business incorporations, new jobs being created, and turning 

around the outflow, which went as high as 14, 15,000 in 1987 

and 1988, to having actually a net inflow of people into the 

province last year. 

 

And I give the credit to the business people and the 

cooperatives who are out there creating jobs. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the number you forgot to 

mention is that there’s also an increase in the number of 

business bankruptcies in this province and that percentage is 

also increasing to the highest rate in Canada. I’m wondering if 

you can relate that to the fact that we do have a tremendous 

number of business regulations and problems having a business 

here in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’m going to send the member a 

copy of this, businesses insolvencies by year, and probably 

from there you could . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I just want to remind the 

minister that use of exhibits is not permitted. And though it is 

not likely that anybody would see what was on that graph, it 

was displayed in a manner fitting an exhibit and I just remind 

the minister not to use exhibits. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Not to challenge the Chair at all, 

but I was under the assumption that exhibits were not used in 

the House but I didn’t realize that applied to committees . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It does? Because I know in other 

committees of the legislature we are allowed exhibits . . . Not 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Anyway the member . . . I’ll send her a copy of this. But it will 

show that in terms of business insolvencies, it’s quite the 

opposite of what she’s indicating. And I’ll read her the numbers 

and then I’ll send you the actual numbers of business 

insolvencies. 

 

But in 1990 the number of insolvencies reached a high of 600. 

In 1991, it dropped below 600. In 1992, it went down to 520. In 

1993, it dropped below 400. In 1994 right on 400; 1995, about 

400; 1996, the same. So it’s gone from a high of 600 per year 

when we came into government to down around 400, which is a 

pretty significant reduction. 

 

At the same time, you’d be interested to know that you can 

overlay the graph of new businesses being established. It’s been 

actually going up by leaps and bounds, and as a result of that, 

the new jobs that are being created. 

 

So I think it’s a pretty positive story. And you might be 

interested as well, is that your area of the province is one of the 

areas that is doing very, very well. Probably you could take 

some credit for that but only a little bit. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’ll take credit where credit is due, Mr. 

Minister. Actually I understand, I realize, how fortunate I am to 

be living in the part of the province where there is a tremendous 

amount of job creation done by the private sector; whereas the  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

only sustainable jobs are . . . is by the private sector. 

 

Mr. Minister, just a question on tourism. I’m sure that you are 

well aware of the fact that one of the officials from the tourism 

branch was upset with the fact that our highways are in such 

terrible shape that it’s affecting tourism in this province. I’m 

wondering if you’ve had any influence on your new Minister of 

Highways to make sure that this problem is going to be 

alleviated. I know you’re going to say $2.5 billion over the next 

10 years, but I’m not sure that’s going to be something that’s 

going to make these people feel a lot better when we’ve got the 

beginning of a long weekend and our first tourism weekend 

coming up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think most of us when we 

get out of here are going to be so happy to be out of here, we 

won’t even notice the roads as we sail home with the beautiful 

weather and all. 

 

But quite seriously, the member indicates that our roads are in 

need of extra money and that’s of course why in this year’s 

budget, we’ve added an extra 40 million. And I know that 

won’t solve all the problems, but I think it’s a real good start. 

 

(1415) 

 

And it’s also a fact that the books of the province are balanced. 

We’re running a surplus. We have more revenue from oil and 

gas and some of our resources. We’ve been able to cut the PST 

(provincial sales tax). 

 

So we see a big improvement in the road situation. And I say 

again, it won’t happen overnight but I think the extra 40 million 

a year that we’re plugging into roads is going to, over the next 

few years, make a big improvement to our highways. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the REDAs (regional economic 

development authority) that are being established and have 

actually been under way for a number of years — some of them 

are going into the second phase — I’m wondering if you can 

tell me if you have been doing any studies or any work to really 

understand what they are completing and what their . . . the 

process is that they’re making a difference to the communities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We’re doing some work on 

reviewing the REDAs. And I think it’s an interesting story — 

and maybe not surprisingly, or maybe surprisingly — that some 

are doing very, very well; others need to get a boost. And it’s 

my understanding that Bill Gaynor and the competitiveness 

review committee are looking a little bit at what REDAs are 

doing in Saskatchewan. 

 

So hopefully, when that report is released sometime this 

summer, there will be a bit of an update on where REDAs are 

at, and maybe some comment. 

 

But overall, in places like Saskatoon and Rosetown and Prince 

Albert, those areas where they’re up and operating and have 

some experience, there certainly is a different attitude about 

economic development and business development. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The REDAs that are 

. . . I’m wondering if any of them have taken over the small 

business loans association in their area, and is there any 

intention to increase the level of funding that’s allowed to that 

association up to, say, $10,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the organizations are eligible 

for a matching grant of 60,000 a year. And this is ongoing and 

is included in this year’s budget. So that’s the grant they’re 

eligible for. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are they, or do any of the REDAs look after 

the small business loans association in the area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes. Some of them do and we’re 

encouraging more to get involved in that program. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials: I just have a few questions. There’s always an air 

of excitement and expectation when there’s a discussion about 

perhaps a major industry that has a potential to select 

Saskatchewan for their place of doing business. 

 

I was wondering, Mr. Minister — I’m referring to Maple Leaf 

Meats in particular — can you give us any idea as to where this 

is at at this point in time and if our expectations can continue to 

be at a higher level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well as you know, Maple Leaf is a 

company owned by the McCain family — or at least one side of 

the McCain family — that has purchased Maple Leaf Meats and 

are now looking at building a world-class facility somewhere in 

western Canada, particularly in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, or 

Alberta. They have hired an organization out of Florida known 

as the Stellar Group to do site location in the western provinces. 

 

I understand your area . . . and we met with the economic 

development people from Yorkton and Melville in a common 

group in Yorkton the other day and had an excellent meeting 

about the potential of the Melville-Yorkton area. And we’re 

very excited about the potential of that kind of a business 

locating somewhere in Saskatchewan. 

 

But at the end of the day, not unlike when Cargill was doing 

their site selection for the oil-crushing plant, that at the end of 

the day they chose a place near Saskatoon. We’re helping the 

communities, all those communities that might be interested in 

putting together a proposal, as much as we can and in a fair and 

equitable way, to get information put together. 

 

I’m not quite sure where your community is at but I understand 

that Stellar was supposed to be back in the province sometime 

this week meeting with your economic development people in 

that region, and I’m not sure whether that meeting was held or 

not. But I know they’re putting together a proposal. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Yes, and this gives me an 

opportunity to congratulate the South Parkland Regional 

Economic Development Authority Corporation from Melville 

that has been working with the entire community to submit very 

detailed statistics and data and information that would be  



1780  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

relative to this project. 

 

I guess I would just want to ask for some assurance that the 

government will support the location, regardless of what area of 

the province it’s in; that we will get the support of the 

government for that particular area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well first of all you should know 

that the department is working very closely with all processors 

of meat in the province, whether it’s Mitchell or whether it’s 

the new Schneiders group or the Fletcher’s group, with the 

Wheat Pool or Maple Leaf. We are actually in constant 

discussions with all of them about potential expansion. And of 

course with our jobs training program, that’s a component that 

we would have available. 

 

Also through other agencies of government, whether it’s Sask 

Water or joint federal-provincial programs like PAWBED 

(Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 

Development) and PARD (Partnership Agreement on Rural 

Development), we have a package put together that I think your 

folks will tell you is pretty impressive. 

 

But I too want to congratulate all of those economic 

development authorities that are doing the research and 

development, trying to put this together. I only wish that every 

one of them could win this project because I know . . . I say 

again, like the Cargill plant or the uranium mines in northern 

Saskatchewan and the McArthur River that’s doing the big, 

hundred millions of dollars expansion, these things really do 

vitalize a community. 

 

So we’re urging the communities to put together the best 

package they can and put their best foot forward. And I know 

your group is very active. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Yes, thank you. Thank you for those comments. 

I know from an area, and it takes in about . . . within about 80 

kilometres there are human resources to the extent of over 

60,000 that can be drawn on for that area. 

 

I guess again the other question that I would like to ask is . . . 

and I’m not sure whether there would be any difference. I don’t 

see why there should be, was that the gas and power rates 

would be the same as for any other site locations that might be 

selected or looked at. 

 

Would there be any variance? Are you aware of any reason that 

there might be a variance from one site to another? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Most of all, given the fact that these 

plants probably will be located outside of an urban centre . . . 

let’s say they were at between Melville or Yorkton, let’s just 

hypothetically take that it’s going . . . it would be somewhere in 

there, or some place outside of Regina or some place outside of 

Saskatoon or some place outside of Lloydminster. Not likely 

they would locate a plant like this inside of an urban centre. 

 

That being . . . if you take that as a hypothesis, then likely the 

power, gas, and all of that would be the same, although there 

might be small nuances. If you had to run a special power line a  

farther distance at one place or the other, that might be . . . 

might turn out to be a cost factor. But the actual charge for 

power likely wouldn’t be different. 

 

One of the things that we find that is a big advantage to 

communities now is if they have full-fledged water and sewer 

systems that are capable of handling the bigger projects. This is 

almost one of the biggest community issues, is whether or not a 

plant like this, that would . . . Maple Leaf’s talking about a 

plant that would do as high as five, six million hogs a year. 

They need a tremendous amount of water and a huge capacity 

for disposal. If you’re a community that already has that 

infrastructure built, you’re at a number of steps ahead on the 

bid offer, on the financial side, than a community that would 

have to go out and redo their whole water system and sewage 

system. 

 

So those are the kinds of things that actually I think would have 

a bigger impact. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. And I agree that we must also not 

only be considering the best interest of the communities that 

may be involved, but also in order to attract that type of a major 

project, that their best interest as well with respect to costs for 

the supplies and the necessary facilities that they require. 

 

So I thank you for that, Mr. Minister. And again I hope our 

feeling of excitement and anticipation can be maintained at a 

higher level; that one day we can say, well thank you, we’ve 

brought that major project to our province, which hopefully 

also will bring back some of our people back to the province 

that had to leave to find employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I would hope that the meat packing 

industry, and I say again whether it be Fletcher’s with the 

Wheat Pool and their new configuration, or Maple Leaf, or even 

the existing Mitchell family in Saskatoon, that a big component 

of the packing industry comes to Saskatchewan. 

 

Whether it’s your community or someone else’s community 

worries me less. I understand where you’re coming from and I 

wish you the best in putting the best face on what we have to 

offer in the Yorkton-Melville area. But it’s 1,500 jobs 

regardless who were to build a world-scale plant. 

 

But I say again, as long as we have the packing industry here, 

all of the communities are going to benefit because there’s even 

more jobs than that associated with the increase of hog 

production, which is absolutely crucial. Taking that number 

from where it’s at now at 1 million to the needed 3 or 4 or 5 

million, you would look at 3, 4, 5 thousand incremental jobs 

being created at the farm gate, in trucking, in feed processing. 

 

And so in my mind it’s exciting for the community that’s 

getting the packing plant and no doubt because it’s 1,500 extra 

jobs. But in the bigger picture, what’s even more important in 

my mind is that Saskatchewan really would have a world-class 

industry based on hog production and, I think, a better, more 

efficient usage of the feed grain, lower quality grains that we 

tend to get from time to time in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

Mr. Osika:  I guess that’s why I feel that within the 

community of Yorkton and Melville, we put politics aside for 

something that’s as important as this type of a major project, as 

you said, with the number of jobs involved. And just for your 

edification in excellent work that South Parkland has done, 

they’ve come up with some very specific figures related to the 

hog industry, and within 400 kilometres, 2.5 million hogs that 

are being produced in the area. 

 

So again we’re going to be as hopeful as other communities are. 

And I appreciate your assurance that your support for the 

location will be dependent on the facilities that are available. 

And I appreciate your assurance that the government will 

support whatever location and area, regardless of what 

constituency boundaries it may be in or cross over. It should not 

be a factor; it should be where’s the best place to create all this 

economic activity. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your 

officials, I wanted to ask, initially at least, some questions on 

the Tourism Authority. By removing the responsibilities of the 

former tourism branch to the arm’s-length Tourism Authority, 

you hope to increase input and financial support from the 

industry and cut out, I assume, cut out red tape from tourism 

projects. 

 

Aside from your grant of $6.9 million to the Authority, what is 

the total budget and what other sources of revenue, if any, does 

it have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, you’re right. Our budget 

transfers just under 7 million. Their total budget is about 10 

million. So already in the short period that they’ve been in 

existence, they’ve been able to go out and raise almost a third 

of what their $10 million budget is. So we’re pretty impressed 

that they will over the coming years be able to hit 50 per cent, 

which I think would be a huge improvement over the system 

that we had in place before. 

 

Obviously the joint partnership that we have between the 

industry across the province, bringing that together in one 

single focus along with the money that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are willing to put in through the general revenue, 

has meant that we have established in Saskatchewan a Tourism 

Authority that is really being looked at by other jurisdictions 

across Canada. I know Alberta’s looking to build a similar kind 

of organization. 

 

But I think it is the way of the future for a number of 

government agencies. The Trade Development Corporation, or 

STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), which 

you know about, is based along those same lines, coming into 

existence a little bit later but already they have sold 

memberships to a large number of trade corporations as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: How many board members are appointed directly 

from the industry and how many are appointed by you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, there are 15 board members in 

total and we appoint by order in council, 3 of those members. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  The recent amendments also make the province 

responsible for funding capital projects which previously were 

handled by the partners who make up the Authority. Why are 

you no longer willing to do this? Since the partners are no 

longer providing major funding for projects, doesn’t this throw 

into question the original reason for establishing the Authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just missed the, maybe, the 

nuance of your question, but I think you asked why the capital 

is not with the Tourism Authority. In fact it’s just the reverse of 

that. Initially it was not with the Tourism Authority but in the 

last Act amendment we actually moved the capital portion over 

to the Tourism Authority as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, how many capital projects has the 

Authority funded over the past year and could you give us a 

breakdown of their costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’ll get that for you. I don’t have the 

numbers here with me and we hadn’t really thought of this in 

the past, but I do have to go back and get that number for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Could you also provide us with a list of the 

marketing and promotional activities undertaken by the 

Authority for the past year? How many employees of the 

Tourism Authority are former employees of the government’s 

tourism branch? And does your department still maintain staff 

that supervise the area as well? For example, would you have 

staff to review and analyse tourism capital projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The only representative that we 

would have is Janis Rathwell, who has other supervisory areas, 

but she would look after the legislative portion and the budget 

portion. But as far as supervising day-to-day operation, we 

really don’t have any role to play any more. And the other 

information you request I’ll have to get for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. With regard to your cooperative 

branch, we understand it’s going to have funding nearly 

doubling, nearly doubled in the coming year from 340,000 to 

625,000. About two-thirds of this increase is going to be 

absorbed in increased salaries. Can you provide us with a list of 

whom you are hiring and what functions that they will be 

serving? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As we go through the work and 

building up the department area of cooperative development, 

we are just in the process of beginning to seek out the three new 

positions that we will put into that area. So at this point in time 

I don’t have the names and salaries. But I would expect if you 

were to call me in a couple of months, we would be able to get 

that for you or in next year’s estimates. 

 

But what the money is being used for on the staff side is three 

new employees we believe that will meet some of the new 

demand for cooperative development. And I say again by most 

estimations most . . . the largest percentage of that will be going 

on in rural Saskatchewan. 

 



1782  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The business 

investment programs branch will be getting quite a large boost 

through the addition of $6 million in the strategic initiatives 

fund. I wonder if you could explain this fund, and whether or 

not it is simply discretionary money for you and your 

department to put into various projects at your will. Or what is 

the purpose of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I have here — this is not an exhibit, 

Mr. Chairman — but I have here a little promotional piece that 

the department has put together on the issue of strategic 

initiative fund. And I think rather than read it out I’ll just send it 

to the member opposite. And I think it lays it out probably more 

articulate than I could. And then if there are any questions, feel 

free to ask. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does it give detail on 

the guidelines of how the money is going to be disbursed? What 

sort of projects will this fund be considering? Are there any 

projects currently under consideration — currently under 

consideration by the fund? And your policy and coordination 

unit received another half million dollars a year. Virtually all 

this money is going towards additional salaries. If you could 

confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just so the member knows, and 

when he gets . . . If he’s got the document there, he’ll look 

under criteria, he can see that there are five main bullets that say 

basically what the criteria is. From that, communities or 

community groups would make a general application, at which 

time we’d get into the actual looking at whether the project 

would be eligible under that criteria. But it’s pretty 

straightforward. 

 

The issue of the funding, I wasn’t quite clear on what you were 

asking in your last part of your question. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  I think it’s explained. I asked what sort of 

projects will this fund? And I think it outlines them here. So 

that’s acceptable. 

 

The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership also received 

an additional half million dollars in this budget. According to 

the original news release on this agency, the private sector 

partners were supposed to kick in one-third of the cost of 

running it. Can we assume then that the partners have agreed to 

put in an additional $176,000 into this project in the coming 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Most of that money is for a 

sub-office in Saskatoon, with the main office of course being in 

Regina. Saskatoon and Saskatoon area has developed a very, 

very large trade component to their economy. And we thought it 

proper and wise to have an office, as well, in Saskatoon. And 

that new money basically goes to fund the staff and operation of 

that office. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Since this is a grant, it doesn’t list the expenses 

of the agency, STEP. Could you break down the expenses of 

STEP — salaries, accommodation, travel expenses, and the 

like? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Let me get for you what I can. I 

don’t have the actual breakdown with me today, but I’ll phone 

up Milt Fair, the executive director, and get that information as 

best I can for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation also 

got an additional million dollars in the budget. And this is 

somewhat disturbing since SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation), unlike SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation), is supposed to be more selective 

about projects and get a better return for the province. The 

ever-increasing grant for SOCO suggests that you are 

anticipating losses for this corporation. Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We’re not anticipating losses; and 

as we go forward, one of the ongoing areas of demand of 

course, is money for equity positions in various community or 

commercial projects. 

 

We’re also involved very much in the research park in 

Saskatoon. And there is now work being done on a proposal to 

develop a research park adjacent to or with the University of 

Regina. Although that’s not a completed project yet, there’s 

very, very high level, serious negotiations going on between the 

university, the Government of Saskatchewan, the Economic 

Development Authority here in Regina, and various other 

people, to establish that project. 

 

But I think Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, where 

they’ve been involved in projects in Saskatchewan, has a very, 

very high degree of support from the public. And any of the 

new money certainly isn’t intended to be lost. Although when 

you’re involved in economic development, whether it’s on your 

farm or in business or anywhere, if you were to make money on 

everything you did, we’d be pretty lucky folks. But having said 

that, I think the record of SOCO is very impressive at this point. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  The Northern Affairs office received an 

additional $500,000, but all of that went to the resource 

development branch. Presumably most of this was funnelled to 

mining projects in the North. While we certainly encourage the 

development of mining in the North, wouldn’t it be more 

appropriately handled by the Department of Energy and Mines? 

And if you could provide us some detail as to what sort of 

projects are funded under this branch? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Now in northern Saskatchewan of 

course, we have . . . we don’t refer to them as economic 

development authorities, but northern economic development 

units. And part of this money goes for three new staff to work 

on those economic development projects in northern 

Saskatchewan. And of course coming from rural Saskatchewan, 

you’ll know how difficult it is to get economic development 

projects going in the southern part of the province. You can 

well imagine how difficult it is in northern communities where 

isolation is even magnified in distance or even further. Many of 

the communities don’t even have roads. Everything comes in by 

air and goes out by air. 

 

So economic development is a very, very unique challenge in 

that part of our province. And so it was thought that some extra  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

money for looking at and helping communities with economic 

development would be in order. So this is where that new, extra 

money is going to. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  With respect to the immigrant investor program, 

you recently announced that you were joining a lobby effort 

with other western provinces to stop federal changes to the 

immigrant investor program. The proposed changes would 

allow provinces to guarantee immigrant investments. 

 

Obviously, as you pointed out, this favours provinces like 

Quebec that are prepared to put in significant subsidies and 

guarantees. And I wonder if you could detail all efforts, 

including meetings, that you have undertaken on this issue; 

what successes you’ve had; and did the proposed changes pass 

before the election call? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well we did a lot of work. In fact 

Saskatchewan, my staff, took a leadership role in western 

Canada in organizing the western provinces, including the 

Yukon and Territories, against the changes that were being 

posed by Minister Robillard. And we had a number of 

conversations with Mr. Goodale, and I called Lloyd Axworthy, 

who is very responsive to working on this project. 

 

And at the end of the day there was a 30-day review period 

once the new changes and regulations were set out — 30 days 

— at which time . . . during which time we could make 

application for changes or make our arguments. 

 

And I think all the western provinces laid it pretty heavy on the 

federal government — these changes were discriminatory 

against western Canada and particularly favourable to provinces 

where subsidies and guarantees would be offered to foreign 

immigrant investors that would really put people off-shore at an 

advantage over Canadian investors or Saskatchewan investors, 

which we found to be not a proper way to do business. And we 

made that point very strongly in a number of letters and a 

number of joint press releases that we did from western 

ministers. 

 

I think it’s . . . We were pleased when about either . . . a week 

before the election, the Minister Robillard announced that these 

were not progressing at the present time. What we’re going to 

be interested to see is whether that was something to get us 

through the election and then we’re going to see them jammed 

at us; or whether there is going to be a sincere effort to make 

amendments that would favour the investment of the immigrant 

investor fund in western Canada, remains to be seen. 

 

So at this point it’s on hold, and I think the unified front that 

was presented by western Canadian ministers has, at least to 

this point, been successful. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If we could turn our 

attention to an outfit called SPUDCO that you people are 

involved in. You’ll be familiar with Saskatchewan’s . . . the 

program I’m sure, a subsidy program, SPUDCO, which invests 

in potato farm operations. SPUDCO has been criticized for 

unfairly subsidizing one set of farmers over another. 

 

In fact the agency wrote directly to Lucky Lake area farmers 

and offered to finance up to 75 per cent of production and up to 

49 per cent of storage. This directly benefits the Coteau Hills 

Potato Corporation, who have put in a proposal to build a 

packing plant for the constituency within the CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation) minister’s constituencies. 

 

Critics have suggested that the facility would be better placed 

between Kenaston and Outlook where it would be more central 

to producers. What has your involvement been in the 

establishment and direction of SPUDCO? Does your 

department provide any funding to this project and was your 

department consulted for advice on the project prior to its 

implementation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  First, Mr. Chairman, I want to 

indicate to the member opposite this comes under the Sask 

Water Corporation, who have been negotiating and I think have 

some involvement both financially and in an advisory capacity. 

Our department has not been involved to the extent of putting in 

money or being involved in the actual negotiations. 

 

There would have been advice given at some point. I’m just not 

sure to what extent. I can go back and track the meetings that 

staff would have had, but it is not under the purview of this 

budget item. I mean we can spend some time talking about it 

but this might be one that would be better left until Sask Water 

comes before the committee. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Will you confirm then, Mr. Minister, that your 

department has not put any money into this project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, that’s right. We haven’t put 

any money in, but my understanding is that Sask Water does 

have investment in but I just would urge us to get back to that 

topic when we get to Sask Water. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, if we could turn our attention to 

the investment the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have in Intercon. 

Rumours have started to fly around once again about the 

financial health of Intercon and the taxpayers’ involvement 

therein. Could you provide us with information about the status 

of the investment in Intercon and whether or not Intercon has 

approached you for further financial assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I don’t know where you’re getting 

the information that there’s any problem there because our 

reports are different than that — not to say that we’re right and 

you’re wrong, because you never know in these circumstances 

of a private company. But the impression that we have is that as 

a result of the problem with disease in the pork herd in Taiwan, 

that actually there have been very recent agreements signed 

between a Taiwanese company and the plant in Saskatoon that 

has actually greatly stabilized the project in Saskatoon. 

 

So I’m a little surprised at the indication that you have that 

there’s some weakness. In fact from our discussions, it’s in a 

stronger position than it was six months ago or even three 

months ago. And as to whether any money has been requested  



1784  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

to our department, no money has been requested from Intercon. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could submit a 

written report of meetings with respect to your ministerial travel 

and your department’s travel, a written report of meetings held, 

deals signed, and benefits accrued from each and every trade 

trip that you went on last year. In particular, could you go 

through right now the meetings, benefits, and deals, etc. 

associated with your trip to South Africa? And any benefits that 

the public gained from that particular trip. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The trip to South Africa and to 

Africa in general, we attended and held meetings in Cape Town 

and Johannesburg and Durban in South Africa. And we met 

with government officials and companies in Zimbabwe and 

Nairobi, Kenya. I will get for you the itinerary of who we met 

with; although you probably have it already because I think it 

was included in press releases. 

 

But there have been a number of arrangements made. Of course 

one of the key players who travelled with us on that trip were 

representatives of Flexi-coil. Flexi-coil is an interesting 

company in the sense that they export about half of all of the 

product they produce. They employ about 1,500 or 1,600 

people in Saskatoon. And in a very, very far away place, for 

example in Australia, they provide 50 per cent of all the air 

seeders that are sold in Australia. 

 

And they have air seeders now in South Africa and are very 

excited about the potential to export more into that area of the 

world because there are huge numbers of similarities between 

dry-land farming in large sections of South Africa, particularly 

in the Free State, which is the area of South Africa that we have 

direct relationships with. 

 

And so Flexi-coil is very interested in opportunities, as well as 

Schulte, who are involved in mowing equipment used to mow 

sugar cane and other crops where they do direct seeding. 

Arrangements have been made there where their distributor has 

agreed to sell their product into the African market. 

 

So I think in terms of deliverables from that trip, in some ways 

they were quicker than what we might have expected, because 

when we went on that trade mission it was exploratory in 

nature. And it was interesting that even before we got back, 

some of our companies were setting up arrangements for 

distribution of their product in Africa. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  With respect to skills training, Mr. Minister, one 

of the most frequent complaints that we hear from employers or 

potential employers is that they have jobs available but they 

can’t find people with the right skills in the province to fill 

them. 

 

What sort of coordination do you have with the Post-Secondary 

Education minister to address this problem? And have you 

made efforts to consult with business, existing or potential, to 

see what sort of skilled employees that they will be needing 

prior to their setting up shop in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, this is a common question  

when we have companies, whether it’s Cargill or call centres or 

now Maple Leaf, looking at setting up in Saskatchewan. And 

one of the first questions they want to know is, what is the 

supply of skilled labour; and if they are not available what 

programs you have to help train. 

 

And so over the last four or five years there’s been a lot of work 

done between Economic Development and the Department of 

Education to make our programs for skilled training much more 

responsive to the needs of industry. And to the point where 

today if a company is coming to our province and needs a 

hundred workers in a specific area, through our department of 

Continuing Education, we can actually develop a program for 

that company in very short order. And I know in some cases in 

a short period of time, in a matter of weeks, we can take a 

program for training workers onto the plant floor and actually 

set up the program to help skilled workers be trained for 

specific jobs. 

 

And I think this is really the key to economic development in 

the next decade and the next millennium, is having our training 

programs that are very, very quick to train people who are 

moving out of an industry that is winding down and into some 

of the new industries. And it’s not a matter of getting a life skill 

training once; in fact many of the studies now show that 

individuals graduating from university or from training schools 

will have to go through three or four different careers as they 

move through life. 

 

So skill training is a big component of what Economic 

Development is all about and we’ve been very much involved 

with the Department of Education and Continuing Education. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to the 

film industry in Saskatchewan, how much has your department 

or its agency, such as SOCO, invested in the film and video 

agencies in the past year? And could you provide us with the 

information with respect to how many permanent jobs have 

been created from this investment, and how many new 

businesses, if any, have been created? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The industry in Saskatchewan has 

now grown from around $5 million expenditures in the 

province in 1992 to around 25, between 25 and 30 million 

expected in 1997. So it is a very, very much a fast growth 

industry. 

 

There are the equivalent of about 600 full-time jobs. I’m not 

sure how many of those would be part-time, how many 

full-time, but its considerable impact in the province is 

noticeable and is getting recognition as one of the fast growth 

areas of Canada right here in the province of Saskatchewan. So 

many hundreds of young people in particular who in the past 

would have had to go to Toronto or Vancouver in order to get 

involved in the film industry can now find successful jobs here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I will get for you the projects that we’ve invested in through 

SOCO. I don’t have them right here, but we’ve invested in a 

number of . . . taken positions in a number of small investments 

as well as putting some money into the sound stage which has  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

been developed here in Regina. So I can get those numbers for 

you. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Could you also provide us with a breakdown of 

your investment in the film industry — how much was in the 

form of loans; how much in the form of grants; how much in 

the form of equity investments; how much in the form of any 

guarantees of any sort; and if there are any tax credits or other 

incentives attached to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’ll undertake to get that for the 

member. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That concludes the 

questions that I have, and I thank you for your questions and the 

help from your officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  And to the members opposite, as 

we wind down the committee, Mr. Chairman, I want to say that 

I appreciate their questions very much, the couple of times 

we’ve been here, the good questions. And I will just ask my 

deputy to make sure that all of the unanswered questions are 

attained as soon as possible. 

 

Just in that, I’d like to say a happy weekend to everyone, 

because I think we get an extra day off when we leave here 

today. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 

Vote 167 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 167 agreed to. 

 

(1500) 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My officials 

with me this afternoon are Mr. Brian King, who is the deputy 

minister, seated to my right. To my left is Mr. Barry Martin, 

who is the executive director of engineering services division. 

To my far right is Mr. George Stamatinos, who is the executive 

director of preserve and operations, southern division. And 

seated behind Mr. King is Lynn Tulloch, who is the executive 

director of corporate affairs and information services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 

Welcome to you this afternoon and to your officials. 

 

I just have a few questions, some concerns that have been 

expressed to us by the Saskatchewan road builders and heavy 

construction association. And particularly with respect to . . . 

Apparently two or two and a half years ago the government 

introduced its asset management program which identified 

which highways are in most need, categorized as major 

problems, medium problems, and minor problems. 

 

Now what the road builders have indicated is that the scheduled 

construction projects for the last couple of years and the 

upcoming year have largely concentrated on smaller and 

medium problems and have left the major problems alone. This 

may very well lead to a situation where the major rebuilding 

projects are simply not addressed. Can you comment about 

those concerns, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you for the question, Mr. Member. 

What we do of course, in Saskatchewan . . . and you’re correct, 

about two and a half years ago we did introduce the asset 

management process. And what of course that really recognizes 

is that rather than taking the entire roadway and attempting to 

complete it all, what we would do is sustain pieces of the road 

that we would think would still be of benefit, or could sustain 

the kinds of traffic volumes that they would incur. 

 

So we would take the areas of the road that require the most 

amount of work, and then concentrate our efforts into repairing 

that piece. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, the road builders as 

well are saying that they do in fact welcome the additional $30 

million that has been proposed in funding to address some of 

these problems. But when you look at the array of projects 

scheduled for this coming year, it seems like still quite a very 

limited amount. 

 

We understand or we are told that the present list of scheduled 

projects will require only 3, 400,000 tonnes of hot mix. Even 

though the industry has scaled down drastically since this 

administration came to power, the industry could still easily 

handle 800,000 tonnes of this hot mix. 

 

With the highways in such bad repair and with revenues better 

than expected, why don’t you use the capacity of the industry? 

That’s the question I wonder if you might address, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I appreciate the question. I think what the  



1786  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

member is asking is that in the proportion of work that’s being 

done across the province this year and into the future, what is 

the allocation that might be given to the area of, say, paving in 

terms of coarse base and the area of grading? And when you 

look to the allocations this year you’ll see again that there’s 

some disparities in the way in which those allocations are being 

made. 

 

What we’ll attempt to do, however, as we move on into the 

future over that period of time that we’ve talked about putting 

in the $2.5 billion, you’ll see a levelling off of where the 

revenue is going to be . . . or where the money is going to be 

directed. This year I think we’re putting a bit more money in the 

area of base coarse and into the grading side than we are into 

the paving. And I think some of the paving fellows might be 

saying of course, that we’re not putting enough into that 

category. 

 

But as time passes we’ll try to level that as we move along and 

that will certainly, I think, ensure some confidence in the 

industry so that we might be able to sustain those industries 

here in the province. 

 

Mr. Osika:  We’re also told by the industry that the quality 

of construction and rehabilitation is less than adequate which is 

being requested by your government. They tell us that almost all 

the projects that are up for rehabilitation this year are what are 

called granular base coarse projects where gravel is placed upon 

existing surfaces and then a sealing coat is placed over the top 

of the gravel. The gravel apparently is usually three-quarters of 

an inch minus aggregate, or 19 millimetre minus aggregate. 

Effectively just a small gravel top of asphalt and then a sealer 

on top of that. 

 

What the industry is concerned about is that this rehabilitation 

type of a program is very short term. They refer to it, as we 

might, a band-aid solution to the problems, short-term life span, 

maybe five years at the outer limit. Now this may lead to more 

work for the industry in the future, but the concern is the use of 

the taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

What do you have to say to that criticism, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that a lot of the roadway that you’re 

talking about here would be in the rural areas of the province 

and wouldn’t have the same kind of consistent heavy haul on 

them. And I think you’re correct in suggesting that in this 

particular year our allocation is certainly more significant to the 

granular base coarse base that you talk about. 

 

And again, part of that is in respect to the amount of funding 

that we’re putting in in the total rehabilitation program this 

year. And it corresponds to some degree with what you talked 

about earlier, which is, with the asset management process, 

where you’ll find in sections of roadways this kind of base that 

we put in. 

 

I think yesterday one of the questions that was asked when we 

talked briefly around the Bill was that how much of this work is 

currently being undertaken. And I guess this year it’s about $23 

million in that entire . . . 23, or $22.3 million in that entire pool.  

That will grow, as I’ve indicated to you earlier, into the future. 

 

Now some of the Canadian ag program, that $7.3 million that 

has been set aside this year — a lot of that will be for road 

construction similar to the one that you talked about here 

earlier. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 

concerns was the massive mobilization costs, particularly as it 

relates to the small projects. 

 

Basic mobilization costs for any construction or rehabilitation 

projects are fixed, and that would include things such as the 

cost of transporting and setting up mobile crushing machinery 

which crushes the aggregate, plus the cost of transporting and 

setting up mobile placing operation which pug-mills and load 

the aggregate and places it on the roadway and compacts it in 

place. 

 

Now these costs are similar regardless of the size of the project 

and the rehabilitation project. The small size of the project . . . 

smaller the sizes of the project means that the budget is used up 

for mobilization costs to an undue extent. 

 

I just wondered what you might have to say with . . . to the 

taxpayers to address that concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think the issue of mobilization certainly 

an important one. And so when we’re putting together a 

package in terms of the roadways that we want to do, we would 

try to ensure that they’re grouped into areas of the province; so 

that when we actually get the construction folks moving into 

that area, that one move would suffice to do a fairly large 

number of roadways in that particular area. 

 

But the mobilization issue certainly is one that we give 

consideration to because we don’t want to be spending most of 

our . . . a larger degree of our funding that’s necessary for 

people to be travelling from one location to another to do the 

work, but rather spending that than on the roadway. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The primary road 

system in our province is one that everybody relies a great deal 

on for tourism and the well-being and the health of the 

economy of this province. 

 

Highways l, 2, 11, 16, 35, and 39, I believe are considered part 

of the primary system. And they play a particularly important 

part in the role of our economy of the province because they’re 

used to ship products originating in Saskatchewan out of 

province and to attract tourists. Those seem to be in unusually 

bad repair. I wonder if you might just make a comment with 

respect to those primary roads. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I certainly agree with what the member has 

indicated, that there is . . . clearly the roadways in the province 

that transport the major part of our transportation of course, are 

on highways like, road systems like 1 and certainly 16, 11. And 

over the long run we’ve said that the $2.5 billion that we’re 

going to be spending in highways, a large part of that of course, 

will go towards making sure that the rehabilitation of  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

those highways is improved, and also some completed work 

that needs to get done as it respects to the twinning project. 

 

As the member knows, we don’t have in this province, or in this 

country, a national highway transportation strategy, which is 

critical and important to the development and the sustaining of 

roadways across the country. 

 

And what you’re going to see of course, is you’re going to see 

the province doing this on its own, unless over the next few 

years . . . and I know that you’ll want to see additional revenues 

make their way into the highways system, and will be assisting 

us in our lobby efforts along with the Yellowhead Highway 

Association and certainly the No. 1 Highway Association to get 

more money into the road system. 

 

But clearly we’ve said and you’ve heard, that in this province, 

you know 70 per cent of our traffic travels on 6 per cent of our 

roadways. And the large part of that roadways that carry the 

travelling public are on those roads that you identified here. 

 

Our sense is that, you know, although they’re maybe not in 

complete . . . as good as we’d like to see them, but when you 

stack them up and compare them to other roadways in other 

parts of Canada, they’re in fairly decent shape. And we’ll 

continue to work hard with the resources that we have today to 

improve on them and ensure that they provide safe motoring for 

the public. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Osika:  I want to thank you, Mr. Minister, and to your 

officials for being here this afternoon to respond to our 

questions. I’d like to defer now to my hon. colleague from 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Deputy Deputy Chair. Thank 

you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 

 

The other day I’d indicated there are a couple areas of concern 

that I wanted to raise with you. Number one is Wood Country. 

And just for the sake of the House, there were a number of 

petitions that were written and signed — I believe there are 

even more than this — that ended up in your department and 

never heard anything about. 

 

I’d like to present these to the floor of the Assembly. And 

basically what the petitions are in support of, Mr. Grant 

Wilson’s claim about an approach into his business — Wood 

Country. It’s outside of McLean. 

 

Now when I first came upon this, Mr. Minister, it had nothing 

to do with Mr. Wilson contacting me. It was travelling down 

No. 1 Highway and I see a group of highway tractors out . . . or 

highway equipment out working and I thought, well what in the 

world have we got going on here? 

 

We’ve got so much highway that needs repair and all of a 

sudden we’re spending money when an access . . . and actually 

we had access to the one . . . to the west lane of traffic was 

already available, and what we needed was a further access to  

the east lane of traffic. And what I see now, we probably spent 

a number of a hundred thousands of dollars more than we 

would have needed. 

 

And I’m also aware of the fact that a lot of discussion had taken 

place with Mr. Martin out of Yorkton at the time. I believe Mr. 

Martin may have moved up in the department. But there’s been 

a fair bit of debate on this question. 

 

Now the concern . . . The fact is that a lot of money has already 

been expended and a service road has already been put in place, 

is almost at completion. Now, Mr. Minister, what’s really in 

question here is an access, a direct link, from Wood Country to 

No. 1 Highway, a link or a road, an approach that was moved 

by Wood Country at their expense from an existing approach 

that was about 200 yards east of where it currently exists. 

 

Now I’m not going to ask you to tear out that service road. I 

think that service road will serve a very valuable point. I think, 

Mr. Minister, what Mr. Wilson is saying, he paid for . . . it cost 

him money to move what was an existing approach over about 

200 yards. He’s asking specifically for that approach to 

continue to exist. 

 

What it does is gives direct access out of his property onto the 

westbound lanes, so that traffic can move and begin to flow 

west immediately versus having to move to the east and come 

back west. As far as traffic going east, that traffic will go down 

the service road and will proceed across the approach and the 

median there and move into the traffic flow and move to the 

east. 

 

Mr. Minister, there seems to be no give. According to Mr. 

Wilson, it appears then and after discussion that Mr. Wilson 

had with the former minister of Highways, the feeling was that 

the minister was just all tied with the bureaucratic’s view and 

wasn’t willing to look at what a businessperson’s view . . . and 

the concerns that might result and the loss of economic spin-off 

for his business. 

 

So what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is if you could have your 

department take another close look at this. I think, Mr. Minister, 

if you drove that, if you went into Wood Country, if you drove 

out of Wood Country and were coming west, I think you would 

have to admit there really isn’t . . . and from what I’ve seen and 

having been there, been out, in and out a number of occasions 

— I don’t believe there’s any less of a traffic hazard turning 

onto Highway No. 1 and proceeding west on the current 

approach that’s there than there is to go down the service road 

and then come west on the new approach that’s being built. 

 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would give some 

serious consideration to reviewing that, taking a close look at 

that, and getting back to Mr. Wilson in regards to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I appreciate the question again. I’ve had an 

opportunity only to look at the schematics and the diagrams of 

the way in which the roadway exits from Wood Country. 

 

I have some understanding and appreciation that we want to 

ensure that we have a safety feature, the safety factor is in fact  



1788  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

in place. And certainly my officials have outlined or indicated 

that when the initial construction of the property was first 

undertaken, that there was some, there was some discussion 

here around the placing of a temporary access. And of course 

we’ve done that. 

 

The new service road, as you suggest, is nearly in place now 

and I think the value of that service road is about $80,000 upon 

its completion. 

 

I know that there’s an access, I think, into the community just 

as you get to McLean and there’s a roadway that could take you 

apparently, when I look at some of the hand-drawn diagrams, 

that will take you through the community to Wood Country. So 

the access from . . . or the egress from Wood Country could 

happen both, I believe, to the east or to the west. If you were to 

go east, then you’d get down the new highway access, or the 

new service road that we’ve put in, and then on to No. 1 and 

away you go. 

 

If you’re going west, if you wanted to go west out of Wood 

Country, you’d have to go through the town of McLean. And 

apparently there’s been some concern there by the residents of 

McLean in respect to the traffic going right through their 

community to get to the roadway again onto No. 1. 

 

But certainly I’ll give the member the undertaking that I’ll take 

another look at it. We’ll get a chance when I’m travelling 

around Saskatchewan with the member from . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . no, no. When I’m travelling around 

Saskatchewan with the member from, I forget where . . . Arm 

River, with the member from Arm River. Maybe when I get up 

to Moosomin we could take that same trip. It would be a saving 

on the provincial government’s Highways budget. So we might 

do it . . . we’ll take the opportunity to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d be more than 

happy to join you in Regina at your expense to travel and check 

out the service road into Wood Country. 

 

But you’re absolutely true, Mr. Minister. The way you exit 

Wood Country, without having to follow the service road back 

if you were going west, you certainly would have to turn into a 

residential area. You’d be travelling through an area of the 

community that will have young children there involved in. And 

that’s one of the big concerns, and the fact that some of the 

streets aren’t actually all . . . I’m not sure if they’re all oiled 

even. I think some of them are straight gravel roads, which 

creates a problem. 

 

And so I think for the sake of this business and for the sake of 

the community, I would certainly appreciate it if you would take 

another look at it. 

 

I know sometimes, Mr. Minister, we get into arguments and we 

get into departments, and department officials look at certain 

things. And there’s a way that bureaucrats view issues; there’s a 

way that business people view issues; there’s a way that the 

general public view issues. And we don’t always necessarily 

agree. And lots of times we choose to disagree. But if we can 

work together, I think, Mr. Minister . . . and if you can find a  

way that alleviates some of the concerns here. 

 

The thing is, Mr. Wilson is also moving up, I believe, into the 

Tisdale area. And I hope he’s not going to run into the same 

kind of scenario where he’s building another property. I’m not 

sure if he’s building on a highway access or not. 

 

But I hope at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, that we can come 

up with something that maybe not everyone’s totally agreeable 

with it, but it is workable and certainly can fall within the 

guidelines of your department. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I have another one on construction. Now 

you may have just received this letter. You may or may not 

have. The town of Whitewood is undertaking to redo Railway 

Street, I believe it is. It’s by the elevators and it comes in right 

along the Railway Avenue, right along the railways. And they 

have called me on their behalf to contact your department. 

 

Now I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, if they’ve taken the time to 

contact you, but they’re looking for some financial assistance, 

as while there isn’t a lot of traffic, there is some traffic, 

especially when there is, say hindrances on No. 9 Highway 

between the entrance to Whitewood and No. 1 where there may 

be some blockages at the time or where there isn’t . . . where 

there’s a road tie-up or railway, that some of the traffic on No. 9 

moves through the community along this Railway Avenue. 

 

And I’m wondering if your department would mind taking a 

look at the request that they’re putting in. They’re looking at a 

project of . . . I believe they received funding so far for . . . well 

they’ve received partial funding for a $250,000 project which 

consists of a major upgrade of the road in front of our grain 

elevators. 

 

If your department hasn’t seen anything from the town of 

Whitewood, I’d be more than happy to . . . In fact I will take a 

moment later on to also send a covering note with this and send 

you a copy of this, so that you’re aware of it, and see what the 

department can do to address this concern and see whether or 

not there isn’t a place where some funding could be put into the 

upgrade of a major artery in the community of Whitewood, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I wonder if you’ll give me some assurances that you’ll at least 

look at it and see if . . . and also let me know whether your 

department’s aware of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. We have just 

received that information and I have not had a chance to take a 

look at it in any detail and the department is just beginning its 

work on it. 

 

But I think what’s important here is that, as you’ve identified, 

there may be a couple of players who might also get involved in 

assisting us through some of our partnership programs of 

course, which we talked about yesterday to some degree. 

 

We might be able to include the, certainly the elevator company 

that’s there, certainly the town of Whitewood, maybe even the 

railroads, in how we might be able to improve that particular  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

piece of road that you talk about. 

 

If you could leave that with me sometime after we’re done the 

estimates this evening, I wouldn’t mind having a copy of that 

from you. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for North Battleford 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — By leave, if I may introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the government 

gallery above me, I’m pleased to introduce to you and to all 

members, some friends from Cochin who are accompanied this 

day by relatives from the Netherlands. 

 

And if I may ask them to stand. First of all from Cochin we 

have Marie-Louise Ternier with her children, David, Daniel, 

and Rachelle. And they have accompanying them from the 

Netherlands, Peter van Overveld, Marie-Pascale van 

Overveld-Brizion, and Jeanne Brizion-Marissen. all from 

Holland. I’d ask you all to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and certainly a 

special welcome as well to our international guests. We’re 

pleased to have you here. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m getting a copy of that. I’ll just scribble a 

quick note on it just to remind you of the discussion we’ve had 

and have you and your department officials take a look at it. 

 

I think one of the major problems with that specific piece of 

roadway is that heavy traffic flow that flows through there and 

the truck traffic that comes on to that piece of road as well. I 

think that’s what the town is looking to some help from the 

department. 

 

They’re not looking to the . . . I don’t believe they’re looking to 

the department to do all of the work or trying, or asking for a 

major . . . but they’re asking for some assistance in it. And I’ll 

certainly send it over and look forward to your response. 

 

Mr. Minister, as well I have a question here that was phoned in, 

and I know I’m going to get asked about it if I don’t raise it so 

I’d better raise it. It’s a question about the types of vehicles 

your department is purchasing, and I’m not sure if it’s the 

individual noted vehicles on the roadway. I understand by this 

concern or this question that came in that you’re buying some  

Volvo units, Volvo trucks. Is that correct? 

 

If it is, and this is what the question being is, are we supporting 

Canadian companies or out-of-country companies? And I guess 

what this person is saying, we should be certainly looking at 

supporting our Canadian industry. Now I don’t know if they’re 

. . . you do have those vehicles on the road but maybe you could 

respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What we use of course, is the open 

tendering process, and of course we put out an RFP (request for 

proposal) for the types of vehicles that we would require. At the 

end of the day when the bids all come in, in the case that you 

talk about here, it’s true that this year one of the awards that 

was won included a white Volvo. But we also purchased some 

GMCs and obviously some Fords and some Chevy trucks as 

well. 

 

So in the RFP process, what we’re going with by and large is 

the lowest bid, and that certainly reflects what happened with 

the Volvo vehicles. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

maybe should relay the way the Department of Highways is 

approaching the purchasing of vehicles and letting contracts to 

the Minister of Labour, and suggest that he should go with the 

lowest qualified bidder as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, just before the former minister of Highways 

announced that he was stepping aside from his portfolio, he did 

acknowledge that there was an additional project in the area of 

the Fairlight area around the high through-put elevator that Sask 

Wheat Pool had put up, some construction on Highway No. 8 

north and some work on Highway No. 48 to the west. I believe 

there’s about 13.5 kilometres. 

 

I did thank the minister as well for the fact of looking at that. 

I’m hoping one day that we’ll actually see No. 8 completed 

right through from 48 through to No. 1. 

 

But there’s also some work, I noticed in the original release, on 

48 between No. 9 at Kennedy and Kipling, about 3.3. 

kilometres. I think it’s called . . . I think they’re calling it 

resurfacing. 

 

Now I’ve seen some work already going on there. One of the 

concerns I have, Mr. Minister, and having . . . may not have had 

the privilege of driving down that stretch of highway, No. 48, 

from Kipling through to No. 9. But that is getting to be a fairly 

. . . it’s getting to be a very narrow road. It’s got a lot of rough 

spots on it. It breaks up very easily. 

 

And I understand they’re picking sections that are really giving 

a problem and they’re resurfacing them a bit. The only problem 

as I see it, based on what I understand of the resurfacing, is to 

basically scrape it down, cut the shoulders a bit, we’re making 

the highway much narrower. 

 

In the long run, Mr. Minister, we’re going to have to look  



1790  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

seriously down the road at widening out that highway, 

straightening it out a bit. And we’ve got an old rail bed already 

that’s sitting there we could certainly borrow dirt from, I think. 

 

But I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, based on some of the 

resurfacing that’s going on, it seems to me — and I don’t 

believe there was a cost put to that or there may have been a 

small . . . a cost on that figure of, I forget what the number was, 

I saw a number there — but based on that, Mr. Minister, what 

concerns me is the fact that as we resurface and just keep 

working with what road structure that’s already there and keep 

cutting the shoulders to repair them, we take away from the 

surface of the road and we make it narrower. And when you 

talk about safety, that is one I would consider to be a major 

safety feature. 

 

What I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is what the 

department is doing in the long term to try and address some of 

these highways that are . . . Like 48 — this little section of 

highway has actually seen a fair bit of expenditures over the 

past few years because of some of the . . . a number of boils that 

have opened up, that you’ve had to dig out and repair. And it 

would seem to me, Mr. Minister, we should look at building 

that road, completing it through to No. 9. 

 

It has . . . There are a number of aspects to it — the safety 

feature. Just a moment ago we had the Minister of Economic 

Development and Tourism. There’s a lot of traffic from Regina 

flows down No. 48 to Kenosee park and I was . . . I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, what are the chances of actually 

having this highway upgraded to a fairly decent standard of 

roadway in the near future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well certainly what the strategy is, the 

highway strategy is, or transportation strategy is, is to include as 

many partners and players in ensuring that we have good, solid 

roadways across the province. 

 

I know that this particular road that you talk about, what we’re 

doing here is providing the best effort that we can in ensuring 

that we can maintain it as a safe thoroughfare over the . . . and 

an efficient thoroughfare over the next short period of time. 

 

And then included in some of the work that’s being done in the 

area planning or the area transportation planning authorities, 

we’re going to be partnering with a number of folks of course 

in the municipal areas after some discussion with them, in 

respect to determining what their priorities for roadways are. 

 

Clearly No. 48 might be one of those that in the interim what 

we do is we provide the kind of restructuring of it that it 

requires to maintain it as a safe access. But as we move into the 

future and we have some additional resources which we’ve 

included into our budget this year and into the future, this may 

be one of the roadways that will get the kind of retrofit or 

expansion that you talked about that it will require. But in the 

interim what we’re doing with the resources that we have 

available to us is to make sure that we provide at least a safe, 

efficient roadway until we can do more with it. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one further  

question and this one relates to possibly your other role as well. 

And I’m not sure. It’s somewhat tied to Highways but it’s over 

a question that I’ve talked to . . . and unfortunately when you’re 

talking to . . . say you’ve talked to the Minister of Highways, 

with the recent transition, you may not . . . I may not have had a 

chance to touch base with you. But the town of Rocanville is 

looking at and would like to purchase or take over the Highway 

facility that’s there. And I believe that’s moved into SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). In fact I 

believe I’ve chatted with you on that issue because of the fact 

that now that Highways moved out, it becomes the property of 

SPMC. 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can give me an idea if 

a decision has been made and whether the town has an 

opportunity to certainly look at purchasing that facility? They 

do have a . . . they do have an individual who is willing to take 

it over and turn it into an ongoing business. Which means, I 

think, if you look at small town Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 

whenever you’ve got someone who’s willing to set up a 

business, you’ve got a building in existence, it certainly keeps 

that town and community looking that much more vibrant. 

 

And so I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if there’s any further 

developments in this area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you, Mr. Member. Just recently 

I received a notification that what the Department of Highways 

has decided of course to do now, is to relocate the building 

from Rocanville to the town of Churchbridge. That’s the 

community in which we were giving consideration to 

constructing another facility for them. 

 

And recently the decision has just been made that the cost 

saving I think, to the Department of Highways by taking that 

building from its current location in Rocanville, moving it to 

the Churchbridge, Saskatchewan, will be about $100,000. And 

so as a result of that we’re going to be moving that building 

from the community of Rocanville to Churchbridge. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is it possible to have your officials 

confirm that or just notify the community of Rocanville as 

quickly as possible so that they are aware of it. 

 

I guess the other thing I would ask of you, is if consideration 

would be given to . . . and I’m not sure if the individual is 

willing to set up a business there, whether they’d be still be 

looking at the property with the building gone — if there is any 

way maybe working with the current foundation that’s already 

there, or else would it just be broken up too much when another 

building is taken off, when the building is removed from it. 

Maybe this is something that certainly can be addressed. But if 

you could respond as quickly as possible, it would be 

appreciated. 

 

And I thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials for the time 

this afternoon. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to your 

officials, Mr. Minister. I just have a couple of questions on the 

move of your department to Innovation Place. Can you tell me  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

how many different locales are moved into Saskatoon, into 

Innovation Place last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that the member is asking, in the 

restructuring and redesign of the Department of Highways last 

year, how many of the regional offices might have found their 

way into the Innovation Place. And parts of four regional areas 

made their way into Innovation Place. So you have some folks 

there from Yorkton, and from Saskatoon themselves, some 

from Swift Current, and some people from North Battleford. So 

that’s the consolidation from those four regions. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The staff that moved into Innovation Place, are 

they administration? Are they engineers? Or who? What exactly 

. . . what professions are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The staff would be senior executive 

directors and engineers. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are any of the people that have been moved 

into Saskatoon still required to go out to their different 

localities like Yorkton or Swift Current to do their jobs on a 

daily or weekly basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  All but maybe a couple of technical people 

that would be . . . that are working currently in Innovation 

Place, and maybe a couple of folks involved with the gravel 

side, are the only ones that would be making their way out of 

Innovation Place to provide services outside of that particular 

facility. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’d asked this question before 

and hadn’t received an answer. Could you tell me what it costs 

to rent the premises at Innovation Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The current cost is about $65,000 — that 

would be an annual cost. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So is there a cost saving from moving, when it 

comes to the rental space, from moving these officials from 

their various departments? Are we saving any rent in the 

locations they move from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The overall provincial savings that we’re 

anticipating that we’ll achieve in this past year would be about 

450,000. What we’re looking for, in terms of achieving over a 

longer period of time, would be about $800,000, just in the 

accommodation side itself. And I believe that’s what your 

question is. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have just one other 

— or a couple other quick questions. I gave you a note and 

asking about a specific approach at Margo. I’m wondering if 

you can give me . . . tell me when I’ll be able to get some 

information. Maybe just to clarify, there was a business person 

at Margo had asked to have an approach put in to allow them to 

proceed with the business. They had been given verbal approval 

that it could be built, and now they’re unsure if that can be built 

or not. Can you tell me about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well what we’ll do, Madam Member, is  

we’ll just review that. As I’ve just got the information early this 

afternoon, I’ll check it with my officials over the next couple of 

days and we’ll have a response for you in terms of what the 

possibilities or the abilities are for us to achieve what those 

people are asking for us to do. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday I raised 

the subject of the junction of Highway 40 where it enters the 

Yellowhead. And I think your officials have long since agreed 

that it’s a bad intersection, and one we have to get rid of. And 

that Highway 40 has to link into the Yellowhead at a 90 degree 

angle, and at a different spot than it presently does. 

 

And I was asking the minister if you could give me some 

assurance as to when that project might be undertaken. I 

wonder if you’re now in a position to be able to answer that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The discussions are currently ongoing with 

both the city of North Battleford and the city of Battleford to 

see how we might in fact solve the problem that the member 

from North Battleford is talking about. And I think the other 

part of your question was when do you think the analysis might 

be completed? We’re suggesting that we think we’ll have that 

done sometime by midsummer, real early fall, to be able to 

provide some kind of decision as to how that junction might 

look like, and configuration might look like in that particular 

part of the road. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, as your officials will be aware — 

I’m not sure if you’ve been brought completely up to date on it 

— but the city of North Battleford has actually offered to 

assemble and donate the land to bring Highway 40 along the 

David Laird Campground, which would be just, I suppose, a 

couple of kilometres east of where it presently comes in. And 

that offer still stands from the city. 

 

However, the additional element has now been brought about as 

a result of the announcement by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

of an $11 million facility to be located a few kilometres further 

east on the Yellowhead. And I understand the Wheat Pool is 

taking the position that they would like Highway 40 to intersect 

with Highway 16 at or very near where their new facility would 

be. 

 

I guess what I’m saying is I feel very strongly that the Highway 

40 intersection should be moved. Exactly where it is put is not a 

big priority with me. But I’d ask you if you could comment on 

those two issues. It seemed to me we’re talking about the Wheat 

Pool new terminal and the David Laird Campground. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think the announcement on the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool facility has just been made, I 

understand. And the Department of Highways and 

Transportation haven’t had this discussion at all with the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in terms of the kinds of 

configuration or needs that they require in terms of road. 



1792  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

But we certainly appreciate the kinds of work that I think’s 

already begun with both the city of Prince Albert . . . or the city 

of North Battleford, I mean, and the Department of Highways. 

 

Of course now that we have a new player, as you suggest, that’s 

come forward, there’ll need to be then a broader, I think, 

analysis, discussion with all of those players which includes 

now, as you suggest, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in attempt 

to try to come up with a solution that would ensure that we have 

good access, egress, and provide the kind of safety features that 

are necessary in development of roadways. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I appreciate the minister’s response. I’d 

just like to say that my understanding was that up until this 

spring the time frame in terms of re-routing Highway 40 was 

something like five years. Now we’re going to have the terminal 

built probably within a year. And I would suggest that that 

makes this project more urgent, and I was hoping that this 

project will be bumped up to a much earlier time frame. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  If certainly the inclusion of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool’s facility there adds to the sort of the 

cost benefit analysis that we’ll be doing on that particular 

project, that obviously will elevate the importance of the project 

significantly. Or if there are issues that relate to safety here that 

we need to be addressing as a department, that too will enhance 

the level of which the discussion will take place regarding this 

particular road. 

 

Our anticipation is that those discussions will now need to 

begin at a different level, considering that we now have a new 

player as a part of that piece. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like now, if I 

may, to turn to the issue of the continuation of the twinning of 

the Yellowhead. Of course you’re aware that we will be 

finished with the twinning from Saskatoon to North Battleford, 

and you have announced plans for North Battleford to the 

Alberta border. 

 

Particularly I would like to ask you though, there is going to be 

another bridge put over the North Saskatchewan River at North 

Battleford, I understand. Are you able to tell us where that 

bridge will be? 

 

And related to that, the present bridge, there is a curve as you 

proceed west from the river — a curve that has been the scene 

of several accidents — and that curve simply doesn’t meet 

modern standards. I understand the real problem is that if 

people would abide by the speed limit posted there wouldn’t be 

a problem. 

 

But unfortunately because of highways elsewhere, truckers 

think they can go at highway speed on that curve, and the fact is 

they can’t. If they go highway speed on that curve they will be 

in trouble, and oftentimes have been in trouble. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  My understanding in discussing this with 

my officials is that the new bridge will go somewhere upstream, 

just a bit upstream from where it is today. 

 

Currently what’s happened over the winter months, there have 

been a number of test holes that have been drilled to see where 

we might be able to solidify the best base for the new bridge 

when it goes in; because of course as I’m told, there’s been 

some movement on the one that’s currently there. 

 

So by moving it to the new location upstream, what that will do 

of course is alleviate some of the concerns that you have and 

some of the casualties, fatalities that have occurred on that 

curve that you talked about earlier. We expect that that will 

alleviate some of those issues that you’d raised. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well as I understand it, the new bridge that 

will go in will of course be one-way traffic. It’ll be western 

bound traffic and the present bridge would continue to be the 

eastward bound traffic bridge. Would the curve then, the 

existing curve which would now be eastward bound traffic, 

would that be corrected as part of the twinning project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The existing roads would be realigned of 

course, and what you would have here is an interchange of 

course that would be built as well on the west side, as I 

understand. That would assist with alleviating some of that 

problem. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Will the routing of the Yellowhead continue to 

be right through the Battlefords, or would it go north of North 

Battleford to be out of the city? Has your department come to a 

firm conclusion on that issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The answer is that it’s staying on the 

existing location. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And is there therefore room in the existing 

location to have the twinned lanes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m told that there is sufficient room there 

to provide the four-laning without any difficulty. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, there are what we call in the 

Battlefords the old bridges, and they are still part of the 

highway network. It was my understanding that your intention 

would be to remove them from the highway network on 

completion of the westward bound bridge. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  My understanding is that some of the old 

bridges form part of the old town park, or the city park complex 

and so some of our thinking here would be to have the 

discussions with the city of course and see whether or not we 

can relinquish some of our responsibilities to that particular 

piece of property to that of the city. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — That is correct, Mr. Minister. The old bridges 

are the access to parks which are on islands in the river. So are 

you saying that they would then become a civic responsibility, 

or do you anticipate that the province would continue to assume 

some responsibility for those old bridges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What we would do is sit down with the 

city of North Battleford and try to negotiate with them what 

would be a suitable arrangement, both for them and for the  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

Department of Highways and Transportation. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Can you give me any indication of the time 

frame for the second bridge, the westward bound traffic bridge? 

And can you tell, Mr. Minister, if the plans for proceeding on 

towards Lloydminster are contingent on federal support, or are 

they firm in any event? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Our estimate on the bridge is about, we’re 

suggesting somewhere in the neighbourhood of four to seven 

years. 

 

The other question that you had asked is in respect to what 

happens with the completion of the twinning of the 

Yellowhead. Of course it’s a solid commitment on the part of 

this government over the next 15 years. Of course we all 

appreciate the fact and we know that you’ll work hard with us 

to secure some of the federal funding. That certainly would 

expediate this process over that period of time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So you’re saying that the four to seven years 

on the bridge and the fifteen years to Lloydminster is an 

independent commitment by the province, that could hopefully 

be bumped up in time frame with assistance from Ottawa? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’m sure we’ll be pleased to see if there’s any 

assistance we can give in that regard. 

 

Mr. Minister, you may be aware, I’m sure your officials will be 

aware that there has periodically been some discussion of a 

bridge in the Highgate area which would be, I don’t know, 20 

kilometres further west than where we’re talking about. Do I 

take it that, from your discussion of where you plan on placing 

the new bridge, that there would be no plans for a bridge at 

Highgate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well what we need to do with this 

particular question is we need to have some discussion within 

our own department about it. Clearly your travels over these 

bridges and roads provide you with a great deal more familiarity 

than certainly I have with them. But in respect to the Highgate 

area, west of the area that we talked about earlier, we’ll do 

some . . . we’ll have some discussion about that within our own 

department and try to provide some response to you on it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. That completes 

my discussions on road plans for my home area. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And welcome, Mr. Minister, and 

to your officials. 

 

As you’re probably aware, it’s been probably some 10 years ago 

that I started having some interaction, as mayor of the town of 

Rosthern and a member of other communities in that area, with 

Department of Highways. So we’ve met on different occasions 

before, and I think I have to thank the Department of Highways 

for some of the work that’s happened in the Rosthern 

constituency. There have been quite a number of very positive  

things that have taken place there. 

 

And I would like to address the first number of questions from 

that section coming out of the constituency of Rosthern. And 

the one is the twinning of Highway No. 12 that's taking place 

near Martensville. And I’m just curious, what is the time line on 

the completion of that twinning? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Our plans are that we would do the 

grading on that roadway this year and we would do the paving 

on it next year, with the opening then in ’98. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And the other highway that’s had 

some twinning done on it is Highway 11. And I think the part 

that’s been twinned is very much appreciated and was very 

necessary. As you’re aware, there was a major safety concern 

with Highway 11 and this has alleviated some of that. 

 

The twinning, as you’re probably aware, ends exactly halfway 

essentially between Osler and Warman, and just stops right 

there and then we’re back to one highway again. And I’m 

wondering what is the outlook for twinning that highway 

further on, possibly to the intersection of Highway 312? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m told that this project is about 40th on 

the cost benefit list. And that would likely take us, based on the 

level of funding that we’ve budgeted over the 10-year period 

that we talked about, would be about four to five years. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, thank you. Because I’ve had a number 

of people who’ve expressed a lot of gratitude for the safety 

that’s already provided by the twinning that takes place and 

saying that, you know, the traffic suddenly comes together 

between two communities. And now the concern is still from 

that other part on. So I’m glad that at least it’s still in the mix 

there somewhere. 

 

I do have one concern about the twinning of Highway 11. And 

there’s an odd intersection that takes place when you come out 

of Saskatoon down Warman road and you want to access to 

Highway 11 going north. And just when you turn off the 

Warman road, that access is almost a 90-degree corner. 

 

And I think it’s turned out being quite a disaster because 

Warman road is a 90 kilometre stretch and you have to slow 

down quite drastically to get onto that other approach — 

probably down to a speed of about 25 to 40 clicks. It’s so bad, 

in fact, that there is a highway sign that’s been set up numerous 

times right at that intersection. It gets knocked over on a regular 

basis. And at present, I believe it’s the Department of Highways 

or some local neighbour who’s trying to help the situation and 

has glued reflector tape on the light post that’s left. 

 

There are continually light and automotive body parts lying all 

over that part just from people who’ve hit that one sign and 

gone in the ditch there. And I’m wondering if they’re looking at 

that particular intersection there because it is a rather strange 

one. 

 



1794  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m told that we’re going to be . . . this 

may be an operational problem. That this is one of the pieces of 

road that we’ve just did some work on just recently and if 

there’s an operational problem with this particular intersection 

— and it sounds by what you’ve described today that there may 

be some difficulty there — the answer obviously isn’t to take 

the pole down but to do some work with the intersection. And 

so we’re not aware of it at this point in time but our undertaking 

will be to examine that particular corner. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you very much, and I think it would 

be very much appreciated by all the people that have to make 

that access turn there. I’d like to move over to Highway 312 for 

awhile. Highway 312 is sort of an unfinished thing over there. It 

was more or less completed from Laird through to the Hepburn 

corner, but the rest of it through from Laird to Wakaw has not 

been completed. 

 

With what’s happening with grain movement, it seems that 

most of the grain movement is coming from the 

Waldheim-Laird-Carlton area to Rosthern. And also coming 

across from Wakaw, because they’re losing their railway track. 

So that’s putting a lot of pressure on 312 to the extent that 

there’s been some definite safety concerns. 

 

I called Department of Highways once or twice on some 

specific concerns through the previous minister of Highways 

and had those short-term, immediate concerns taken care of. 

And I want to thank Department of Highways for that quick 

action on those particular potholes. But on the long-term scale, 

Highway 312 is coming apart very rapidly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The piece of road that you talk about on 

312 looks like it’s about 14th on our cost analysis list here. Our 

sense is that that’s about two or three years away from getting 

the kind of work that it likely requires. I think what’s important 

here is this might be one of the roadways though that could in 

fact be included under the Canada Ag infrastructure program. 

 

And so as we work on over the next year or two we’ll try to 

ensure that it’s one that’s given that kind of priority considering 

the kind of traffic that likely . . . grain traffic that it’s presently 

carrying as you mentioned. Some of the rail line is coming out 

of that particular area which will obviously put more demand 

on the roadway which then I think would increase its priority 

under the Ag funding or the Canada Ag funding program. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and you may be aware that there 

is considerable discussion going on about a high through-put 

elevator coming up some place between Hepburn and Duck 

Lake and there’s one or two companies that are discussing that. 

And if that does take place the pressure on that particular 

highway will increase dramatically again. 

 

Could you detail your department’s criteria for making road 

improvements in general. Like what sorts of things do you take 

into consideration when you’re looking at making road 

improvements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There are about six or seven components 

here that would be used as factors when we would be looking at  

what level a particular roadway would fit, and they would be 

these. The capital cost to construct or upgrade the roadway; 

what the annual maintenance and long-term preservation costs 

of the roadway would be; the change in traffic safety benefits to 

society; the change in cost of operating a vehicle on that 

roadway; the change in level of service as measured by 

improved traffic flow and reduced travel time; society’s 

preference for travel on dust-free surfaces or on four-lane 

facilities; and I think the final one would be the economic 

growth in the provincial economy arising from highway 

improvements. Those would be the factors that we’ll be using 

in determining the cost benefit analysis. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the discussion 

on 312 you sort of mention that this may be . . . there may be an 

opportunity there for some of that infrastructure program. And 

I’m wondering if you could describe for me highway projects to 

be included with the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 

Works Program, which highways are presently sort of 

earmarked for that program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What’s important to understand in the 

Canada Ag infrastructure program is that the decisions as to 

where the money goes or flows is really dependent upon the 

outcome of a committee of seven of which the province has 

only two representatives on it. The federal government I believe 

have three and the municipalities have two, so that’s the 

compilation of the committee. 

 

I have here, and we can provide a copy of this for you which I 

think would be more useful, and what it does show is the 

number of high through-put, by and large, facilities that are 

being created, designed around the province. And this is where 

in large part the money from this particular program makes its 

way to. 

 

I think what I’d like to say here as well is that in our new 

transportation strategy, one of the important factors is that when 

we have a high through-put facility like these that are going to 

be designed, there’s going to be some requirement now for 

those people to come and have a discussion with us. 

 

There will be some requirements here for some licensing of that 

particular roadway and some partnership here ensuring what 

some of those costs are going to be, which then provides some 

other opportunities for the generation of revenue to ensure that 

we have these kinds of new structures participating in those 

projects. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Some of the projects that will fall underneath 

this category of this joint infrastructure — are any of those 

projects that would have gone ahead had the infrastructure 

program not been announced? In other words, are all these 

projects new and sort of over and above what the Department of 

Highways would have done without that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What the Canada Agri structure program 

has really done is it’s expedited the process in terms of getting 

the money to do these kinds of highway projects that likely 

would have been done over time only it’s brought them to 

fruition a bit earlier than what we would have anticipated. 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

Mr. Heppner:  You mentioned in a question or two back the 

committee that’s made up that puts this together, and I believe 

the partnerships that were involved in that. Since some of these 

projects depend on municipal application for projects in their 

area, is there any of the planning that the Department of 

Highways had done in the past that kind of gets thrown into 

disarray because of a new program that’s suddenly provided for 

you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think the best answer to that question 

might be that with the, certainly with the development of the 

high through-put facilities that we’re seeing all around the 

province, this is clearly . . . and the deregulation of many of the 

railroads or rail lines, this has put a tremendous added pressure 

onto the highway network. And to compensate for some of 

those pressures of course we have the new program, the new 

federal program. 

 

Through the partnership of course with the municipalities and 

the province and through that committee, what we’re seeing 

here is hopefully an increased amount of dialogue through the 

area planning authorities or transportation planning authorities. 

We’re going to see more dialogue both with the railroads and 

the grain companies to ensure that we can alleviate some of 

those additional pressures that are on the roadways today. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The mayor of Gull 

Lake has expressed considerable concern that Highway No. 37 

is suffering pretty badly due to some of the commercial traffic 

that’s there. With some of the new programs and funds that 

have sort of come through, with what we’ve just been talking 

about, I wonder if you could comment on the condition of 

Highway 37, and if there’s any intentions to put some money 

into Highway 37 and do some upgrading on that particular 

roadway. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well what we’ll do with this particular 

project, it was submitted as a CAIP (Canada Agriculture 

Infrastructure Program) project. It wasn’t approved however. 

There are two more years of the CAIP program and our hope, of 

course, is that it may get some approval over the next couple of 

years. 

 

So what we’ll do with this particular roadway is continue to 

provide the kind of maintenance that we can in the short term. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  There’s already been some questioning this 

afternoon on road crews and depots that have been cut. Having 

sort of gone through a year of those sorts of things and looking 

at the situation now, is there any possibility of some those road 

crews and depots being reinstated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well what we’ve just . . . we’re just in the 

process of completing some of that consolidation that you talk 

about. That process was scheduled to take place over a period 

of two years. So we’re into our second year of that 

consolidation. 

 

We’ve had one . . . part of a summer of course and one winter  

season with the work crews as they’ve been left in the rural 

areas . . . or in the regional areas. And with the consolidation, 

we’re continuing to examine what the outcomes are going to be 

into the future. 

 

We have our joint study that’s under . . . that we’re currently 

undergoing with UMAC, which is the union membership side. 

And we’ll monitor it over the next year. If there’s some need for 

us to add some additional resources to areas where we’re not 

providing the kinds of services that we believe we should be, 

then some of that of course can be undertaken. 

 

But at this point in time, it’s our sense that it’s early in the day 

based on the restructuring process and would like to see . . . I’d 

like to have some time with it first. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Back in August of ’92 the 

province began a process of trying to work itself into 

international registration plans for commercial vehicles to 

simplify the cost of commercial vehicles operating in 

Saskatchewan. And so it had basically two components to it. 

 

Our target date on that plan was October 1, ’93. Where are we 

at with that right now and how successful is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The member’s right that those target dates 

were set, I believe, for ’93. We don’t . . . I believe the 

discussion that I had with the individual who has most of the 

information around this, we didn’t bring with us today. But the 

answer to this I think is that now that we’ve expanded some of 

our work, in terms of looking at harmonization regulation 

across North America, which certainly expands broader the 

work with our U.S. (United States) friends, this target date is of 

course moved a bit. 

 

We can provide you more detail on that into the future. But we 

don’t know exactly when we hope to reach sort of full 

conclusion to those discussions that we’re having. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I think probably both you and I have a study 

prepared by Canadian Automobile Association of 

Saskatchewan that shows that between ’91 and ’94 the ratio of 

budgeted dollars expended by Highways and Transportation 

versus the fuel tax collected has fallen from $1.30 to 59 cents, a 

drop of approximately 50 per cent. 

 

A study from last December, CAA (Canadian Automobile 

Association) determined that only 46 per cent of money 

collected from fuel tax and licence registration was being spent 

on roads. And I don’t think much has changed in the last little 

while. 

 

Do you feel this is fair to motorists of Saskatchewan that 

revenues that are collected under the guise of that kind of a tax 

are not being put back in development of roads which seems the 

logical thing because that’s very much . . . The person who uses 

the roads would be the person that would be paying for it the 

most and the money would be going back into the roads. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think what’s important to recognize 

here is that government doesn’t dedicate tax. And I know that  



1796  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

you’ve had this discussion several times over. 

 

In Saskatchewan what we’re attempting to do of course is — 

with this budget — we’re putting in an additional $30 million 

this year into roads and transportation. We’ve made a 

commitment to the Saskatchewan people that over the next 10 

years you’re going to see a budget of somewhere . . . or a figure 

expended of somewhere within the neighbourhood of about 

$2.5 billion. 

 

I mean the question that you raise is, you know, do we have 

enough money today for roads? Well clearly the answer is, is 

that if we could get another 40 or $50 million and dedicate it to 

our roadways across the province, we could enhance them 

significantly. 

 

But when you have a limited budget that we work with and we 

have a tremendous number of priorities across the piece of 

government, then of course the Highways budget needs to take 

its portion of that and we attempt to do what we can with the 

resources that are dedicated to us. 

 

But if there was certainly some way that we might see some 

additional revenue flow our way, we have lots of avenues where 

we could dedicate it to in the transportation system or in the 

highway network. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You will recall that 

over the last year the issue has come up of cheques being sent 

out by your department to people who sustain damages to their 

vehicles because of potholes or other road conditions that 

damage the vehicles. 

 

Could you tell us the maximum amount that has been paid out 

to any single recipient of this kind of compensation this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  One that we know of offhand was around 

$4,000. We don’t have the verification of that with us here 

today, but our sense is that that would have been the highest 

one that we have paid out to any single recipient through the 

course of this particular year. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Last question for this afternoon, Mr. 

Minister. We’ve discussed to some extent where you get the 

revenue from for your highways and discussed the possibility of 

getting it from taxes, and some of it comes from infrastructure 

sharing program and this sort of thing. 

 

I believe the province picked up what sounds like a major 

number of dollars — $21 million — to compensate 

Saskatchewan for the loss of the Crow. I’d like to hear your 

comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well my sense of this of course is that this 

$21 million is only one part of the pay-out of the 84 million I 

believe over a period of four years. And of that, I believe that 

$7 million of that makes its way to the Department of Highways 

and Transportation. The other $21 million . . . or $14 million, 

excuse me, makes its way to the municipalities. 

 

Is this a significant compensation for Saskatchewan in terms of  

the loss of the Crow benefit? Of course it’s not anywhere near 

what we require here to maintain our roadways and sustain our 

roadways across the province. 

 

Certainly part of that of course, is with the deregulation of 

railroads in this province and across Canada, we’re going to see 

more and more pressure on our roadways. We talked a little bit 

about that earlier this afternoon. And we’re going to need a 

substantive amount of revenue funding in the next while just to 

sustain some of that roadway for us as the road traffic becomes 

heavier and the truck traffic increases. 

 

And that’s part of why, as I said yesterday in some of my 

comments around the transportation strategy, we need to be a 

lot smarter in terms of how we spend our money into the future 

as it relates to transportation. We need to include much broader 

partnerships with the grain companies, with local authorities, to 

see how we might be able to manage that into the future. 

 

So although the federal government has made a contribution in 

the amount of 84 million over that period of time, it doesn’t 

touch the kinds of pressures that we have in the road system. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I would like to thank the minister and his 

officials for answering the questions this afternoon. Also a 

thank you to the Department of Highways and to the minister 

for the attention that you have paid to my constituency. It’s one 

of the few areas in rural Saskatchewan that is growing very 

rapidly, and as such it puts a unique pressure on highways as far 

as safety is concerned. And we’ll keep you up to date on other 

concerns that we have. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just before we let 

the officials go this afternoon, could you provide us with a 

complete list of highways equipment that you intend to dispose 

of in the course of this fiscal year? And what would be the 

estimated cost to the department of its disposal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We’re currently just comprising the list of 

assets that we would be disposing of in this current year. And if 

it would suit the member what we could do is provide that later 

on in this year, which would be . . . because we don’t have that 

complete list yet. And if we were to provide it for you now, it 

wouldn’t have all of the equipment on it that I think you’d want 

to know about. 

 

So if we could do that later on in this year sometime, 

midsummer or so, that might be more advantageous to you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

minister. Then if we have your undertaking that that listing in 

detail will be provided as available later in the summer, then 

that would be satisfactory for us here this afternoon. 

 

I’ve already had opportunity in prior estimate sessions to state 

my case for the highways in my constituency; I won’t get into 

that here this afternoon. I think we’ve made some of the 

conditions obvious to the department in that regard. And in fact 

I did receive some more pothole patrol forms at my 

constituency office again today in fact. So I do intend to present 

the balance of them to you next week in the spirit of  



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

cooperation. 

 

So I would thank the officials who have been so diligent here 

this afternoon and I’ll just take my place. 

 

(1630) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

today, to my right is Mr. John Law, president of the 

corporation. To my immediate left is Mr. Al Moffat, who is the 

vice-president of commercial services. Behind Mr. Moffat is 

Mr. Garth Rusconi, who’s the vice-president of commercial 

services. Directly behind me is Ms. Deb Koshman, who’s the 

vice-president of finance and corporate services. And behind 

Mr. Law is Mr. Rob Isbister, who is the director of financial 

planning, finance, and corporate services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome 

to the minister’s officials here this afternoon. 

 

Piggybacking somewhat on a question I put moments ago — to 

you in fact but with your officials of the Department of 

Highways — I understand now from the question that you 

won’t be able to tell me exactly what equipment you intend to 

dispose of at this point in time anyway for the Department of 

Highways. 

 

But could you explain for us this afternoon what will be the 

eventual tendering process for that equipment when it’s turned 

over to you for disposal? Perhaps you could also outline for us 

who traditionally has been buying this equipment? What 

traditionally have you been able to obtain in terms of percentage 

of what might have been the original purchase price — how 

many cents on the dollar perhaps would be another way of 

expressing it. And would you be able to advise us a little bit 

further in detail when I ask who traditionally is buying the  

equipment? Are there a lot of out-of-province firms that are 

actually purchasing this equipment that you’re disposing of for 

the Department of Highways? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  As I’d mentioned earlier to the member 

under the Highways estimates, what’s currently being 

undertaken is that the Department of Highways of course, 

would be putting together the inventory of equipment across the 

province that would be required for sale or that we’d be selling. 

 

What would happen with that of course, is that those lists 

would then be provided to the Saskatchewan Property 

Management and would list on each of those sheets in which 

locations of the province that equipment would be located; if in 

fact some of the equipment may need to be moved to another 

department — or a depot, I mean — if you didn’t have enough 

in one particular location. Then there would be an advertising 

process, a public advertising process, and then all of the 

equipment would go to a sealed open tender process. 

 

Now the question that you asked is, who buys the equipment? 

This equipment of course, could be bid on by not only people 

from within the province but anyone who has an interest in a 

piece of equipment, if they were to read the ad and then come in 

and make a sealed open tender . . . or sealed bid on it. 

 

I think just by way of information, last year the Saskatchewan 

Property Management handled one of the largest equipment 

tender sales on behalf of the Department of Highways. I think 

there were something like 3,000 bids that we had and they were 

from all over western Canada. And the net value of that sale last 

year was about $1.9 million. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

would you be able to express that $1.9 million in . . . being 

that’s a disposal price, what sort of percentage of the original 

purchase cost of that equipment might you estimate that to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We wouldn’t . . . Saskatchewan Property 

Management wouldn’t know what that percentage would be. 

That would be a better question I think that would need to be 

posed to the Department of Highways and they can provide you 

with some of that information. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Whoops, I’ve let them go. 

 

I’m going to switch to a different topic now and it concerns air 

ambulance services in the province. I had, earlier in this year, 

asked through freedom of information for information 

concerning air ambulance trip statistics, and I know at that time 

in the response you weren’t able to advise us to the end of the 

’96-97 fiscal year as far as the number of trips by air 

ambulance. 

 

I believe I’m looking . . . well I’m looking at the document in 

front of me here right now. As of January 31 the total trips for 

the fiscal year had been 572. I wonder would you have the 

ending . . . year end figure now for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t have that current information 

that you want to date. We’re still getting that detail from the  



1798  Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1997 

Department of Health. But we’ll have that in the next bit and 

we can provide that for the member. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And to the 

minister, I would appreciate getting that information when 

you’re able to. But regardless, I think the statistics themselves 

as I look at them on this document, are significant enough. Of 

1991-92 there was only 398 air ambulance trips, and as of the 

of January 31 of ’97 there have been 572, so there has been a 

significant increase in the air ambulance needs in the province. 

 

So we were certainly welcoming the addition of the new aircraft 

to the air ambulance service. I was wondering if you might just 

briefly outline some of the attributes of this particular aircraft 

that make it most suited for the air ambulance service that it is 

now within. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I very much appreciate the question 

and the opportunity to speak a little bit about our air ambulance 

service. The demand of course on our air ambulance service has 

grown significantly, as you pointed out, in terms of numbers. 

But as important to that is that over the last couple of years 

there’s been a huge demand to fly a number of our residents 

from Saskatchewan, for specialized services, outside of the 

province. 

 

And I want to in particular talk about the child’s . . . the 

Children’s Hospital in Toronto, where we’ve probably in the 

past year had a number of trips there which have really been 

able to ensure that in two or three instances have in fact saved 

the lives of young people who we’ve taken to Toronto. 

 

This new aircraft of course, will now be able to make that 

non-stop flight at a much quicker rate than we would have in 

the past. This new aircraft of course, can land on any of the 

airstrips across the province that we have. So accessibility to 

good quality health care, emergency transport service, is greatly 

improved across the province. 

 

In 1996-97 alone, there’s been a 25 per cent increase in air 

miles that are flown. We now have somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of over 300,000 miles that have been flown by 

this particular service. 

 

We’re just extremely pleased that we have this kind of a 

state-of-the-art service in our province, and we know that it will 

make a tremendous difference to the quality of health care in 

rural Saskatchewan in particular. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Concerning the 

other aircraft that I’m assuming will be retained in the air 

ambulance service . . . or Lifeguard One, I guess. Is that what it 

is referred to as? I understand that it is; although it’s an older 

aircraft, I think it’s pressurized and it’s a relatively high-speed 

craft as well. 

 

Given that there is such a significant increase in the number of 

air ambulance trips that are required, and that I’m told that in 

the past, when you really only had Lifeguard One as a fully 

pressurized aircraft available for the air ambulance service, 

whenever it was out on a mission, I’m told that there either had  

to be an aircraft charter or else an unpressurized Navajo out of 

SPMC was put into service. And my understanding is those 

types of crafts are not very good in terms of transporting 

patients who have serious complications. 

 

Could I get your undertaking here this afternoon that Lifeguard 

One will continue to be used for the air ambulance service — 

because I think it will be needed as well — rather than just 

transporting ministers around the province instead. Because I 

really do think that there is a need to have it on stand-by, 

another pressurized, relatively high-speed aircraft for air 

ambulance use. So could I just get that undertaking from you 

this afternoon? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The old non-pressurized Navajo is now 

out of service. And so what we’re using, of course, is the old 

Cheyenne II, which is our backup. This aircraft is on duty now 

for 12 hours per day, and is currently located in Saskatoon. I 

think part of what you say is what we’re examining as well, in 

that these are very, very . . . this is a very old aircraft. It has a 

tremendous number of air hours on it as well. It serves us well 

around the province to provide some of the backup services. 

But we expect that as the demand increases on our new aircraft, 

that they’ll need to be consider — there will need to be 

additional considerations around what the backup services 

might be. We acknowledge your position on this. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, I’m switching topics here again. Concerning the fire 

that occurred at the Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon, we had heard 

through the media, various estimates of the costs of damages. 

One example was $5 million, and on another occasion it was 

quoted as less than 5 million, and then again at over 5 million. 

I’m wondering if you could provide a little bit more certainty 

for us this afternoon as to what the costs of damages may have 

been? 

 

And also with respect to the fire and the extensive damage that 

it has caused, my understanding of the situation was that there 

was smoke being detected by officials on the site but they 

weren’t able to determine exactly where it was coming from. 

And I think there was a little bit of confusion surrounding 

whether or not it might have been just some smell of smoke that 

might have related to some of the trades that occur, the training 

that occurs in the building. 

 

And I’m just wondering, as well as providing this more 

accurate estimate to the cost of damages and what is going to be 

done to make repairs during this year, could you also advise us 

if there is anything undertaken by your department to try and 

prevent a similar situation from occurring in the future, where 

detection could be a more certain thing in an instance such as 

this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The question that you raised is one that 

we’ve been having to respond to on a fair number of occasions 

as well, and that is what is the actual cost of the damages to that 

particular building. Our estimate today is that that will be about 

$5.5 million before we have all of the work completed. 



May 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

What’s important to note here is that work will all get 

completed within a period of about three months. So before the 

school year again in September, all of the students that will be 

returning, or new students that will be coming to the institute, 

will be nicely accommodated again. 

 

Your question about how it is that there wasn’t earlier detection 

on this, what we have done of course after the fire is had a 

number of people from the Fire Commissioner’s office tour the 

building. And there seems to be no indication here at all that 

any of our sensor systems weren’t working. In fact it supported 

that they were all in place, and should have detected that. 

 

But apparently the fire was trapped between two levels — 

between the roof and a secondary level just below the roof line, 

which was constructed there I think, when the building was 

initially designed for future expansion upwards. And so this is 

where most of the fire occurred. 

 

I think the other piece that I think is important here is that the 

fire . . . right after the fire, all of the students were 

accommodated in various locations around Saskatoon in a 

period of about 48 hours. So it was a tremendous undertaking; 

there was about 300,000 square feet of space that was required. 

Through the work of the staff at Saskatchewan Property 

Management and the diligent work of both employees and 

management at SIAST, all of the students were accommodated 

for classes within about a 48-hour period. So this was a 

tremendous undertaking by a great many people. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, a final topic here this afternoon concerning the 

allocation of the $8 million that we see in the Estimates for 

renewal of assets. I’m wondering how much of this is going 

towards the restoration of the legislature itself. And in terms of 

that restoration process, could you perhaps briefly outline 

what’s going to take place here in the building — interior- and 

exterior-wise. 

 

Also just if you could advise us how long your government has 

been aware that this work has been required on the building. 

And perhaps a comment as to how much money could have 

been saved by the government if this work had been undertaken 

a bit sooner than this current . . . than getting started in this 

current year. 

 

Perhaps if you could also advise us if all the contracts related to 

the restoration work have been tendered, awarded; and if they 

have, could you provide us with a detailed list of that? 

 

And with that I’ll take my seat and let you respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The $8 million . . . Of the $8 million that’s 

been identified for work this year, $5 million of that is 

designated for work to be done on this building. 

 

The majority of that work of course, will be done on the 

foundation of the building, to secure the base and the structure 

of the building. So there’ll be a fair bit of activity around here 

over the next little while. There will be excavation that will be 

undertaken to take out a fair bit of the soil underneath the  

building because it’s wet and we need to put in a new enforced 

piling system under parts of it. 

 

The question as to how long we’ve known about it — well 

we’ve been monitoring this since about 1982. Could we have 

we begun the process a bit earlier? I suppose the answer to that 

is that we could have. We could have begun the process a bit 

earlier. 

 

Is there any indication here that this is going to be a more 

expensive project today than it might have been, say five years 

ago? Well at this point in time we don’t have anything that 

might be able to relate to us that that could be the case. Has the 

contracts . . . there hasn’t been . . . the tender’s gone out for 

work on the building. We’ve received them now. We’ve 

examined them at the corporation but we have not yet awarded 

any of the contractual work to date. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And to the 

minister, if you could at the time when the awards are made, if 

you could undertake to provide us with that information as well. 

 

And having said that, that concludes my questioning for this 

afternoon and I would at this time just like to thank the 

minister’s officials and the minister for your responses and also 

for the undertakings you provided to us in terms of additional 

informations that will be coming very soon. I’ll take my place 

and just wish everybody a very nice long weekend. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to take this occasion, Mr. 

Chairman, to thank the member for these questions this 

afternoon, and as well to wish the member and others in the 

House a good, safe weekend and to extend an appreciation to 

my officials who are here this afternoon for the excellent work 

that they’ve done in the preparation of this year’s budget. So 

thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I want to wish members that they 

should have a good weekend. It’s too late to have a good, long 

weekend, but a good weekend none the less. It being past the 

normal hour of adjournment, the committee will rise, report 

progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Before adjournment, I want to wish 

everyone a very happy and joyous Victoria Day weekend to all 

the members here and to everyone in Saskatchewan. Enjoy 

yourselves. Enjoy the good weather and all come back. 

Hopefully, God willing, we will all meet here again Tuesday at 

1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1744 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1744 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1744 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1744 

  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1744 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1744 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1774 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1789 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Institution of the Year Award 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

 Ile-a-la-Crosse Fashion Show 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

 Canadian National Institute for the Blind Letter of Acknowledgement 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1745 

 Questionnaire to Farmers about Farm Marketing Board Changes 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1746 

 Dedication of Stuart Houston Ecology Centre 

  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1746 

 Can-Am Bowl set for Porcupine Plain 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1746 

 Auto Skills Champs 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1747 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Youth Suicide 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1747 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1747 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1747 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1748 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1748 

 Health Care Worker Injuries 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1749 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1749 

 Child Protection Services 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1750 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1750 

 Apology for Remarks about Reform Leader 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1750 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1750 

 Avon Brochures in Government Mailboxes 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1751 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1751 

 Regional Park Funding 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1751 

  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1751 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



 

 Bill No. 236  The Chief Electoral Officer Accountability Act 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1752 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1752 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1752 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1752 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1755 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1755 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1756 

 Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1757 

 Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 ...................................................................1759 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Health — Vote 32 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1759 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1759 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1761 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1763 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1765 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1773 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense — Health — Vote 32 ................................................................................................................................1777 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Economic and Co-operative Development — Vote 45 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1777 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1777 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1779 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1781 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense — Economic Development — Vote 45 ....................................................................................................1785 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments — Economic Development — Vote 167 ..........................................................................1785 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1785 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1785 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1787 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1790 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1791 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1793 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1796 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense — Highways and Transportation — Vote 16 .........................................................................................1797 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — Vote 53 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1797 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1797 


