



















































Hansard: April 16, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 889 

 April 16, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of people from Abernethy, Balcarres, Dysart, Lemberg, 

Melville, and Regina. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of the many citizens of 

Saskatchewan concerned about the social devastation caused by 

the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) gaming policy. 

 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

The petitioners are from Melville, Krydor, Yorkton, Goodeve, 

and throughout eastern Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens in the community of Kamsack, and I’ll read the prayer 

for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes, including car thefts, as well as crimes of violence, 

and the charge of attempted murder of a police officer; 

such task force to be comprised of representatives of the 

RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a 

new hospital in La Loche that will provide adequate health 

care to its northern residents. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

people like Keith Lemaigre, Ronny Montgrand, Michael 

Janvier, Jean Montgrand, Beth Clark, Trudy Sylvestre . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. It’s not in order to be 

entering the names of the petitioners into the record, and I’ll ask 

the hon. member to simply identify the location, the community 

from which the petitioners have signed and proceed to the 

conclusion. 

 

Order. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize, and I 

so present the petition. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to cause the 

construction of a new hospital in La Loche. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 

SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 

Clerk:  Mr. Johnson, the Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members’ Bills, presents the third report of the said 

committee which is as follows: 

 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 

petitions for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 

rules 64, 65 and 68 have been fully complied with. The 

petitions are: 

 

Of the Lutheran Church Canada in the province of 

Saskatchewan praying for an Act to provide for the 

continuation of the Lutheran Church-Canada, Central 

District; and 

 

Of The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company, Montreal 

Trust Company of Canada, and the Montreal Trust   



890  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

Company; and 

 

Of the TD Trust Company and the Central Guaranty Trust 

Company. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Cypress Hills, who is fully knowledgeable of this 

report because he asked about it: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you a group of students 

from my constituency seated in your gallery this afternoon. 

They are 29 wonderful grade 12 students from Aberdeen 

School, and they are accompanied by their teachers, Donna 

Duriez and David Herron, and by their bus driver, Roy Page. I 

look forward to meeting with each of you later on after question 

period this afternoon, and I’d ask all members of the Assembly 

to join with me in welcoming this group. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce a guest that’s seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. I’m sure that this guest is familiar to all of us, but I’d 

like to welcome Stirling McDowell, the former general 

secretary to the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation who is able 

to join us this afternoon. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to introduce John Murney, the agricultural director from one of 

the best radio stations in Prince Albert or in Saskatchewan, 900 

CKBI. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

join with the member to introduce John Murney from CKBI 

radio, and he’s the agriculture director there. So I’ve been 

getting a chance to speak with him quite often, so everybody, 

I’d like to have you welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

House, a distinguished Saskatchewan citizen, Mr. Jim Mills, the 

mayor of Elrose, probably the longest-standing mayor in 

Saskatchewan. He’d take a break for a couple of years to get a 

rest but he couldn’t stay away and he’s again the mayor and I 

suspect the most well-known mayor in the region of 

west-central Saskatchewan; has served his time on the 

SUMA(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

executive and a distinguished citizen. Welcome to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many of 

my colleagues who were at the Credit Union Central reception 

last night will have met these gentlemen that I am about to 

introduce and I would like to do that right now. They’re seated 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I’d ask them to rise as I 

introduce them. 

 

Larry Herman is the general manager of the Shellbrook Credit 

Union. Seated beside him is Grant Nicklin, the manager of 

members’ services at the Prince Albert Credit Union. And I 

might point out that he was, when I first started in the credit 

union system some number of years ago, was my district 

development manager and sort of guided me along the way. 

Seated beside him also is Karl Kajner, manager of the 

Spiritwood Credit Union. 

 

They all were, and many more general managers in the system 

became, part of my family when I was involved with the credit 

union system and they still remain dear, dear friends, even 

though all of you here now are my family. 

 

So if you would please join with me in welcoming these 

gentlemen to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to add to the 

opposition and the member from Prince Albert in welcoming 

John Murney here. He was a former constituent of mine from 

the town of Semans. So he’s . . . I’ve known him for quite 

awhile, debated with him, and agreed with him on a few things 

but not that many. So I also want to add my welcome, John, to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) to welcome also Mr. Mills to the Assembly 

today. Not only is Mr. Mills the long-standing mayor in 

Saskatchewan but he has also been a long-serving broker for 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) in this province and 

served very well that part of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also want to say that over the last couple of weeks anyway, I 

have been asked about what the insurance rates in the auto fund 

are going to be in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to tell 

you that the person who will be responsible for any changes is 

Mr. Mills. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No doubt he is a 

very popular man, but on behalf of the Liberal caucus I also 

want to say hello and welcome to Mr. Mills. Mr. Mills and I 

had the pleasure of serving on the SUMA board together, and I   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

think there was several occasions where we did figure out the 

provincial problems and we did have the solutions but these 

took place till 4 or 5 o’clock in the morning. Nobody recorded 

the minutes, but I certainly had a good time with Mr. Mills and 

I welcome him here on behalf of the Liberal opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

New Library Service for Visually Impaired 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many times I’ve 

had the pleasure to stand before this Assembly and comment on 

numerous positive programs and events that occur throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Today I would like to mention a new program that has begun 

here in Regina. A partnership between the Regina Public 

Library and the Canadian National Institute for the Blind has 

been formed that will allow visually impaired and 

print-disabled individuals access to the information they want in 

the format that they need. The CNIB (Canadian National 

Institute for the Blind) library is the largest producer of 

alternative formatted material: Braille, tactile, audio, and 

electronic text. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new partnership will improve the accessibility 

and quality of service for visually challenged people. Users will 

now have the ability to choose materials from the Regina Public 

Library and gain information from the CNIB. 

 

This new partnership also reinforces the role of Regina Public 

Library for residents of the city to provide access to information 

for all of the citizens of Regina. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Regina Public Library and the 

CNIB for their partnership and their commitment to providing 

quality services to all their patrons. This agreement exemplifies 

the community focus of both organizations as an example of 

working and cooperating together in the best interests of 

everyone. 

 

I would ask all members to applaud this new partnership and 

the benefits that will be enjoyed by the residents of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Curling Rarity 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been watching 

very closely our Canadian curling team as they participate in 

the world championships, and of course I wish our very own 

Sandra Schmirler particular success. 

 

Talking about success, Mr. Speaker, something happened 

recently for the very first time at the Dorintosh Curling Rink 

which is roughly comparable to the parting of the Red Sea, and 

which also happened only once, I’m told. 

 

On March 3, the Dora Larson rink, consisting of Dora, Grace 

Arnold, Myrt Irwin, and Bernie Sergent, scored an eight-ender. 

For those from another planet, this means that all eight rocks of 

the Larson rink were in the rings and none of the opponents 

rocks were counters. For this astounding feat of athleticism the 

rink was given sweatshirts, pins, and certificates, and as well 

now, Mr. Speaker, have immortality in Hansard. 

 

Now members opposite may wonder how I’m going to tie this 

news into the federal Liberals. It’s fairly easy actually. In 

Dorintosh they have eight rocks in the house, and thank 

goodness in Ottawa they only have one Rock in the House. 

 

Now based on what he’s done with gun legislation, it would be 

my guess that even . . . or that when the results of the next 

election come in, he may not be a counter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

50th Anniversary of Crown Investments Corporation 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, in 1947, the Douglas government 

decided there was a need for an organization to coordinate the 

activities of Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. The result of 

this piece of visionary bookkeeping was the forerunner of the 

Crown Investments Corporation. The name has changed over 

the years, but it’s mandate, goals, and performance in the 

service of Saskatchewan people have remained the same. 

 

This week we celebrate the first 50 years of CIC. I am quite 

confident that 50 years from now a new member from 

Saskatoon Southeast, still representing the New Democratic 

Party, will be touting CIC’s first century. 

 

The Crown Investments Corporation is a unique entity in a 

unique province. For its shareholders, the people of 

Saskatchewan, it manages assets of nearly $8 billion. The 

corporations under its umbrella make up 17 per cent of our 

gross domestic product and provide 9 per cent of the jobs in 

Saskatchewan. Public investment under CIC has played an 

important role and continues to do so in the changing economic 

climate of the modern world. Among other things, we’re 

celebrating 50 years of strong managerial ability and dedication 

to this province. 

 

Significantly, the Crown structure ensures that head offices of 

major corporations stay here along with their jobs, expertise, 

and community involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate CIC on its first 50 years of success 

and wish it continued success in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Comprehensive School 

Girls’ Basketball Team 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

would like to commend the community spirit and tradition that 

has been forged in the community of Weyburn. 

 

The Weyburn Comprehensive high school girls’ basketball   



892  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

team recently won the small-cities four-A girls basketball 

championship for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was an amazing story in itself, but it does get 

even better. The girls’ basketball team, coached by Len 

Williams, has, since 1985, won six provincial championships 

and four small-city championships. This string of 10 combined 

championships over a 12-year period is truly remarkable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our rural communities are proving again and again 

that they can compete with larger centres. The Weyburn girls’ 

basketball team is one of numerous examples. I would like to 

take this opportunity to congratulate all the members of this 

year’s team for their effort, determination and desire they 

demonstrated in capturing the championship this year. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge and congratulate Len 

Williams for the countless years of teaching, coaching, and 

dedication he has given to the many players who have learned 

and gained immeasurably from his fine coaching skills. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Darlene Hay, Saskatchewan Landscape Artist 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

landscapes are some of the most picturesque in all the world. 

Our wilderness areas not only provide a natural habitat for 

animal species, but also provide the opportunity to view 

wildlife and enjoy our natural surroundings. 

 

And one of the individuals who is actively promoting the 

protection of our protected areas is Darlene Hay, a Saskatoon 

artist who has devoted much of her life to portraying the beauty 

and advocating the protection of Saskatchewan landscapes. Ms. 

Hay’s new exhibition, appropriately called “Saskatchewan Hills 

of Endangered Spaces” is on display at the Assiniboia Gallery 

here in Regina until the 19th of this month. 

 

Darlene’s ability to embrace the experience of our diverse 

landscape and transmit this experience to us through her art is 

what distinguishes her work. And today I would like to 

commend Darlene for sharing this vision of Saskatchewan with 

the Saskatchewan public and urge members of the Assembly to 

view her work in the Assiniboia Gallery. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drake Dinner Theatre 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last week there was a lot of talk about theatres and theatrical 

performances, but I want to talk about one in my constituency 

in the town of Drake that would match or rival anything in 

Regina or Hollywood. 

 

The community of Drake held its third annual dinner theatre 

last weekend. There was a matinee on Sunday and they had 

performances Friday and Saturday nights. And tickets went 

very well and I think there was even signs of scalpers on No. 20 

Highway. 

 

The actors are all local people waiting to be discovered, and the 

meal was prepared by volunteers in the community. 

 

The first proceeds went to the new skating rink and the curling 

rink complex, now officially opened. From now on proceeds 

will go into a general fund that can be accessed by the 

community non-profit organizations. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the perfect marriage of art and business 

and another good example of the volunteer spirit that makes our 

province so exceptional. 

 

This year the entertainment consisted of two one-act comedies: 

A Thanksgiving Truce and The One That Got Away. I’m not 

sure, Mr. Speaker, but I think the second one is about the 

former leader, possibly of the Liberal Party — the one that got 

away. As well, there was a musical interlude between the plays. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a good time was had by all in Drake, and I 

want to express the spirit of Saskatchewan is alive and well in 

my constituency. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

hope Lily is near her phone because I have a very important 

issue I’d like to discuss with her today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I recently met with 

representatives from a number of rural municipal councils to 

hear their concerns about a variety of issues. At the top of the 

agenda of these councillors and reeves were funding cuts that 

are being brought down by this government. 

 

As this House is aware, the government’s latest act of 

offloading was to the tune of $29 million. As a result of these 

cuts and not knowing what future cuts may be in store, 

municipal leaders say it is impossible to plan large-scale 

construction projects or even, for that matter, annual 

maintenance. RMs (rural municipality), at most, can build about 

a kilometre of road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of those municipal governments, I ask 

the minister to explain what her government’s future, overall 

plan is for revenue sharing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Lily is still here. It’s one 

ringy-dingy, two ringy-dingies, three ringy-dingies. 

  



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

And the member opposite knows, as a former local government 

elected person himself, that municipalities are highly . . . the 

local councils are highly capable people who are very adept at 

making the most of the resources at hand and at planning ahead. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, there is, in addition to the revenue 

sharing . . . they had a year’s notice — a year’s notice — on the 

25 per cent reduction. So they had time to plan. Then they have 

this year $20 million coming in from . . . for the Crow offset. 

They have the infrastructure money totally for municipal 

purposes, as well as the revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have adequate resources. And there is a plan 

announced by our Minister of Highways last week, 

transportation plan. They will be involved in that. And their 

future, Mr. Speaker, is secure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, those councils and 

municipalities out there were told they would have a 25 per cent 

reduction in funding. Now they find out in many cases it’s as 

high as 55 per cent. So they are very capable people but they 

can only take so much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of an enormous pressure from SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA, 

community leaders, and the opposition, this government was 

forced to withdraw its service districts Act last year. 

 

I believe the agenda of this government is that we’re going to 

have a county system and forced amalgamation one way or 

another. And one way to do this is by starving RMs and towns 

by cutting the revenue-sharing grants to the bone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and, Madam Minister, I honestly believe that 

come hell or high water you intend to still force amalgamation. 

Will the minister confirm that this is indeed what is happening 

and does she realize the damage this apparent plan is doing to 

the infrastructure of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this sounds a lot like it’s 

another plank in the Liberals’ conspiracy plan. We have no such 

conspiracy, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to assure the member 

opposite. 

 

I want to also mention that the RMs have, on what they buy, a 2 

per cent reduction in the PST (provincial sales tax) which will 

save them millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. And it is not true 

that any individual municipality got less than . . . more than 50 

per cent in revenue-sharing cuts, because we put in a safety net 

at 50 per cent. So nobody got reduced more than 50 per cent — 

50 per cent. 

 

And you have to take into account the $5 million that we picked 

up in social assistance levies, public health levies, and the 

hospital levy — that gives them the tax room to keep that 

money for themselves. That’s $12 million, Mr. Speaker — a 

total of 17. And some municipalities have got an increase in 

their revenue-sharing grants this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 

minister for her honesty in admitting that the 25 per cent 

funding cut is actually 50. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is somewhat ironic that when the Tory 

government was downloading funding cuts to local 

governments in the ’80s, the New Democratic Party called this 

back-door taxation. In fact I would like to quote from an NDP 

document entitled, Tax Fairness for the ‘90s, which reads: 

 

Saskatchewan people are becoming increasingly concerned 

by the PC provincial government’s pattern of shifting the 

tax burden onto local property taxpayers, a tax shift that 

amounts to back-door tax increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our municipal governments would be in a much 

better position to plan their finances if they were provided a 

long-term funding plan by this government. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment to provide a long-term 

funding plan to our local governments and at the same time stop 

their downloading? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the communities of 

Saskatchewan and the municipalities of Saskatchewan are not 

institutions; they’re made up of people. We know that. The 

people of Saskatchewan have told us that their priorities are 

health, education, social programs. We have responded to that. 

We have increased funding for health; we’ve increased funding 

for education; we’ve increased money for social programs; and 

we’ve substantially increased money for highways. And those 

services serve all the people in all the communities of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we do care about the people in Saskatchewan and we have 

responded to the priorities that they have identified as being 

theirs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reassessment 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the problems created by 

reassessment and savage cut-backs don’t just affect rural 

municipalities. Urban municipalities are also trying to cope. 

Now the problems of reassessment have been made infinitely 

worse than they need to have been by the bungling at the 

provincial level. 

 

As late as this morning I was still getting phone calls from 

municipalities who say they’re still getting figures from our 

Saskatchewan assessment; they still don’t have the final 

assessment figures. 

 

  



894  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

Recently the city council of the city of Swift Current voted 

unanimously to request the resignations of the leaders of SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) after they 

received their fourth set of assessment figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has made it all but impossible for urban 

councils to use the tax tools they were provided with last year 

and as late as . . . (inaudible) . . . What will you do to clean up 

this mess so that they can get assessment figures on a timely 

basis; so they can deal with the issues of reassessment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

knows that SAMA is an independent agency owned by 

municipalities. Local governments have the majority of 

representation on the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency. It is their tool. They should 

make . . . municipalities should make representations to them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also knows, or should 

know as a previous city council member, that assessment is and 

should be a mobile . . . it’s a living thing. It never . . . You don’t 

etch it in stone and it stays that way and you have a final figure. 

You’re always having new construction, pick-ups, changes, 

renovations. There is no such thing as a time when every 

municipality had their assessment roll cast in stone in January 

for the upcoming year. 

 

So it’s a little more difficult this year, I’ll grant, because we’re 

making changes to catch up for 30 years. I think that 

municipalities should be given credit for having the fortitude, 

after 30 years, to finally deal with this problem and modernize 

our system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well that’s the point. It would have been an 

awful lot easier for them to modernize it if they would have had 

the figures a year in advance, which they should have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems of reassessment have also been 

compounded because in the same year we’re dealing with a 

reassessment that’s been delayed 30 years, our municipalities 

are also having to deal with cuts in revenue sharing of an 

average of 42 per cent. 

 

Now the speaker just told us that there’s been a lot of 

long-range planning and warning. Why then did your 

long-range planning and warning have coinciding the 

reassessment and savage cuts to revenue sharing in the same 

year? Surely you realize that either one of these problems 

would have been very, very difficult for municipalities to deal 

with in one year. Why have you chosen to dump them both in 

the same year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, the year of 

reassessment was chosen by a vote of municipalities at an 

annual meeting of the Assessment Agency on September 29, 

1995. They chose that date. They communicated that to us and 

we therefore responded by passing the legislation that gave 

them the date and the timing that they wanted and they asked 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of having assessment a year in advance, get real. I 

mean what do you do about the houses that have been built? I 

mean in Saskatoon, in Saskatoon there were 1,200 new housing 

starts within the last year. Would they not be on the tax roll then 

for this year? 

 

As I said before, it’s a moving thing. It doesn’t get etched in 

stone and stay there. You can’t do it a year in advance. And in 

terms of savage cuts, Mr. Speaker, if you take the tax room 

that’s left by the levies that were taken off, if you take the 

decrease in the provincial sales tax that municipalities 

heretofore paid, a lot of municipalities, a large number of 

municipalities, are net better off. So there is no such thing as 

savage cuts, Mr. Speaker, except in the member’s imagination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future of Uranium City 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Uranium City are very concerned — are losing sleep. The fact 

is that they’re looking at losing their hospital. They understand 

that and they accept that and they accept that a new facility will 

be opened in the very near future in Stony Rapids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this community have not yet heard 

an official announcement from this government about the status 

of their current hospital. They do not know what health care 

services will remain in Uranium City if the facility is 

transferred to Stony Rapids. 

 

Will the Minister of Northern Affairs be upfront with the people 

of Uranium City and explain what his government’s plans are 

regarding to the health services for their community, the 

municipal funding that could be affected if the hospital moves, 

and the future of this very community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker; I’ve 

been waiting for not one week, two weeks . . . this is the sixth 

week and it’s the first question about northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

haven’t even had a . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the Chair is having 

a great deal of difficulty being able to hear the minister provide 

his response, and I’ll ask the cooperation of all members of the 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think, Mr. Speaker, the critic for 

Northern Affairs, the member from Battleford, must have flown 

through the hospital in La Ronge — the $14 million hospital   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

that the provincial government built in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  As well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

from Battleford must have again flown through another 

hospital. This hospital is now going to be in Stony Rapids — a 

$10.8 million hospital. Again, that’s thanks to the provincial 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Now, Mr. Speaker, there is concerted 

regards to phase out. There is no question that in dealing with 

this issue, as is in every community in northern Saskatchewan, 

with the 7 per cent increase in health spending in northern 

Saskatchewan, the issues in regards to Stony Rapids as well as 

in regards to Uranium City will be well taken care of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A wise old owl 

once said if you have six weeks to prepare for an answer you 

should give a good answer, but I never heard an answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, another problem that the people 

of Uranium City have is their Imperial Oil Esso bulk station is 

going to be leaving the community soon. A major factor in the 

oil company leaving that town is the regulations regarding 

underground storage tanks. Dean Classen, an official with 

Imperial Oil, says, and I quote: 

 

The biggest hurdle we have in doing business in Uranium 

City is the government’s environmental standards. The 

economic reality is that the financial costs of replacing 

these underground tanks far exceed the profits which are 

made from this particular tank farm. 

 

The people of Uranium City are feeling abandoned, Mr. 

Speaker, and I urge the minister and I challenge the minister: 

will he make a commitment today in this House to undertake 

immediate public hearings with the people of Uranium City to 

develop a strategy to deal with the issue of their tank farm, their 

local hospital, and the very future of this community and the 

200 people that they have? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, we will doing follow-up 

work with the people of the Uranium City, as we do with all the 

communities of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it just shows, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal opposition 

doesn’t give a hoot about northern Saskatchewan. They don’t 

give a hoot because it took them six weeks before they raised 

one question about northern Saskatchewan. They’ve raised a 

few hundred questions and they haven’t raised one for the 

North, and it was first one that I heard, Mr. Speaker, and I’m so 

happy about that. But let’s not forget they don’t give a hoot. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Local Telephone Service Competition 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are for the minister of SaskTel. Madam 

Minister, here you go again crying wolf. Before long-distance 

competition arrived you kept telling us that long-distance 

competition was going to cost SaskTel money and drive up 

local rates. And what happened, Madam Minister? Competition 

came in, SaskTel dropped its rates, call volumes went up, and 

SaskTel actually made more money. 

 

So competition was good, Madam Minister. In fact it was good 

for customers. It was good for SaskTel. It was good for 

everyone. And now the minister is whining about competition, 

Mr. Speaker, again — this time from local phone services. 

 

Madam Minister, instead of resisting competition and asking for 

another extension, why don’t you start getting ready so you can 

ensure local rates for all customers, just like we have seen for 

long distance, will be lower. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

just got the order of something wrong there, is that we lowered 

long-distance rates before the competition came in. The 

reductions started in 1991, Mr. Speaker, and competition didn’t 

come in . . . wasn’t allowed by CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) until 

’94. It came in here in ’96. 

 

I’m glad to know that the member opposite finally realizes that 

Crown corporations are good. And he says, all these things are 

good. This is good; SaskTel is good; competition is good; the 

rates are good. So, Mr. Speaker, why isn’t he happy if 

everything’s so good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the answer will be 

obvious. Madam Minister, you’ve had at least until October of 

1998 to get ready for local phone call competition. We don’t 

want to have to come back then and say, we told you so, again. 

That’s a lot more time than you had put into the analysis that 

you gave to NST deal that cost the taxpayers $16 million, so we 

expect better next time. Instead of asking for more extensions, 

you should be using the time to get ready, Madam Minister. 

 

The CRTC says it will set up the ground rules for local phone 

service competition. So if you’re worried about rural customers 

paying more, listen up, Madam Minister. Why don’t you ask the 

CRTC to pass a regulation requiring that all phone customers be 

offered the same rate, regardless of where they live. Now we’re 

going to say we told you so if you don’t look at this. 

 

Madam Minister, you have a year and a half to get ready for 

competition. If long-distance competition is any indication, it   



896  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

will probably result in lower rates for everyone. Instead of 

resisting competition, Madam Minister, why don’t you 

welcome it and start getting SaskTel ready for the competition 

by lowering rates today. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

saying that we are resisting competition. We wouldn’t have had 

to have competition until 1998, in the fall. We invited the 

competition. We invited the rebillers who came in over a year 

ago. We invited the inter-connectors. They came in last fall. We 

wouldn’t have had to have them. We’re getting ready to invite 

in the local access competition. We’ve been competitive in 

Mobility since the outset and we’re doing very well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite should stay 

tuned. He suggests — I think the line is going dead. There’s 

static on it — the member opposite suggests the same telephone 

rates wherever you live in Canada? We have the lowest rates. 

Why would we want to go up? What is he suggesting, Mr. 

Speaker? Do your homework. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ban on Strippers in Bars 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister of Liquor and Gaming. Mr. Minister, another 

Saskatchewan community, Prince Albert this time, is now in a 

dispute over strippers. The city of Prince Albert has laid charges 

against a stripper bar, but because of the recent court ruling, it’s 

doubtful that these charges will stand up in court. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government says it’s against strippers in 

bars, but you seem powerless to prevent it. 

 

There is a simple solution, rather than taking it to another court 

case that you will probably lose. The ban on stripping was 

struck down in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. So why 

don’t you simply invoke the notwithstanding clause to pass new 

legislation against this activity? Will you use the 

notwithstanding clause to ban strippers in bars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to first indicate to the member opposite that the 

government has taken a very serious position on the stripping 

issue across the province. I’ve received many, many letters 

from individuals across the province, both from hoteliers and 

the general public, suggesting that we should do something. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have done is we have proceeded to the 

Court of Appeal. That has been now filed and we’re expecting 

that early in April, I believe it’s around April 7 or 8, this matter 

will be proceeding at the first level of the Court of Appeal. 

 

In respect to what the member asks about us proceeding with, 

we’ve examined that, explored it in some detail, and do not . . . 

and the best legal opinion we get on it, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

do not have the ability to implement that particular piece of 

statute. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Minister, our office has been in contact 

with Mr. Mel Smith, who is a constitutional adviser to four 

consecutive British Columbia governments, under both the 

Social Credit Party and the NDP. I understand the Premier 

knows Mr. Smith quite well as he was involved in the 1982 

constitutional talks. 

 

Mr. Smith says that the ruling is a prime opportunity for the 

Saskatchewan government to invoke the notwithstanding 

clause; so that elected governments could make these kinds of 

decisions instead of the judges. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you are truly opposed to stripping in bars, why 

don’t you put an end to this controversy once and for all, save 

the province the extra court costs, use the notwithstanding 

clause to ban strippers in bars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to again state to the member opposite that it isn’t that we 

haven’t looked at this particular issue with some broad interest 

and due diligence. In our review of this particular matter, Mr. 

Speaker, with the Department of Justice and our own . . . and 

private solicitors, they have told us that the notwithstanding 

piece would not, Mr. Speaker, stand up. 

 

And we’re not in a position to move on it at this particular point 

in time and have in fact provided both this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan with the kind of direction that we’re 

going to be taking as it relates to this very difficult issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fixed Legislative Session Dates 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s become 

abundantly clear that public cynicism has grown, and one only 

need examine the decrease in voter turnout in recent elections to 

realize that many citizens feel alienated from their democratic 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most Saskatchewan people can’t even tell you 

when this legislature is in session. And this is hardly surprising 

given the unpredictability of session dates. 

 

I would like to ask the Premier today to share his views. In fact 

I’d like to hear the Premier’s views on this issue of predictable 

session dates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well my view, Mr. Speaker, is one 

which, quite diametrically, is opposite to the view of the former 

leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

I think most people in the province of Saskatchewan do know 

when the legislative session sits. I believe that most people in 

the province of Saskatchewan pay attention to what the 

Legislative Assembly does. 

 

I have faith in the majority of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan knowing what the budget said and did. I have   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

faith and confidence in the democratic process of this 

institution. I’m a member of the democratic process institution. 

I got elected by democracy. 

 

I have faith in the people, and I’m surprised that the hon. 

member wouldn’t share that faith in people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Later 

today, I’m going to be introducing a Bill that reflects what 

several other legislatures have already done to empower their 

citizens and hold government more accountable. And this Bill 

will not extend the number of sitting days, but will ensure that 

the people of our province can predict with certainty that their 

government cannot in the future go for almost nine months 

without being held accountable in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: do you support in principle 

the intent of a Bill that will outline when sessions should begin, 

and will allow for controversial Bills to be put forward in the 

fall; so that the people of this province can in fact . . . affected 

parties can in fact look at them and peruse them, and then a 

shorter session again for the winter session where people in this 

province will know with some predictability what’s going on by 

their government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the question 

which is put by the former Liberal leader and applauded by at 

least half or a third of the current Liberal caucus, presumably in 

support of that position, is one that I cannot endorse. 

 

The argument for fixed session dates is the argument of 

predictability. In a democracy, governments and legislative 

assemblies must have the freedom to be able to call sessions 

when public policy and public interest so demands. This may 

involve an issue such as, for example, a medicare dispute which 

took place, as we know, in Saskatchewan in 1962 where 

legislation was at issue, and legislation might have been an 

issue at the time of the impasse of the KOD (Keep Our Doctors 

committee), and legislation might have been interested in 

post-circumstances. It might involve matters pertaining to the 

constitution that arise. 

 

A government needs flexibility and a government would ask the 

members of the Legislative Assembly to do that. To have the 

fixed terms that the member talks about is what they have in the 

state legislatures of America. This is the Texas audit approach 

that the member advocated when she was the Liberal leader — 

having fixed legislative sessions — and our government doesn’t 

support that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Releases Strategy Report on Job Training 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

inform the Assembly that I have today released The 

Saskatchewan Training Strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The strategy consists of three public 

documents, copies of which have been or will be distributed to 

all members of the Assembly. 

 

This strategy is the product of countless hours of discussion 

throughout the province over the last year. We spoke with 

anyone and everyone who wanted to express an opinion on 

education and training. They included communities, students, 

teachers, employers, training institutions, and aboriginal 

organizations. 

 

We explained the situation our training system was facing in a 

document called CHOICES, which set the background against 

which the consultations took place, describing the problems that 

the training system was facing — problems which included the 

federal withdrawal from the policy with respect to training and 

the federal withdrawal of some of their money under the 

Unemployment Insurance fund. 

 

We explained how the economy and the new technology and 

demographic shifts were also driving change. People 

understood the importance of developing a 

made-in-Saskatchewan training strategy to fill the vacuum left 

by the federal withdrawal, and they were ready to get involved 

in that process. 

 

At each consultation, Mr. Speaker, people and organizations, no 

matter who they were representing, said the most important 

aspect of a training system is to link training to the job market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that the programs and services 

outlined in The Saskatchewan Training Strategy do just that. 

They are made-in-Saskatchewan solutions. They provide people 

with the bridges they need to gain employment. The strategy is 

the first in Canada, Mr. Speaker, to link economic policies with 

social policies through training. 

 

Our recent provincial budget, in combination with the training 

strategy, invests significantly in education and training for 

Saskatchewan people. In fact we will create 10 per cent more 

training and employment opportunities over the next three years 

than before the federal cuts were visited upon us. 

 

That is at 10 per cent more, Mr. Speaker, rather than 27 per cent 

less that would have resulted from the cuts if we had done 

nothing. That is good news for Saskatchewan, good news for 

employers, good news for learners. 

 

Our training strategy has mechanisms to build the critical 

partnerships we need at the grass roots level. This is a level 

where the decisions need to be made, Mr. Speaker, not in a 

room far away from the situation but out there where the jobs 

and opportunities are. 

 

This is the level where employers and communities can work 

with training institutions to look at their future needs and   



898  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

together plan relevant training for the needs of their specific 

local labour market. Together they can best decide how the 

training should be delivered to benefit all partners. Our strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, will give them the tools to make it all happen. 

 

Bridges to Employment, one of the three documents, will . . . 

speaks of ensuring access and support so everyone has the 

opportunity to develop the skills they need and improve their 

chances of gaining employment. People with special needs will 

have the special help they need because everyone deserves a 

hand, and that is the Saskatchewan way. 

 

To help people make informed decisions critical to planning 

their future, the strategy will provide timely, up-to-date career, 

employment, and labour market information. To guide the 

process and ensure we meet the objectives we have set out, the 

strategy ensures mechanisms to continually evaluate progress. 

There are mechanisms to ensure dialogue continues between all 

partners so that together we can continue to improve the 

training strategy as times change. 

 

We must all learn to change with the changing times, Mr. 

Speaker. With this strategy, Mr. Speaker, we’ve charted a new 

direction for training in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to first begin 

by thanking the minister for sharing the documents earlier on 

this morning, and indeed providing us with a briefing session. I 

also want to extend my appreciation to the deputy minister, Mr. 

Perrins, for trying to bring me up to date in terms of the latest 

strategy. 

 

As the minister announced last May, I believe, that we were 

going to begin this public consultation process, I think in terms 

of talking with various people around the province, it was very 

evident that indeed we needed a new Saskatchewan-made 

strategy — those became very obvious. And as a result we’ve 

had great input from businesses. We have had concerns raised 

by corporations, by different educational institutions, to identify 

the very, very specific needs in different portions of the 

province. 

 

What we’ve looked at of course is that the province has been 

lobbying for a long time to have control of a provincial training 

strategy. And I think what this does is allow the province of 

Saskatchewan to take the lead. We can blame the feds for their 

funding cuts and we can say that that has caught everyone by 

surprise, but it hasn’t. This is something that has been in place. 

Other provinces have taken that to heart and have gone forward 

and developed a new strategy. Saskatchewan I believe, will do 

the same. 

 

What I fear though and some of the concerns that have been 

expressed to me, Mr. Speaker, is that of course we have 

identified a time frame of about three years — the year 2000 — 

as to the full implementation of the strategy. There are many 

organizations and businesses who can’t wait three years for 

some new training. And those concerns I think have been heard 

by the minister and I know that he will take those into account. 

The other concern that we have is, because we’re developing a 

regional model, the delivery of a system regionally, to be 

coordinated with SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology), I think there is a measure of concern 

and a measure of who will be held accountable to ensure that 

the program is delivering. And those are the kinds of things that 

people are raising; that they want to ensure that when there is a 

need in a particular community that indeed we don’t have to go 

through a forum that takes years to plan a program. It needs to 

be done now. Businesses require particularly skilled 

individuals. 

 

What we also are worried about and that the minister has 

identified and so has the Finance minister, that there is a budget 

for the delivery of skills training and apprenticeship 

programing. Looking at the budget — and those concerns I will 

address later on with the minister in terms of estimates — we 

don’t see very much new money. And what we see is actually 

reallocation from Social Services to Post-Secondary. 

 

So while I think on the whole it looks good, the documents look 

great, there are great objectives that have been put forward, my 

concern is that this doesn’t just become a document that sits on 

the shelf and gathers dust. We need something done for the 

people of Saskatchewan and I think that this is a step forward as 

long as we can implement it. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

thank the minister for providing us with the information ahead 

of time and for the briefing we had. I’d also like to thank him 

for the opportunity to give us a chance to give him some 

personal input on where we thought some of these sorts of 

things were going. 

 

And I think there’s a few possibilities in where we’re going 

here that I think are fairly good. One of the concerns that I’ve 

had is that we have job opportunities in Saskatchewan that we 

can’t fill with our local people and yet on the other hand we 

seem to be turning out people that can’t find jobs. 

 

The direction we are going in here seems to be that it’s 

job-needs appropriate. And I’d like to commend the minister on 

going . . . taking us in that direction. So that the people that we 

train in Saskatchewan will find work in Saskatchewan, and the 

employers that need employees will find those in Saskatchewan 

as well. 

 

It’s also good to see the increase of 10 per cent in the training 

and employment opportunities that are there. And if those do 

come to pass, I think that bodes well for Saskatchewan as well. 

 

One of the concerns that has happened in the past is that the 

updating didn’t take place. And that’s why we ended up in the 

situation that we were in, where we were turning out people that 

didn’t have jobs and jobs were being created that wasn’t there. 

 

There’s apparently an intent here to maintain that updating on a   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

constant time line. And I think if that works out, and if that 

works out the way it’s intended to, we shouldn’t get ourselves 

into the difficulty that we find ourselves in presently. 

 

The other aspect that I think is commendable is the fact that it’s 

set up on a regional basis. It’s not possible for every particular 

educational institution to know the needs that are out there, 

whether we’re talking about the northern forest regions or the 

oil regions, if you’re situated in Saskatoon or Regina. So by 

setting up on a regional basis, there’s a better opportunity to 

provide the jobs and the opportunities that are out there. 

 

The concern that was mentioned is one that I have as well. 

There’s a three-year time line. We are behind at present where 

we ought to be and so I think there is an urgency in timing. And 

if the purpose and direction of this occurs, it’ll be a good 

direction. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 216  The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 

(Sessional Dates) 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act respecting the determination of sessional dates be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 223 — The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 

(Duration of Assembly) 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act respecting the 

duration of the Assembly be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 224 — The Legislative Assembly 

Public Presentations Act 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move a Bill respecting public presentations to the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that 

question no. 44 be converted to notice of motions for returns 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. 1 is converted to motions for returns 

(debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to move second reading of Bill 41, The Crown 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially a housekeeping action. 

There’s a contradiction that exists between the wording of The 

Crown Corporations Act, 1993 and The Power Corporation Act 

and The SaskEnergy Act. This issue being dealt with today, Mr. 

Speaker, is the legislative authority for Crown corporations to 

levy charges for their services. 

 

By proposing these changes, Mr. Speaker, we will ensure that 

all subsidiary Crown corporations operate under the same 

authority when it comes to rates, fees, and service charges. CIC 

clearly has the authority to oversee the rates, fees, and service 

charges proposed by subsidiary Crown corporations and these 

changes enhance that role for CIC. 

 

Presently, Mr. Speaker, the powers contained in The Power 

Corporation Act and The SaskEnergy Act are different from 

those that are granted to subsidiary Crown corporations in their 

originating statutes. 

 

It is the government’s intention, Mr. Speaker, that all subsidiary 

Crown corporations should have consistent approval processes 

which may include their board of directors, the board of 

directors of CIC, and cabinet. It is also essential that CIC 

ensures that these approval processes are followed for the 

setting of rates, fees, and charges. 

 

The proposed legislation widens subsection 6(1)(j) of The 

Crown Corporations Act by including the words “charges and 

services” to provide CIC with the overall authority to review 

the issues it deems appropriate when it comes to setting rates 

and charges. At the same time, the obligations for the specific 

subsidiary Crown corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy, are 

changed so that they reflect provisions contained in The Crown 

Corporations Act. 

 

It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the provisions in 

subsection 6(1)(j) of The Crown Corporations Act will apply to 

all subsidiary Crown corporations consistently when it comes to 

setting rates, fees, and service charges. Without this change in   



900  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

wording there is a possibility that a subsidiary Crown 

corporation may comply with the provisions contained in their 

originating statute, but the compliance may be inconsistent with 

the provisions of The Crown Corporations Act. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are making these changes so that all 

of CIC’s subsidiary Crown corporations operate within the 

same framework, and that there will not be any contradictions 

in the legislation that governs their operation. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

speak on the amendments put forward regarding The Crown 

Corporations Act, specifically the proposed changes to the 

45-day review process. I think that the new amendments 

proposed by the government prove that they are finally realizing 

the lack of confidence the people of Saskatchewan have in the 

existing process. 

 

I have read through the proposed changes to the Act, and from 

what I’ve seen I would say that the changes are much needed 

and a long time coming. I suspect that these changes include 

any and all charges, rates, prices, and fees that SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, and SaskPower presently charge or may charge for 

any goods or services now or in the future. The changes to the 

Act will hopefully clear up some controversy over what the rate 

increases can and . . . what rate increases can and cannot be 

reviewed. 

 

If I recall correctly, Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised in the 

1995 election platform that any rate changes involving the 

Crown utilities would be subject to a 45-day review process. 

But when SaskTel decided to begin charging for directory 

assistance in 1996 he changed his tune, stating that the new 

charge was a fee and not a rate increase. 

 

Considering that the new charge was estimated to raise an 

additional $4 million in revenues for SaskTel, surely such an 

increase should have been held to public review. In comparison, 

SaskEnergy recently held a review for their residential rate 

increase which would raise $3.7 million. These are not small 

sums of money, Mr. Speaker, where for some reason the two 

increases are not comparable from the government’s point of 

view. 

 

I was recently on SaskTel’s Sympatico home page on the 

Internet when I came across Canada 411 service, an Internet 

version of directory assistance. I thought I would save 75 cents, 

the cost of calling SaskTel’s directory assistance, and try to find 

a phone number for a friend in Saskatchewan. When I went to 

enter the location, I realized that SaskTel is one of only two 

provinces in Canada that are not included in this directory. I 

couldn’t think of why SaskTel had not gotten around to putting 

their phone listing on this service, and then I realized it just 

hadn’t figured out a way to charge for it yet. 

 

A second concern I had regarding these amendments is simply 

that it will not stop the government of the Crowns from dipping 

into the pockets of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. They will 

likely continue to burden the people of Saskatchewan by raising 

utility rates to cover for a $16 million mistake on investments 

gone bad, or to pay for a 26 per cent increase for company 

vice-presidents, or maybe even to pay for high-price consulting 

fees for former SaskTel presidents. Or will future rate increases 

be used to pay for a $3 million public review on privatization 

when once again this government’s political ideology becomes 

threatened? Why should the people of Saskatchewan foot the 

bill for these costs? 

 

What concerns me still though is the simple fact that any 

changes to rates or fees charged by the Crown corporations are 

still essentially at the government’s whim. 

 

I quote from Hansard, Tuesday, April 8, 1997, Mr. Speaker, 

where the member from Saskatoon Southeast spoke regarding 

the 45-day review process: 

 

The public has considerable opportunity to complain; the 

Crowns have considerable opportunity to explain . . . 

 

But that’s where this government’s review process ends. Once 

the Crowns give their explanation for the increases, they simply 

wait for the cabinet’s rubber-stamp for the approval. 

 

We realize that the whole process is a sham, and it’s an 

expensive sham. The utility review process as it is becomes a 

farce when we consider that the final decision essentially comes 

down to a cabinet decision. And within the last year we have 

seen two examples of just how independent this review process 

really is. 

 

I’m sure none of us on this side of the House were surprised to 

hear that the cabinet went along with the recommendations for 

the proposed increases on the two most recent occasions. And 

judging from the vocal concerns expressed throughout the 

province, none of the people of Saskatchewan were fooled 

either. 

 

The government’s 45-day review process of the utility rate 

increase is nothing more than another example of how this 

government attempts to deceive the people of Saskatchewan 

into believing they have a voice in the decision-making process 

of government. Obviously the people of Saskatchewan are not 

fools. 

 

You simply to have to read a newspaper to realize that 

SaskEnergy wasn’t fooling anyone with their public meetings 

and their 1 800 information lines. While I would like to 

commend those who took part in the review process, it was 

evident that most of those attending the public meetings were 

not fooled into thinking that whatever was said would have any 

effect on the officials that were present, and especially not 

government. 

 

In fact there were those who came to the meetings, not to 

question SaskEnergy’s utility rate increases, but instead they 

were there to question the government’s review process itself. 

 

A quote from the February 12 issue of the Prince Albert Herald 

basically tells the story of what many people throughout the 

province think of the review process. One man who attended 

the meeting in Prince Albert stated, and I quote: 

  



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

I don’t understand why you were here tonight (referring to 

vice-president Ken From). No one believes what they say 

will really make a difference. 

 

These thoughts are not just those of a single individual. Moira 

Wright, director of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, agrees 

with these remarks, calling it a farce and a sham, and compares 

the review process to letting the fox watch the hen-house. Barb 

Cram of the Consumers’ Association of Canada agreed with 

these views and added the process should be scrapped 

altogether and replaced with an independent rate regulation. 

 

The president of SaskPower states that the whole process is of 

no real value, Mr. Speaker. Even former NDP premier, Mr. 

Blakeney, agrees that there needs to be some form of 

independent review process, akin to the Public Utilities Review 

Commission, to ensure that Crown utilities are charging fair 

rates. 

 

If this isn’t enough evidence that the government needs to 

re-examine the review process, the lack of public participation 

only goes to further the point. The total number of people to 

participate in SaskEnergy’s 6 public meetings totalled 70 

people. At a meeting in Prince Albert, only 11 people showed 

up. At another meeting in Regina, 9 showed up. And in Swift 

Current, the room was empty. Mr. Speaker, this clearly 

demonstrates not only a lack of interest in the review process, 

but also a lack of confidence. 

 

Last week the member from Regina South disagreed that there 

is a lack of confidence, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect this is a 

similar view of the entire caucus. Maybe they should ask the 

thousands of people who have switched from SaskTel to Sprint 

or AT&T, what kind of confidence they have in the review 

process. People don’t always need to speak to make themselves 

heard, Mr. Speaker. People vote with their feet. And when it 

comes to SaskTel, they let their fingers do the walking. 

 

In the recent review process that took place, SaskEnergy went 

to the effort of setting up a 1 800 line to handle the concerns of 

those who chose not to attend public meetings. Only 39 phone 

calls were taken, Mr. Speaker; that’s less than one for each day 

of the review process. I certainly hope we hired no extra 

personnel to handle the flood of phone calls. 

 

One reason that few people showed up is because of the lack of 

information that is made available for public scrutiny. This 

should be no surprise for the government or for SaskEnergy, 

considering their own spokesperson admits that both CIC and 

the Crowns have to do a better job of getting information to the 

public. 

 

Just browsing through the 1995 annual report for SaskEnergy, 

there is no breakdown on the number of residential, farm, 

commercial, and industrial customers. This information would 

be helpful to have when looking at what the effect of rate 

increases will have on SaskEnergy’s revenues. But it seems that 

SaskEnergy and the government does not trust the public with 

information. 

 

The annual report simply states that SaskEnergy has over 

300,000 customers. I did happen to find the number of 

residential customers in a newspaper article that pegged the 

total at 247,000. This does not include commercial and 

industrial customers who are always seeing an increase in rates 

and who represent 40 per cent of SaskEnergy’s sales, not 

including gas-brokering activities. 

 

SaskEnergy stated that each residential customer would see an 

average of $15-a-year increase in their gas bill. Now a quick 

calculation based on 247,000 residential customers show this 

would yield $3.7 million in additional revenues. SaskEnergy 

still needs 2.5 million to cover the increased depreciation costs. 

 

According to some recent articles in the Leader-Post, the 

residential increase will cover the increased cost of 

transportation and storage, but not the 2.5 million in 

depreciation. What about the revenues raised by increases to 

commercial and industrial customers? Will these increases 

cover the cost of depreciation? These questions were not likely 

asked in the public review process because no one had the 

background information to ask the question — nor were they 

given the information. 

 

I suggest it would be hard for the public to ask a question when 

they are not informed about the consequences of the rate 

increases, other than increased revenues for government. Even 

the government’s own spokesperson admits having people ask 

us challenging questions would be a step in the right direction. 

The simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t want 

challenging questions. 

 

This government thinks that the people of Saskatchewan don’t 

understand the issues and they’re quick to point out that the 

opposition doesn’t either. Well, Mr. Speaker, give us the 

information on the issues and we’ll make up our own minds. 

 

This is a good example of how this government has lost touch 

with the people of Saskatchewan and how they continue to 

operate in a total vacuum. How can this government expect to 

get an informed viewpoint from the public review process when 

they withhold simple yet valuable information that should be 

made available in the review process. It’s simply another 

instance of how the government has chosen not to give the 

whole picture to the people of Saskatchewan. And then they 

wonder why they can’t get enough interested participants to 

take part in its own review process. 

 

(1445) 

 

One really can’t help but be cynical of the process when the 

members of the government and the executives of SaskEnergy 

can’t even make up their minds as to what the reasons are for 

the rate increases. One day it’s because of lengthy cold spells; 

the next day it’s because of transporting and storage costs. This 

confusion only helps to build cynicism against the whole review 

process and drain people’s confidence in the system. 

 

In closing, I would like to call on the government to re-examine 

its review process even further. As our opposition members 

have suggested, we feel that an all-party review committee, 

including industry experts and representatives from local   



902  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

stakeholders, would help to restore the confidence in the review 

process without costing large sums of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

We think that a multi-member committee made up of 

individuals from all areas of the community would not solve all 

the problems of the present review process, but it would 

certainly add some idea of trustworthiness to a process starved 

for some small fragment of credibility. 

 

I would ask at this time to adjourn debate on this issue so we 

may have further time to scrutinize amendments to this Bill. I 

move to adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, The Planning and 

Development Act provides the framework for municipalities to 

manage the physical development of communities. 

Municipalities have suggested a number of ways that the Act 

could be improved. These amendments reflect our commitment 

of responding to the needs of local government. 

 

The amendments include — on zoning — clarifying 

development fees, increasing flexibility for the provision of 

temporary uses, delegating authority to the development officer 

for approval of permits in demolition control and architectural 

control districts, and ensuring that there is adequate public 

notice for discretionary uses in the administration of zoning 

bylaws. 

 

On approval of subdivisions and instruments, clarifying the 

requirement for approval by the approving authority of certain 

caveats registered by the Land Titles Office, enabling the 

minister to delegate approving authority to municipalities for 

certain subdivisions, allowing municipalities that are approving 

authorities for subdivisions to delegate approving authority to a 

development officer and on dedicated lands, providing 

municipalities with greater latitude in the management of lands 

dedicated to the public use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, zoning bylaws play a major role in directing land 

use and controlling community development. Therefore there is 

a need to ensure that such bylaws provide administrative 

flexibility and that the public is fully aware of development 

proposals. Amendments relating to zoning bylaws are as 

follows. 

 

Municipalities have expressed concerns that existing 

application fees established in zoning bylaws do not adequately 

compensate for the cost of administering and regulating 

development. We recognize that municipalities must have 

adequate means of meeting the administrative costs of local 

zoning bylaws on a cost-recovery basis. 

 

Therefore amendments will clarify application fees for 

development permits, minor variance permits, zoning bylaw 

amendments, and discretionary uses. These changes will ensure 

that the cost of administering and regulating development are 

fully recoverable by a municipality. 

 

Municipalities often permit certain uses for a specified period of 

time. Amendments will authorize municipalities to consider 

discretionary uses on a temporary basis and provide for the 

extension of both permitted and discretionary uses allowed by 

the zoning bylaw. This amendment will increase flexibility in 

administering zoning bylaws. 

 

The public has expressed concern that there is insufficient 

notice when councils are dealing with discretionary uses. 

Therefore amendments will require municipalities to provide 

public notice for discretionary uses. This will ensure that the 

public has the opportunity to bring any concerns on a 

discretionary use to the attention of the council. 

 

Amendments will permit a council to delegate to a development 

officer the responsibility for approval of permits in a demolition 

control district or an architectural control district. This will 

allow municipalities to deal with development permits in these 

zones administratively and in an expeditious manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the approval of subdivisions and instruments, 

amendments will allow existing approving authorities for 

subdivision to delegate authority to the development officer. 

The development officer is responsible for the administration of 

a zoning bylaw, and delegation of authority by the council will 

provide increased flexibility in subdivision review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments will clarify where a certificate of 

approval is required. Presently there are concerns about the 

registration of caveats against entire parcels of land in the Land 

Titles Office when the caveats are based on an agreement for 

sale, lease, or mortgage of a part only of a parcel of land. 

 

There have been occurrences where a caveat is registered 

without the agreement for sale, lease, or mortgage attached to 

the caveat, thereby circumventing the need to obtain a 

certificate of approval. The amendment will clarify this 

provision and provide the Land Titles Office with the authority 

to request a certificate of approval where a caveat is registered 

based on an agreement which affects part only of a parcel of 

land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Planning and Development Act allows the 

minister to delegate to municipal councils approving authority 

for subdivisions. Many of the cities have already been given the 

authority to approve all subdivisions within its municipal 

jurisdiction. Amendments will permit the minister to delegate 

approving authority to municipalities subject to terms and 

conditions. 

 

For example, the minister may delegate to a municipality the 

authority to approve certain classes of subdivisions such as a 

single first subdivision from a quarter section of land, and/or a 

single lot split. Delegation could be conditional on the 

municipality having access to technical and planning expertise. 

The amendment will increase local autonomy and expedite the 

subdivision review process for which authority is granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the matter of dedicated lands, previous   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

amendments to The Planning and Development Act allow a 

municipality to identify specific policies and zoning regulations 

for dedicated lands in accordance with the Act and the 

dedicated land regulations. Municipalities are often faced with 

requests for placing certain uses and structures on dedicated 

lands. This is especially the case in lake shore areas. 

 

Amendments will establish a framework that will allow a 

municipality to permit certain developments and temporary 

structures on dedicated lands. The intent of dedicated lands for 

public use will be maintained. 

 

The amendments, which are permissive in nature, will be 

subject to the provisions of The Planning and Development Act 

and the dedicated lands regulations. The amendments will 

provide municipalities with flexibility in dealing with proposals 

such as boat docks, fire pits, steps, and sidewalks. Amendments 

will be proposed to the dedicated land regulations in the near 

future which will clarify what development and temporary 

structures may be placed on dedicated lands. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, minor housekeeping amendments will 

clarify that either the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment 

and Resource Management or the Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation must be consulted prior to the creation of a new 

environmental reserve or the sale of it. The amendments will 

streamline existing administrative procedures, and will ensure 

that the relevant authority has the information necessary in 

making a decision on environmental reserve matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are evidence 

of our support for local governments, and commitment to 

maintaining a legislative framework for effective land use 

management which serves the public interest and responds to 

the changing needs of Saskatchewan communities. 

 

I would now urge each and every member of this House to 

support this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this 

Bill No. 26, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

1997. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 

to speak to the amendments to The Planning and Development 

Act this afternoon. From looking at the amendments, Mr. 

Speaker, I see that the majority of the Bill is just some simple 

housekeeping. 

 

The new amendments will hopefully streamline and clean up 

some of the administrative processes that are required by the 

Act, which the municipalities are responsible to enforce. The 

basis for the Bill seems to allow municipalities to continue to 

provide and maintain an environment that can sustain 

meaningful and effective land use, while at the same time 

continuing to provide municipalities with the framework to 

manage the physical developments of their communities. 

 

I see the changes to the Act will, among other things, allow the 

municipal councils to delegate more authority to development 

officers. From the surface this seems to be a valuable addition 

to the legislation. This allows councils to take advantage of the 

expertise of planning and development professionals. My 

concern here is that not all RMs may have the access to this 

kind of expertise, which may put them at a slight disadvantage. 

 

The proposed changes will also help municipalities to control 

development on dedicated lands such as public, municipal, or 

environmental reserves, buffer strips, or other land that is 

dedicated for public use within the municipalities. 

 

The changes also address the need for further public 

accountability by municipal councils by ensuring that the public 

will be given due notice when councils are considering 

discretionary use applications. 

 

Changes to the Act go on to say that collection fees . . . or the 

collection of fees can now reflect the actual cost of processing, 

administering, and regulating the developments. While this is 

something that many municipalities have already been in the 

practice of doing, they are now given the authority to recover 

the actual cost of also providing notice to the public. 

 

These costs are not small either, Mr. Speaker. They could easily 

range into the hundreds of dollars when an RM is required to 

post a notice in local newspapers. This is especially costly for 

RMs which contain satellite communities adjacent to large 

urban centres. Often these RMs are required to post notices in 

the major daily newspapers in this province at a cost 

significantly higher than small local newspapers would charge. 

It shouldn’t surprise anyone here that a public notice published 

in a newspaper in Regina, Prince Albert, or North Battleford 

would easily cost considerably more than the same size ad in 

the Fort Qu’Appelle Times or The Wadena News. 

 

When we take into account this simple fact, it must raise some 

questions and concerns in terms of the differing costs that can 

be expected from one RM to the other. Will some applications 

for development permits, minor variance permits, zoning 

amendments, or applications for discretionary uses or 

developments vary in price? And if so, could this deter or 

discourage some citizens who lack sufficient financial resources 

from making application under these new amendments? These 

are questions that need to be pondered. 

 

Will these new amendments put the local government process 

out of the average citizen’s reach, especially where small local 

government bodies are involved? Because these small local 

governments will soon be able to charge, and in some cases 

forced to charge, the full cost of administering, processing, and 

regulating these new developments, it will be the applicant’s 

responsibility to cover these added charges. Presently, 

municipalities may be absorbing some of these costs in order to 

keep them affordable in an effort to promote public 

involvement and encouraging the public’s input. 

 

This raises one other concern, Mr. Speaker. As I have already 

pointed out, there can be a difference in costs associated with 

giving the public ample notice for proposed development and 

zoning changes between neighbouring rural municipalities. But 

the changes to the Act may also be evident in the costs of 

administering, processing applications and permits between 

rural and urban centres. 

 

  



904  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

The simple reason is that larger centres already have the 

administration processes and the staff to handle these tasks in 

place, to handle the large quantities of the applications that are 

received. Unfortunately, in smaller rural municipalities the 

luxury of large administrative departments do not exist. 

Therefore it can be much more difficult and time consuming for 

rural municipalities to process applications at a cost that is 

affordable to the applicant. 

 

What has been happening is that municipalities have had to in 

effect subsidize some of the costs associated with these 

requests, not to deter the public from having some input in 

making these requests. 

 

However this new amendment does little to help municipalities 

recoup costs. In some cases, municipalities have already been 

recovering as much as possible, and in some cases, it’s not been 

enough. The reason they cannot charge more is simply the 

people of these communities would not be able to afford to 

cover the entire cost of the application and the permit fees. 

 

(1500) 

 

I agree that it is encouraging to see that RMs and municipal 

councils are now being given the authority to recoup the 

expensive costs of providing their services to the public, but the 

legislation does little to determine where this money should 

come from. 

 

And it leads to another situation, Mr. Speaker. Because of the 

difference in operations that I alluded to between urban and 

rural municipalities, once again we are going to have urban 

against rural, being pitted against one another. The cuts to 

municipalities will also affect the affordability of these new 

processes. 

 

Another amendment included in this Bill, as I have already 

mentioned in my opening, is to allow governments to have 

greater control over placement of temporary structures on 

dedicated lands. This includes public and municipal reserves, 

environmental reserves, and buffer strips. 

 

The general structures that this would refer to would also 

include temporary boat docks or fire pits. The Act allows for 

structures related to landscaping, which includes trees, 

walkways, trees, and the placement of sand or steps. My one 

concern here would be the impact of any of these temporary 

structures on the natural environment and whether this 

legislation or existing legislation would limit what kind of 

temporary structures would or are being considered and would 

be acceptable. 

 

I also understand this particular amendment allows for the 

collection of any fees that would be incurred by the 

municipality to cover the costs of demolition or dismantling of 

these temporary structures. While this particular amendment 

seems to allow for the municipalities to assume greater 

authority, we are not sure of any other possible implications of 

this change at this point in time. 

 

While much of this legislation seems to help to clean up some 

of the administration problems currently being faced by 

municipalities, in fact some of the changes are already in place. 

 

The biggest concern I see regarding this legislation is that with 

the cuts to operating grants in rural areas, these RMs will have 

no choice but to recoup their expenses through the taxpayer 

who, as a result of cuts from this government, are already 

seeing less bang for their dollars. 

 

While I do see some added benefit for municipalities in this 

legislation, there are still some concerns that I would like to 

scrutinize with my colleagues and raise at a later date. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing 

(Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill No. 27 amends The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act. 

The changes being made ensure that municipal property taxes 

levied on potash mines will not increase unduly because of 

reassessment. At the same time municipal interests will also be 

protected because the amendment ensures that potash property 

taxes will be maintained at the same level in the year of 

reassessment. 

 

Under the current provisions of the Act, the Municipal Potash 

Tax Sharing Administration Board is required to use the 

preceding year’s municipal mill rates to determine the current 

year’s potash mill rate. This potash mill rate is then applied to 

current year potash mine assessment to determine the property 

taxes to be levied on potash mines. 

 

Because of the increase in assessment in 1997 due to 

reassessment, potash mines would have paid four to five times 

the municipal property taxes in 1997 as they did in 1996 if the 

normal calculation method provided for was used. 

 

The amendments will require the Municipal Potash Tax Sharing 

Administration Board to adjust the potash mill rate in years of 

reassessment so that the same municipal property taxes are 

levied on potash mines in a tax-sharing area as in the preceding 

year. This doesn’t necessarily mean that the property taxes will 

remain the same for each individual potash mine. Because of 

relatively larger or smaller changes in assessment for individual 

mines, their share of the municipal property taxes in a 

tax-sharing area may increase or decrease. 

 

This amendment will only apply in years of reassessment, that 

is every third year. In the years between reassessments the 

board will use the normal method of calculating the potash mill 

rate based on the mill rates of the rural municipalities in the 

potash tax-sharing area. In these years, potash mine property 

taxes may go up or down depending on relative changes in 

assessments of mines and other properties and on the RM mill 

rates and tax policies. 

 

The general trend should be to lower overall potash mine 

property taxes somewhat because potash assessments are not   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

increasing as much as other rural assessments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 27, An Act to 

amend The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have checked with a fair number of interested parties and feel 

that we have no great concerns that have to be answered right at 

this time and feel that we can have our concerns answered in 

committee. So we would be willing to pass this one on at this 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this Act was introduced in 1988 to provide for our first 

provincial honour, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and also to 

define and protect our provincial emblems — the coat of arms, 

the western red lily, the bird and tree emblems, the tartan, and 

the wheat sheaf logo. 

 

The Act has stood the test of time and indeed has been a model 

for other jurisdictions such as British Columbia. In 1995 the 

legislature amended the Act to provide for a second provincial 

honour, the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Mr. Speaker, 

experience over the past two years has resulted in two 

developments which require further amendments to the Act. 

 

First, the time has come to name potash as the official mineral 

emblem of our province. In 1995 the Minister of Energy and 

Mines and the Saskatchewan mining association asked grade 7 

and 8 students across the province to recommend the mineral 

they thought best represented Saskatchewan. The results of this 

consultation was a recommendation that this mineral be potash, 

scientifically known as sylvite. 

 

I’m sure that all members will agree with this recommendation. 

Saskatchewan is the world’s largest producer and exporter of 

potash. Four of those mines are in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. Our reserves of potash are expected to last hundreds of 

years at current production rates. The industry employs some 

3,000 people and in 1995 had sales valued at $1.2 billion. 

 

We have all seen the long trains of potash hopper cars moving 

across the prairie landscape on their way to ports on the west 

coast and from here to our valued customers in such countries 

as China, Japan, and Korea. Potash is a key element of our 

economy and our international relations. It is high time to 

feature potash as an official emblem of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other proposed amendments to the Act 

concern our provincial honours. Members of the House will 

recall the first presentation of the Volunteer Medal by His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor to six outstanding citizens in 

March of last year and the second presentation to seven citizens 

just four weeks ago. Both events took place in this Chamber 

with full participation of members. I know we were all proud to 

honour these deserving people in our midst. 

 

The Volunteer Medal was an immediate success, Mr. Speaker. I 

am informed that for 1996 there were over 100 nominations 

from 48 communities across the province. Saskatchewan is 

known across Canada for its volunteer spirit. We have one of 

the highest rates of voluntarism in the country. For example, no 

fewer than seven Saskatchewan residents received the Governor 

General’s Caring Canadian Award earlier this year. This is a 

sign of a caring, cooperating, sharing society created over the 

past century by Saskatchewan people of all walks of life and all 

ethnic backgrounds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council has 

recommended to the government that the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal be formally declared a decoration, which 

enhances the status of a medal and gives the recipients the right 

to use the initials SVM (Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal). This 

is one of the proposed amendments to the Act. 

 

The other amendments clarify that statutes of our provincial 

honours conform to international usage. Honours include 

orders, decorations, and medals, and it is important to spell this 

out in our legislation. Should some future legislation wish to 

establish a provincial medal, for example, for the centennial of 

Saskatchewan in 2005, the Act will facilitate the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province of progressive, caring, 

motivated people. As we mature as a society it is good for us to 

enshrine our emblems and honours in legislation and to keep 

the legislation up to date. It is therefore my pleasure to move 

second reading of The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Bill before us today seeks to amend The Provincial Emblems 

and Honours Act by officially recognizing potash as our 

provincial mineral. In addition, Mr. Speaker, it also seeks to 

provide official recognition of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal as one of our orders and decorations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments are worthy of praise. 

Each year in this House we invite a number of residents of this 

province to come and receive their Saskatchewan volunteer 

medals. They receive their medals as well as the attention and 

time of this Assembly. I believe such events and such 

decorations help focus public attention on many of the good 

works and selfless public service provided by individuals across 

the province. 

 

Like most of my caucus colleagues, and in fact many other 

members of the House, I come from a rural area where the 

media is dominated by weekly or daily papers with a 

community focus. When we officially recognize the hard work 

offered by volunteers across the province, more often than not 

it’s the local weekly or daily community papers which take the   



906  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

time to tell the community about these individuals’ hard work. 

 

I think we owe a good debt of gratitude to these journalists for 

taking time to write about these very special people. By doing 

so, they are raising the profile of outstanding volunteers in 

many communities. They are also showing residents and young 

people that they don’t have to be a Michael Jordan to inspire 

other people. 

 

By writing about special volunteers, our local journalistic 

community is showing people that even though you’re not 

famous — and you might live in a rural, remote community — 

you can make a difference by using your spare time for the 

betterment of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that Saskatchewan has a 

strong volunteer spirit. Across my constituency, for example, 

we have people volunteering on community clubs; on 

recreational boards; housing boards; for the 4-H; agricultural 

and exhibition societies; and museums and historical societies. 

 

(1515) 

 

In addition, we have many other arts and cultural groups, and 

many people involved in amateur coaching. 

 

Actually tomorrow evening in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 

attending a dinner theatre in the community of Pense in my 

riding, just as recently I had attended a dinner theatre in the 

community of Pasqua. And I’m not only impressed by the talent 

of the individuals in the riding, but also by the commitment that 

is shown by everyone who gets involved. 

 

It was interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that some of the 

individuals helping with the play no longer live in Pasqua. They 

came home to help out and rehearse, because they told me it 

was their way of giving something back to the people of their 

community. And that, Mr. Speaker, does typify the 

Saskatchewan spirit of generosity and caring. To some degree 

it’s a shame that people who provide such devoted service often 

receive little recognition. They are giving of themselves for 

others, but yet we as a society often give more credit to the 

people who earn millions as hockey players or movie stars. 

Those peoples’ contributions to our lives are important but they 

are not normally as real, or as nearby, or as heartfelt, as the 

contribution from a local person who made our community a 

little bit brighter. 

 

By passing this Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 19, we in this 

Assembly will be providing needed recognition to many 

volunteers who toil daily without reward in our communities. 

Thanks to their selfless devotion, we can proudly say we are 

from this province and from this country wherever we go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this Bill provides further recognition to 

volunteers, it should act as a reminder to this government to 

reflect on how it treats voluntarism. The members opposite, and 

everyone in fact, should reflect on how policies might affect 

others and seek to mitigate those effects before implementing 

them. 

 

There are a couple of problems which the government does 

need to review. And one, for example, Mr. Speaker, is that 

many volunteer activities just don’t function without money. A 

great number of volunteer hours are spent fund-raising for many 

efforts that are undertaken. And in that area this government has 

a few detrimental policies. 

 

For one, they rake in millions of dollars from VLT (video 

lottery terminal) funds which once moved elsewhere in the 

community. Many community groups who once depended upon 

$20 raffle tickets to help maintain their rinks find the market’s 

drying up. And it’s partly due to the presence of VLTs and, as 

well, declining rural populations. In my constituency alone this 

government collects another $1.38 million of VLT money. 

Another $4.94 million is collected in Moose Jaw and I’m sure 

Thunder Creek constituents in the Moose Jaw district also 

contribute to that, Mr. Speaker. Some money which once went 

to community groups now does go to VLTs. 

 

Before the last election the Premier promised to provide some 

of this money back to those communities, but he later broke that 

promise. If the government wants to truly demonstrate its 

support for volunteer groups and community organizations 

through Bill 19, they should reconsider this decision and make 

good on those promises. 

 

Other policies exist which might need to be reviewed with 

respect to how they affect and encourage voluntarism in this 

province. Last year the government changed policies designed 

to target under-age drinking in youth driving. While many 

people are pleased with these policies, I would urge the 

government to review them to see how they affect community 

groups and volunteers. 

 

Because just as an example, again many community groups, 

like the dinner theatres, ask for liquor permits. Now if laws are 

enforced such that many of these groups are fined for seemingly 

benign offences, then few people in a community club would 

ever consider to put their name on a liquor permit for such an 

event. And we do know that alcohol can be used responsibly; so 

it’s important that laws and policies be reviewed from time to 

time to ensure that they’re not undermining the volunteer base 

which we so value in this province. 

 

Before I leave the issue of volunteers as outlined in Bill 19, I’d 

be remiss if I didn’t mention the large volunteer efforts which 

will soon begin across the country. We all expect a federal 

election. We all rely, to a large part, on political volunteers and 

we also know that they don’t get much public recognition. And 

we acknowledge and owe them a great deal of gratitude for the 

work that they do. 

 

By becoming actively involved in a political party, by helping a 

candidate seek office, they are helping maintain our democratic 

system. Without people taking an active interest in politics, our 

democratic system would surely fall victim to apathy. And I’m 

sure you’ll agree, Mr. Speaker, that that is by far its worst 

enemy. 

 

So while I wish every volunteer were a Liberal, I’m sure all the   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

members agree with me when I do encourage people to get 

involved in whatever party or movement that they choose, 

regardless if . . . 

 

The Speaker  Order, order. Now I have been listening for 

some time — order, order — to the hon. member’s remarks and 

I want to remind the hon. member that the Bill before the 

Assembly is The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 

Act and that I’m sure he’ll want to tie his remarks to the 

proposals that are in the Act in order to establish their relevance 

in this debate. And I’ll look forward to hearing that from the 

hon. member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

reminder that this Bill does in fact seek to recognize potash as 

our provincial mineral, and I think that many people are pleased 

in fact with that choice. While potash is important, I think it is 

an opportunity though to mention some other minerals which 

are so important to this province, like uranium, oil and gas, 

sodium sulphite, and precious metals. 

 

In due time I’m sure in Saskatchewan we’ll undoubtedly 

become known for exploration and development of other 

minerals as well, Mr. Speaker. But potash, however, is a good 

choice because not only do we have many mines but our 

reserves are extensive as well. 

 

The presence of an ancient geological seabed where a lifeless 

body of water once existed has helped provide jobs and 

economic activity for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. More 

importantly, it also provides life and food for a hungry world. 

And there is some irony, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that a lifeless 

sea now does make it possible to support so many lives. 

 

In addition to these factors, potash not only represents jobs and 

economic activity, but it represents our province’s dependence 

on transportation and upon exports. Potash products are now 

expanding and diversifying, much like Saskatchewan itself, into 

specialty products for industrial customers. 

 

As an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I’m 

pleased to represent a constituency which includes the IMC 

(International Minerals and Chemicals Corporation (Canada) 

Ltd.) Kalium potash mine at Belle Plaine. It does provide many 

jobs and it’s a valued part of this community. 

 

But I have to at this point . . . I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if 

I didn’t remind the Minister of Highways that many accidents 

occur near that mine related to the absence of proper access and 

acceleration lanes on the Trans-Canada Highway. And with the 

administrative functions that have now been moved to the mine 

from Regina and there’s a lot more people commuting, I 

hopefully think that the minister will soon take that into account 

and that perhaps this year they would undertake the 

improvements that are in the works in terms of acceleration 

lanes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably the greatest contribution which potash 

has made in this province is one that goes relatively without 

notice. Unlike producers in other jurisdictions around North 

America, Saskatchewan farmers consume virtually no 

potassium fertilizer. So, Mr. Speaker, this same ancient seabed 

which has left us with extensive potash deposits has helped give 

the glacial soils of our province abundant supplies of potassium, 

one of the four major or macro nutrients that are required for 

agricultural production. 

 

And while the NDP government may not be doing much to 

address rising farm input costs, producers can be thankful that 

millions of years of geological history and glaciers spared them 

of the expense of having to apply potash to their fields. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the reason why I support this Bill though is 

because it encourages the people of this province and members 

of this House to focus on things that make us proud and grateful 

for what we have. In recent days, if you’d listened to the 

members opposite, you’d wonder whether they spend any time 

reflecting on the symbols, accomplishments, and the positive 

things about the country in which they live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Daily — daily, Mr. Speaker — they attack 

our national government and talk about how terribly we are 

doing as a nation. 

 

Well in the spirit of the Bill before us today, the members 

opposite should instead be focusing on some of the good things 

in Canada. In this Bill we are focusing on the accomplishments 

of our volunteers and on how fortunate we are to have 

significant potash deposits and a potash mining industry. 

 

So I think the members should take a little break from the daily 

attacks on the Government of Canada, whose evil Liberals . . . 

and reflect on their accomplishments and on those of the 

country as well. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we learned that Canada has the fastest 

growing population of any industrialized country in the world. 

In addition to that, a UN (United Nations) survey recently cited 

us as the best place in the world in which to live. A recent 

Angus Reid poll also discovered that citizens of other countries 

ranked Canada highly as well. When asked if they could live in 

any other country other than their own, which country would 

that be, Mr. Speaker? Well of course it’s Canada. 

 

While the members opposite suggest everything is wrong with 

this country, thousands of immigrants are choosing Canada as a 

place to live. By contrast, yesterday’s census results suggest 

Saskatchewan is second last in population growth, second only 

to Newfoundland. So I ask the members opposite to reflect on 

these national accomplishments because people across the 

world pick Canada first as a place to live and they do clamour 

to our borders. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, before I conclude and take my seat, I ask the 

members opposite to think about the following question. When 

they condemn the Government of Canada for its handling of 

issues, are they suggesting that all of these immigrants who 

think this country are great are wrong? I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the 41 members opposite are wrong in their 

assessment of this country and its government, not the hundreds   



908  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

of thousands of immigrants who are clamouring to get here 

each year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, just a few comments before we 

allow a vote on this Bill, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act. I was listening as the minister was giving his 

statements as to why this piece of legislation is before the 

Assembly, and I certainly agree with the minister and the 

government in the fact that potash as a mineral is probably an 

appropriate choice for the emblem in our province. 

 

And as I understand correctly as well, I think the government 

did ask a number of students throughout Saskatchewan to give 

their impressions. And I’m certainly pleased to see that students 

in Saskatchewan took some time to think, and obviously they 

felt that potash was something that was really recognized as 

being from Saskatchewan and a product that is known 

worldwide, as we certainly do export potash, not only across 

North American, but into Far East markets; certainly all over 

the world. And in that regard, I think it’s certainly a fitting 

emblem for this province to recognize as a mineral. 

 

An Hon. Member:  We have important dirt, though. 

 

Mr. Toth:  My colleague from Cannington suggests that 

maybe the black dirt would be a good emblem as well, as we all 

are aware of this important resource, and it plays an important 

factor in the economy of our province. But certainly potash 

does as well. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, the minister mentioned the fact 

that we have, certainly in this Assembly and through 

legislations such as this, taken the time to recognize the key 

work of individuals across our province. And while it boils 

down to a few who actually get that recognition in a formal 

manner, Mr. Speaker, we have, as we’ve seen in the last two 

years, recognized some 13 members for their volunteer work to 

their province, to their community, or to an organization. 

 

We’re quite well aware of the fact that so many other people 

throughout the province certainly dictate their time and efforts 

doing volunteer work to support their local communities and 

local organizations. 

 

I should add, I neglected the other day when I recognized a 

number of individuals for their recognition at the South-east 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Awards ceremony, to recognize the 

fact that my colleague’s sister was recognized there as well. 

 

(1530) 

 

An Hon. Member:  Susan Hagel. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Susan? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Hagel. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Susan Hagel was recognized for her volunteer 

efforts at that awards ceremony and I apologize to the 

Assembly for not making that recognition. 

 

But I just wanted to just let the Assembly know that while 

different groups may have dropped that program, the south-east 

regional sports program has kept the program going, Mr. 

Speaker. And basically they’ve done it through local initiative. 

 

You will remember a number of years ago that there was a fair 

bit of provincial funding that helped cultural organizations offer 

these types of volunteer awards, medals, and ceremonies. And 

so I certainly want to give recognition to the south-east regional 

sports association for their efforts in continuing this program. 

 

And certainly I would say in the last few years, as the provincial 

input as far as funds has diminished, it certainly hasn’t 

diminished in the views of individuals and their efforts to 

maintain the program, to maintain the service, and to maintain 

that recognition to their area and surrounding area, which 

comprises an area, I believe, from Highway 6 right through to 

the Manitoba border, and the Qu’Appelle down to the American 

border. 

 

That’s a fair size area, but they do acknowledge a number of 

awards, and that has come about because of the fact that we 

have brought forward legislation that has said we want to 

recognize people for their services to our province. 

 

So I extend to each and every volunteer group a hearty 

thank-you for all your work and efforts. And at this time as 

well, Mr. Speaker, I think it certainly is appropriate that we as 

individuals and as lawmakers do take the time to recognize that. 

I believe this legislation certainly brings out some opportunities 

to do that. 

 

It certainly also allows us to recognize key characteristics of our 

province and the recognition of potash as the key mineral in this 

province at the present time. Although there may be some other 

persons or personalities might view other areas — such as 

uranium, maybe gold, in the future, as maybe a mineral that we 

should be looking at. But I think right now potash is certainly 

recognized by most people as a major export and something 

that we really have to offer and really have made available. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks, I really 

don’t have any real reason to adjourn the debate and to hinder 

the movement of this piece of legislation. So I will now allow 

any other members to take place or to allow for a vote on this 

second reading. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Act is 

to regulate all psychologists in the province under one statute, 

and in doing so, improve their accountability to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

  



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

Psychologists in this province are employed by many different 

public organizations, including school boards, universities, 

governments, social services agencies, and health districts. 

There are also those in private practice. Levels of education 

vary as well. Psychologists can be trained at the doctoral level 

or masters level. The latter group is not regulated by the current 

statute. 

 

This updated statute recognizes the diversity of the psychology 

profession. It provides consistent regulation of all these 

professionals under one body to ensure accountability, 

transparency, and public protection. I am pleased to say that this 

Act provides for a single professional organization to be called 

the Saskatchewan College of Psychologists. 

 

The college will have the authority to ensure psychologists have 

the proper training and practice within their area of expertise 

and in accordance with any standards of practice the college 

deems appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might add that this Act contains all the features 

of more recent professional legislation and is more responsive 

to our changing health system. 

 

Numerous public accountability provisions have been 

incorporated into the Act. For example, the Act will expand on 

the college’s ability to investigate and respond to public 

concerns regarding its members and allow for public 

disciplinary hearings. Representatives of the public will be 

appointed to sit on our college’s council and its disciplinary 

committee, and the college will be required to file an annual 

report. In addition, bylaws proposed by the college that may 

impact on the public will have to be approved by the 

government after a consultation process involving concerned 

parties. 

 

The Act before us today also addresses another important 

matter related to public protection, that of title protection. This 

government held extensive consultations with the three 

psychological associations, employers of psychologists, and 

other related professions on this matter. The provisions before 

us will allow psychologists trained at the master’s level to 

continue to refer to themselves as psychologists. However, to 

help the public to distinguish between those trained at the 

doctoral level and master’s level, members will be required to 

clearly indicate their educational credentials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act represents a new era in the regulation of 

psychologists in Saskatchewan. I am pleased to say that it was 

developed through consultations with the Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association, the Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Educational 

Psychologists Association. 

 

Following passage of this Act, a council with representation 

from these three groups will be set up to ensure the necessary 

bylaws are established to regulate all psychologists. 

 

I believe this new Act will serve the profession and the public 

well into the future, and ensure the continued delivery of quality 

psychological services in Saskatchewan. 

I’d like to close by thanking the three professional associations 

for their participation in developing this updated statute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of The Psychologists 

Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The practice of 

psychology has seen numerous changes in the last 37 years, and 

that’s the last time the Act respecting the profession was 

updated. That’s a long time to go without an update, given how 

much our world and our province has changed in the last three 

or four decades. 

 

Mental health is now considered as important an issue as 

physical health. Emotional problems need as much in the way 

of treatment as do other health problems. 

 

One would hope that seeking out the help of a trained 

psychologist does not bring with it a certain stigma. It should be 

no more of a humiliation to visit a psychologist than it is to visit 

an eye, ear, and nose doctor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to do everything in our power to ensure 

that people who need the services of a trained psychologist 

should be able to access that help easily. Just as one would hope 

that a doctor isn’t too far away when we suffer a physical 

problem due to illness or accident, we also have to ensure that 

people who need the services of a psychologist are able to 

receive the counselling and the proper counselling that they 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our office is probably not alone in receiving many, 

many letters, faxes, pieces of e-mail, and phone calls regarding 

the new Act as proposed by the government. We have received 

submissions both on the pro and con side, Mr. Speaker, and we 

are carefully studying all the many viewpoints that have been 

expressed to us. Most of the comments we’ve gotten are from 

those in the psychology field itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve stated, we must begin to recognize that 

psychology, though not a medical science, is an important 

aspect to our overall health care system. Therefore some checks 

and balances are necessary and have to be put in place in order 

to ensure that Saskatchewan people are receiving adequate 

treatment and that those who are practising in the field are 

qualified and competent. 

 

As in other professional disciplines, such as dentistry, medicine, 

or law, who better to judge than your peers. Bill No. 47 

responds to this by establishing the Saskatchewan College of 

Psychologists. This is an expansion of what’s in place, namely, 

the Saskatchewan Psychological Association, established by 

The Registered Psychologists Act. 

 

Along with those members, under this Bill will be current 

members of the Saskatchewan psychological society and 

members of the Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists 

Association. The Saskatchewan Psychological Association 

includes only those professional psychologists who have   



910  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

received their doctorate. It does not include, at the present time, 

those who have received their master’s level training, which, I 

understand, the majority of those practising applied psychology 

in Saskatchewan have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there’s a serious division within the ranks 

of psychologists over this particular Bill. In fact, the fact that I 

keep referring to all of these people as psychologists is one of 

the main bones of contention. 

 

As it does with most of its Bills, the government says it has 

consulted with those affected by the proposed changes. 

However, when there is such divergent views on the proposed 

Bill as we see between the registered psychologists and the rest 

of the profession, not everybody is going to be happy with the 

end result. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we have to concern ourselves with the 

bigger picture here. We have to do what is right to ensure the 

best quality of care for the most number of people in our 

province. That’s why it’s so vital we have a proper body in 

place to regulate and control this profession and those who are 

involved in it. 

 

Just as is the case with doctors or lawyers, with this Act we will 

see the implementation of a professional self-regulating body 

with a council and a public complaints process. This is very 

important, Mr. Speaker. And it’s very important that very 

stringent regulations are in place for this profession just as they 

are in the cases of other disciplines within the medical 

profession as well as other professions. 

 

Again, psychologists are not medical practitioners. But given 

their importance, they must be governed the same way, and this 

Bill does move in that direction. However, as is the case with 

the new Dental Disciplines Act, I’m very concerned about the 

government taking more power this time to regulate the 

supposedly self-governing body. 

 

Self-governing bodies certainly aren’t what they used to be. 

And just as is the case with the new Dental Disciplines Act that 

is currently being debated in this House, this Bill will give the 

Minister of Health extraordinary regulatory power over the 

Saskatchewan College of Psychologists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will give the minister the right to propose 

new bylaws to the college or request changes to any existing 

bylaws. And this Bill does give a pretence of deliberations on 

the part of the college. However, if the college does not agree 

with this bylaw change, the minister has to wait only three 

months before enacting the bylaw, whether the College of 

Psychologists, this supposedly self-regulating body, thinks it 

wise or not. 

 

I question the wisdom of why it’s necessary for the minister to 

have this extraordinary power in certain disciplines. The whole 

point of the self-regulating professional organization is that 

these people know what’s right for their profession and what 

isn’t. Now it appears the minister is the one who will pretend to 

know best. That’s true with dental disciplines and it’s true of 

psychologists. With these types of provisions, Mr. Speaker, it 

appears the minister is simply once again trying to centralize 

more powers in his office. 

 

That’s been the government’s standard operating procedure 

since coming to power, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen it throughout 

the health reform process. Whereas the government and the 

minister profess to doing the exact opposite — that is handing 

over more control to local decision makers — in reality it’s just 

not true. More power is moving to the minister with each move 

that he makes. 

 

(1545) 

 

The minister wants the power; he simply doesn’t want the 

responsibility that goes along with the power. That’s why we 

see him constantly passing the buck when it comes to the fallout 

from the decisions he has made and that the government has 

made. This latest move is only the latest symptom of that need 

to centralize all power in the minister’s office away from the 

people who should be making these types of decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act is very similar to The Dental Disciplines 

Act in other respects as well. Like in that Act, as well as with 

The Occupational Therapists Act, there is no immunity from 

counter-suits for the college as a whole, if it decides to take 

disciplinary action against one of its members as a result of a 

complaint lodged with the college’s discipline committee. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, one questions whether this will make the 

committee think twice before taking up such a complaint. 

That’s certainly a concern that was expressed to us as it related 

to the dental profession. And I’m sure the same concerns apply 

here as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already stated, we’ve had a lot of input on 

this Bill from the various levels and for the most part, members 

of the psychological society and educational psychologists, both 

groups primarily made up of master level professionals, agree 

with the Bill, while many registered psychologists are opposed. 

 

Most of this disagreement comes from the use of the term 

psychologist, itself. The registered psychologists, or those at the 

Ph.D. level, have argued that only they should be allowed to use 

the term psychologist because of their higher education and 

superior qualifications. They say allowing others to use the term 

does not distinguish well enough the differences between the 

two levels. The fact that because of their education these people 

are able to call themselves doctor, while those with masters 

cannot, is not enough of a distinction, they argue. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have also heard from the other side as 

well. Educational psychologists and other master level 

professionals say they should have the right to use that term. 

Even some registered psychologists have expressed this view to 

us. 

 

They say allowing the psychologist term to apply to all those 

with at least a master level of education, recognizes the reality 

that there simply aren’t enough doctoral level psychologists in 

Saskatchewan to provide the necessary care. 

  



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

And to further compound this problem is the fact that many if 

not most of these doctoral level psychologists are teaching at 

our universities. Thus the number of doctoral level 

psychologists providing health care as a regular part of their 

duties is actually quite small. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each side makes good points over this particular 

Bill. And while there is a lot that is acceptable in this 

legislation, I feel we’ll need some more time to study the 

arguments presented to us. Therefore at this time I move for 

adjournment of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the 

Assembly that with respect to the immediately preceding item, 

Bill No. 47, The Psychologists Act, I wish to declare a conflict 

of interest and indicate that I will not vote on any stage of 

passage of Bill 47. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The House acknowledges the hon. member 

for Regina Victoria’s declaration of conflict of interest. And 

pursuant to Rule 41, the hon. member will not participate in 

votes on subsequent stages of the Bill. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 7 — The Cancer 

Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I certainly 

am not planning on taking a lot of time in debating this Bill at 

great length or at further length. I think there are a number of 

areas we can certainly take time and address questions in 

committee. 

 

But I understand that the Bill simply allows the Department of 

Health to pay for fee for service physicians directly rather than 

requiring the Cancer Foundation to pay for these services and 

then bill the department. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that is appropriate and I guess it 

addresses two things. It does away with a lot of paperwork; it 

certainly speeds up the process of payment. And it creates 

another unnecessary form of red tape that has been around for 

far too long. 

 

And in this regard, Mr. Speaker, we certainly are supportive of 

this piece of legislation. In a lot of regards it basically is a 

non-controversial piece of legislation which we don’t have a lot 

of objections to. And the few questions that I think that we 

would like to raise we can certainly address directly in 

committee. And at this time I would allow for the Bill to 

proceed on to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Dental 

Disciplines Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, regarding 

the Bill No. 17, The Dental Disciplines Act, I have a few 

comments to make. The fact is I believe the Bill certainly looks 

at streamlining legislation relating to the dental professions by 

consolidating them into one Bill. But I think there are a few 

things that we will need to take a look at and address in this 

Bill, and certainly some other issues that I believe we need to 

take even more time to peruse before we even move to 

committee. 

 

The Bill, I understand, as well provides for public consultation 

into disciplinary hearings for those professionals. And I think, 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at disciplinary hearings, it seems to 

me that when you look at all the professions in this province . . . 

And certainly an issue that came up just recently, even with the 

Department of Justice and some of the other professions, there’s 

one concern I do have and that is that most professions, while 

they have a disciplinary committee, the committee is made up 

of individuals within the profession. 

 

And many times when there may be a conflict with a public 

person, you wonder whether or not a commission made up of its 

own individuals, body, really take into consideration the 

problems that may be raised with that commission in view of 

the fact that they would be criticizing a member of their 

profession and having their own body address these concerns. 

 

So I think the provision for a public consultation is certainly 

important if that indeed allows members of the public to 

address some of their concerns to a body even larger or outside 

of just a commission directly made up of professionals of that 

profession. 

 

I understand it allows dental professionals more flexibility to 

operate in, and I think that’s appropriate, especially when we 

look at the make-up of our province and a number of 

communities having a problem to find professionals, especially 

in the area of dentistry, to come and establish. For example it 

allows dental services to be made available or operated or care 

provided in special care homes. 

 

It allows more flexibility in the types of services different types 

of dental professionals can provide, instead of the legislation 

spelling out at great length the types of procedures each 

discipline can provide. It allows each discipline to provide such 

services as are part of the generally accepted standards of 

training for that profession. And that, Mr. Speaker, obviously 

allows the different disciplines to change over time according to 

the standards of dentistry without requiring extensive legislative 

changes at each point. 

  



912  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

And I understand as well from the minister that this Bill was 

written in consultation with each of the dental professions 

affected. And while there may have been consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, consultation doesn’t necessarily mean that 

consultation was comprised of taking place with each one of the 

members of the profession, but certainly with the profession at 

large. And so it certainly would appear that the legislation here 

has . . . while we do have some agreement, it would appear that 

this legislation also has some areas that need to be questioned. 

 

While the legislation improves the efficiency and flexibility of 

the medical services, and while that is positive, it certainly 

appears as well though that we are concerned with the funding 

cut-backs to the health sector. We will want to question the 

minister at large in Committee of the Whole just how thorough 

the consultation process was, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 

important that time be given to allow for that. 

 

We’ll also want to assure that these changes are not a Trojan 

Horse for delivering poor services to health districts. And 

considering some of the questions that have arisen in the last 

few days regarding health care in this province and health 

services and some of the concerns that I see in my constituency, 

it’s an area that we as an opposition party and opposition 

members certainly want to take time to address and address 

thoroughly. 

 

The changes in flexibility for locale of practice may simply give 

health districts an excuse for not providing adequate facilities to 

dental professionals. And this is of a concern to us and of a 

concern to constituents throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Likewise, for broadening the definitions of the duties each 

profession can perform, health districts may be able to get away 

with hiring, for example, a dental assistant instead of an actual 

dentist to do fillings, and this is of a concern to many people. 

 

And Mr. Speaker will be aware of the debate that took place 

when the dental assistants were moved out of the schools or the 

school program was done away with and put into the 

professions or into the local dentists’ offices. And while a 

number of people were concerned about it, there were 

arguments on both sides of the case at that time, as we do see 

today in the demise of the children’s dental program. 

 

On balance the Bill appears to allow dental professionals 

greater freedom to provide more efficient services to a broader 

patient base. However, closer examination will be needed to 

ensure that these changes have the desired effect. 

 

And as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, there certainly are areas that 

we can see and we will agree with; there are areas that we feel 

we need to raise more questions to make sure we have a better 

understanding of what the intent of the legislation is. And in 

view of the questions that arise I think it would be inappropriate 

at this time to just move quickly into Committee of the Whole. 

And I therefore would move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 36 — The Health 

Districts Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few points on 

The Health Districts Amendment Act in terms of the intent of 

Bill 36. This Bill states that the government may pass limits on 

the rates of remuneration and reimbursement for expenses 

which may be paid to members of district health boards. After 

those rates are passed by this government, the local district 

health boards must stick to those rates. 

 

I have to ask the question, is there a problem with the members 

of the district health boards voting to pay themselves too much 

for remuneration and reimbursement? 

 

And the Bill also suggests that there is history of local health 

governance in this province is one of volunteer boards. It seems 

that the government’s much heralded health care reform has 

resulted in a situation where the government itself thinks more 

controls are necessary in order to curb overly high spending by 

the new district health boards. 

 

As a northern resident I have to ask, is this an indication of 

what awaits our new district health boards? Are we going to be 

looking to the district health boards as employment, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And some of the situations we talk . . . when we talk about 

health care — very quickly just to again address some of the 

problems we have in northern Saskatchewan — in terms of 

Stony Rapids not having adequate water and sewer service. The 

poor quality of roads make it extremely difficult for people in 

the North to travel a long way for health treatment. The people 

of La Loche still receive health services in run-down, leaky 

trailers that insurance companies won’t even insure. 

 

(1600) 

 

And the fact that after decades of representation by the NDP 

members in northern Saskatchewan, top-quality health care for 

northern residents still does not seem to be high-priority. 

Hospital and its spin-off purchases in Uranium City account for 

70 per cent of the oil that Imperial Oil sells in that community 

and if the hospital moves or is downgraded or severely — well, 

closed — then of course, the Imperial Oil service in that 

particular community closes for all the residents. 

 

And again with the Uranium City hospital issue, people in that 

community . . . no one realizes it’s going to close, but there still 

has not been a whole pile of questions answered. So in 

reference to some of Bill No. 36, there is a whole bunch of 

questions we have to ask yet. 

 

And we begin to address the problems of here we are talking 

about how much district board members are going to make, 

putting a cap on that, and the question we have is: why are they 

replacing volunteer boards; and secondly, how much more level 

of bureaucratic processes must we instil with our medicare   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

system in order for us to have control over it? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we feel that there is a lot of waste of time, a 

lot of waste of money, and this Bill proves that the priority is 

not necessarily building up health care, but really the Bill shows 

that it’s intended to control health care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we obviously have a lot more to say about 

this, and we will as time goes on. And I sincerely thank you for 

the opportunity for expressing my views and I’ll now take my 

place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think we 

were led to believe that this was a fairly non-controversial 

housekeeping Bill making minor amendments to The Health 

Districts Act. I believe the amendments largely deal with 

bringing in the wording of the Bill into line with the associated 

pieces of legislation, example, The Rural Municipalities Act. 

 

The Bill also seeks to clarify the tax exempt status of health 

boards and formally allows boards to pay Public Service 

Commission level expense rates to board members. When I 

read this, Mr. Speaker, I do have somewhat of a concern, 

concern related to the costs of health care and the fact that we 

see — and as I note in my own constituency and across the 

province feeling that more and more people — that we’re 

seeing lesser and lesser of fewer services being offered through 

our local health districts. 

 

When I see the boards being given the ability to pay public 

health service level expense rates, one has to begin to wonder 

whether or not the feeling is that we have a piece of legislation 

here which really allows boards even a greater flexibility to pay 

themselves more and to eat up more of the funds that are 

available to them, rather than making sure that more and more 

funds are put into actual patient care services or services to the 

district to provide opportunities or services . . . or patient care, 

the needs of patients within the districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when the government changed and formed 

the large health care districts in the province of Saskatchewan, 

the argument was made that they were going to save money 

through fewer boards. But the realities are . . . And they were 

going to save that by having fewer boards to eat up 

administrative costs or fees that were being paid to board 

members. 

 

But we have pointed out time and time again that the boards 

that were in place, while there were a number of boards, most of 

the individuals on those boards are basically doing the service 

as an honorarium or as a gratis with very little fee, and in many 

cases, local RMs were picking up the fees. And the dollars they 

had coming to them were generally going into patient services. 

 

Since the change, we however see a substantial increase in 

board rates and fees and dollars going in to pay board members. 

And while some would argue, well it’s once a month, what I 

understand and in talking to board members, some board 

members are actually on the go once or twice a week, which is a 

lot more than just one meeting a month. And when you think 

about that, based on the fee that they’re being paid, a substantial 

dollar is being eaten up just covering the costs of running board 

meetings or running the different committees that boards have 

set up within their jurisdictions. 

 

And so there are a number of concerns out there — concerns 

that taxpayers have and the fact that they are losing control of 

the ability of receiving the services that they have come to 

expect. 

 

And while we’re not standing here arguing that we should have 

the services we had years ago, or we should have the amount of 

beds available to the taxpayers of this province or the number of 

hospitals, the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that, I think, in view of the 

waiting lists that many people are still finding themselves on — 

and a current one that just comes to my mind I just received 

about three weeks ago where one individual is telling me that 

he’s on a 17-month waiting list for a hip replacement — I think, 

Mr. Speaker, what people are saying is they don’t mind being 

on a waiting list if it takes that to improve their health, but they 

get concerned when that waiting list starts to turning into a year 

and 17 months. Then they make inquiries as to why that waiting 

list is so long. 

 

And we find out the waiting list is so long because the service is 

only provided in fewer and fewer locations. And as the beds are 

cut back, many times the waiting list is there because there 

aren’t enough beds available for physicians to indeed bring their 

patients in that they want to provide the service to. 

 

So what I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, while this seems 

to be non-controversial, this doesn’t seem to have a major 

impact, I think the public of Saskatchewan feel we need to have 

a lot of other questions answered in dealing with pieces of 

legislation such as the one we have before us. And it would I 

think be inappropriate just to move this quickly into committee 

as well. 

 

I think we need to take more time to focus on the Bill to address 

some of these concerns in second reading, and therefore I move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife 

Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to 

Bill No. 42 on The Wildlife Act, 1997, Mr. Speaker. This is an 

important Bill with potentially far-reaching implications and 

impacts on wildlife and on those that coexist with wildlife, like 

first nations, farmers, ranchers, oil and mining companies, and 

those that will administer the Act. 

 

Through analysis and consultation with stakeholders, we will 

want to assure ourselves and our constituents that the Bill has   



914  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

all the required provisions and powers to manage wildlife and 

protect endangered species. At the same time, we will want to 

establish that the rights of landowners, ranchers, farmers, 

hunters, and aboriginal people are not ignored or trampled on. 

 

We will ask the minister to explain and elaborate on how he 

intends to use the powers granted to him under the Act and 

under the regulations. These are some sweeping powers that 

need to be justified as necessary for the administration and 

enforcement of the Act. 

 

In particular, we will focus attention and scrutiny on section 11, 

Mr. Speaker, the big game damage compensation fund. Also 

part V, protection of wildlife species at risk, section 48 to 54. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch on that part of the Bill that I think 

has been a very big part for the farmers of Saskatchewan in the 

last couple of years. And I believe why we are taking special 

attention to this is we feel that the government of the day has 

actually been reneging on their responsibility to farmers, where 

farmers are being asked to pick up compensation that should be 

shared by the people of Saskatchewan instead of just strictly 

picked up by the farmers. 

 

And I know the minister in charge of SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management), and actually the 

minister in charge of Agriculture, know what I am saying 

because they both know how much they’ve been dumping on 

our farmers. So I think this will be one of our areas that we’re 

really going to check in this part of the Bill and check with 

people that are concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will also explore the relationship between this Act and the 

federal endangered species Act. Is there any unnecessary or 

costly overlaps and duplications in the administration of the two 

Acts? What, if any, coordination is envisioned or planned 

between the two levels of government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are but a few aspects of the Act that we 

intend to subject to thoughtful and careful and detailed 

examination to ensure that we will have a Wildlife Act that 

strikes a balance between and protects the interests of 

Saskatchewan residents and Saskatchewan wildlife. 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate on No. 42, 

The Wildlife Act, 1997, be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

Item 1 

 

The Chair:  Mr. Minister, would you please introduce your 

officials? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce Stuart Kramer, sitting up here at the front, deputy 

minister for the department. We have Les Cooke, associate 

deputy minister of policy and programs, and Ross MacLennan, 

assistant deputy minister of operations. And last but not least, 

Donna Kellsey, director of financial administrative services. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good 

afternoon, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. I’ll be 

asking questions for the first 30 minutes or so and my hon. 

colleague from the constituency of Melville obviously will have 

some questions as well. 

 

I’ll guess we’ll get right into it. I’ve got a number of issues of 

course we wanted to discuss. And there’s 10,000 issues out 

there, as you’re aware, but I’m just going to stick to about 4 or 

5 here. 

 

First of all, in reference to Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management, can I just get a brief overview of what 

your responsibilities of your department is, please. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the 

hon. member for the question. The Department of Environment 

and Resource Management does cover a wide range of issues, 

activities in Saskatchewan. 

 

On the environmental side of the department we are responsible 

for monitoring a number of activities, from landfill sites to . . . 

We are dealing with underground fuel tanks at service stations, 

for an example. We are responsible for the licensing of uranium 

mines, working with other mining operations and industries 

such as potash, oil and gas. 

 

On the resource side, we have a number of branches in the 

department. We have the parks branch, which is all of our 

provincial park system. We have the forestry branch of course, 

which deals with the forest industry. We have the fish and 

wildlife branch, which covers obviously fish and wildlife. 

 

So we do cover a wide range of activities in the province here 

and what . . . We really rely on a lot of cooperation with the 

various stakeholders, and this is working out very well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 

significant challenges we notice that your department has gone 

through for the last several years, and for the life of me I can’t 

figure out why — you’re such a nice guy — but the situation is 

you’ve gone through a significant amount of cuts in your 

department, significant to the point where it is now affecting 

how well your department performs — and not necessarily an 

attack on your staff’s credibility or effort or desire to do their 

job, really it’s an issue of being understaffed. And when you 

have a situation like that, it obviously is going to have an 

impact on monitoring the environmental challenges associated 

with all the different industries operating in Saskatchewan. 

 

SERM, as you mentioned, certainly has a wide variety of 

responsibility in terms of monitoring how the mining sector 

works, how the forestry sector works, how well the wildlife is 

managed, and the list goes on and on. And granted that the   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

stakeholders do play a significant role in delivering that 

particular responsibility, nonetheless the Department of 

Environment and Resource Management plays a key role, the 

lead role, and probably the only role that has a lot of power and 

influence attached to it. 

 

So these cut-backs certainly are having a drastic effect out there 

and I guess the big question I have in particular, it shows up in 

my constituency in the case of Buffalo Narrows. Buffalo 

Narrows, of course, wrote you a letter a couple of weeks ago 

and they’re very concerned of a decision that your department 

made for reallocation and redistribution of staff — whatever 

their argument is — and they’re very, very disappointed that 

they lost a position in Buffalo Narrows. Granted you moved it 

to a community just 60 miles down the road, to Beauval, but 

what that does, it creates animosity between the two 

communities. 

 

So in that sense the concern that Buffalo Narrows has is, why 

does it seem these cut-backs are pitting community against 

community and it just doesn’t seem fair. 

 

Would you care to respond to that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I’d 

like to thank the hon. member for the compliments. Certainly 

the last number of years it’s no secret every government 

department has had to do more with less and whether . . . This 

not only is restricted to government but businesses, big business 

corporations, as well. Everybody seems to be doing more with 

less and, however, we believe that the . . . we are through that 

hurdle at this time. 

 

In fact we’re very pleased to say that our budget has been 

increased by about $6 million this year. A million dollars, a 

million and a half, for parks and facilities, which are very 

important to our people — we’ll be putting more money into 

there. Another $2 million for operations in the province, which 

includes conservation officers, the forest fire people, and also 

the forest fire management has also been increased by $5 

million. 

 

So I can appreciate the hon. member’s concerns, but there is 

always going to be change and, like I say, trying to do . . . make 

things more efficient. That’s just the way of the ’90s. 

 

But we do believe that we are still doing a good job and we are 

still meeting our responsibilities through cooperative programs, 

partnership agreements — programs such as the tip line where 

people cooperate in reporting wildlife infractions. So I 

appreciate the comments, but we do believe that we’re still 

doing as good a job as we can. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess one of the 

concerns that the . . . again, going back to this Buffalo Narrows 

problem, is it’s nice to see that we do have an increase in 

SERM’s budget. It’s also nice to see that . . . some of the 

comments that you made in reference to partnerships and 

people wanting to work together in terms of stakeholders. 

 

And I guess the other fact is as a result of your $6 million 

increase, can Buffalo Narrows expect to have the position that 

they once had retained at Buffalo Narrows, not at the expense of 

Beauval, but certainly in light of the fact that northern 

Saskatchewan consists of half the land mass of the province as a 

whole? 

 

So you would assume instead of having cut-backs in an area 

where most of the animals are, most of the trees are, most of the 

mines are, and a great vast tract of land is, you would assume 

that any increase that you have as the environmental department 

that you would certainly look at putting positions, more 

positions as opposed to cut-backs, to northern Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

Would you care to respond to that, please, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With the 

specific question regarding the conservation officer station at 

Buffalo Narrows, a large part of our downsizing a year ago was 

through early retirement options and it turned out that the 

individual station at Buffalo Narrows did qualify for early 

retirement; so he took that option. And the process is such that 

we cannot replace somebody that takes early retirement. 

 

So at least for the time being, we will not be filling the position 

at least this year. But certainly if concerns are such and demand, 

we would certainly look at this in the future. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure Buffalo 

Narrows would be very happy to hear, at least, that in the future 

the consideration of this nature will be once again on the agenda 

of your department. 

 

The other question I have is, who makes the decision in terms 

of where certain positions should go? Like suppose, example, 

you had another case of early retirement in another community. 

As you’re aware, the communities in the north-west have 

unemployment rates that are quite high and every position that’s 

available through the government, be it SERM or through the 

private sector, really is treasured. And when you have a 

movement like this, of course it will concern any community, 

and Buffalo Narrows is not unlike any community. They get 

concerned when they see job loss. 

 

So who makes these decisions and these recommendations to 

replace employees or to not replace them or to transfer positions 

or to retire people? How is this all assessed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to 

the hon. member’s question, we certainly do recognize the 

vastness of the North, the uniqueness. Of course the whole 

forestry industry is in the North, a lot of hunting and fishing 

opportunities are in the north part of the province; so we 

certainly distribute our resources to where the need is most. 

And certainly the North is not forgotten. 

 

And to look specifically at forest fire-fighting operations, we do 

everything in our power to hire local people. In fact we offer 

training opportunities for local people, and we want to I guess, 

provide as many job opportunities as we can. Instead of 

bringing people in from the South to fight fires in the North, we   



916  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

want to use local people. 

 

So the decision to where people work is simply, I guess, the 

greatest need and the most logical way of employing people. 

For an example, where there’s a large hunting community, we 

would certainly have conservation officers in that particular 

area. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And I guess the first part of the 

question — I’m still waiting for an answer in reference to who 

makes the decisions and the choices. And would you undertake, 

kindly undertake, to contact the mayor and council of Buffalo 

Narrows to explain who made a decision and why the decision 

was made; so that they can get good clarification on why they 

lost this particular position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, like 

all departments we are given an X number of dollars to operate 

in and our management team, some of which are here today, 

looks at the overall province and decides where we best need 

people employed or stationed, and I guess when downsizing — 

as was a year ago — is on the agenda, I guess they have to 

weigh very seriously where cuts can be made. 

 

And as I mentioned in your particular case, the individual from 

Buffalo Narrows qualified for early retirement; so he was not at 

least out of work and he had a pension, and we did everything 

we could to sort of provide soft landings for people. 

 

And more specifically, we’d be very pleased to contact the 

mayor of your community and explain to him the process. And 

we want to hear the local people’s concerns as well; so we will 

certainly endeavour to do that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I guess the 

other question is . . . I certainly appreciate the fact that you will 

contact the mayor and council of Buffalo Narrows. And I guess 

the only thing that’ll probably be asked is okay fine, that the 

person was retired, we can appreciate that. You’ve done 

everything you can to make sure these landings are soft. And 

when one loses his job by his option or not, it’s always nice to 

have these concessions for him. 

 

It still does not answer the question, and I know the question 

will come back from the mayor and council, as to why the 

position was transferred from Buffalo to Beauval; and again 

you’re dividing the two communities. I don’t want to have to 

choose between the two myself because I’m, of course, 

representing both communities. However, I think the key thing 

here is that we make sure that we don’t do . . . make decisions 

of this nature which divide communities. 

 

And I think the key thing here is we can appreciate 

departmental budgeting. You know, being a former mayor 

myself, I can appreciate how you have to juggle dollars. 

 

But again to go back to the earlier point we made, is northern 

Saskatchewan’s got half the land mass. I don’t know how many 

thousands of square kilometres they have out in northern 

Saskatchewan — but one figure we have is for every person we 

have in the North, there’s approximately 90 square kilometres 

for every man, woman, and child. 

 

So the problem certainly is not one of departmental spending, 

it’s really departmental priorities in saying that’s where the land 

is, that’s where all the . . . most of our job is, so that’s where 

most of the positions should be — just makes common sense. 

 

But nonetheless we’ll continue on here to the issue of the 

Uranium City fuel farm, Mr. Minister . As you’re probably 

aware, I did speak with the Minister of Northern Affairs this 

afternoon in question period and asked him about the whole 

issue of the fuel farm. And as you’re probably aware, they get 

their fuel shipped in through Imperial Oil, and what Imperial 

Oil does is store the fuel for a number of winter months. And I 

think next month — May, I’m not exactly sure of the date in 

May — but that’s the last opportunity in which they’re going to 

have to make a decision as to whether Imperial Oil is going to 

pull out or not. Now if Imperial Oil does pull out because of the 

tank storage problems . . . they claim they have to replace these 

tanks because they’re underground tanks, and the cost is just not 

possible for them to recover over the long term based on their 

operations. 

 

So the situation we have here now is, what’s going to happen to 

Uranium City to ensure that the replacement of these tanks is 

not a pressing priority in which that the people of Uranium City 

will not have adequate supply of heating fuel for their homes 

and their hospital and their school for the upcoming winter 

months of 1997-98. 

 

(1630) 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Chairman, I want to introduce to 

the members and to you, a visitor who is seated in our west 

gallery. It’s a young man who studies at the University of 

Saskatchewan. He’s very active in the political scene in our 

province. He’s currently the acting president of the 

Saskatchewan Young New Democrats and I’m very proud to 

say he’s my constituent. Would the members please welcome 

Mr. Brendan Pyle. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 

and I just learned about this situation a day or two ago, and we   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

realize the importance of having heating fuel at a remote area 

like Uranium City. And I can assure the hon. member that our 

department, along with your friend, the Minister of Northern 

Affairs, will be working with the community of Uranium City 

as well as the Imperial Oil company to do everything we can to 

ensure that fuel will be available. 

 

I’m not sure of the conditions of the tanks but we will be 

checking into that. If it’s a mere fact of having to monitor the 

tanks to see if they’re leaking, if they don’t need replaced, well 

that can be done very easily, but if the tanks are leaking we will 

have to look at that. So we are in the process of getting 

information but we appreciate the concern you raised on this 

issue. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess in essence 

then I could expect and anticipate that your department officials 

will immediately contact the chairperson of the local advisory 

committee, which is Jean Lepine, and advise him of the 

ongoing discussions and work with him firsthand as to how we 

can resolve this issue. Because it is a very serious issue, and as I 

mentioned today in question period, many people in Uranium 

City are losing sleep trying to figure out, with the hospital 

leaving and with this fuel farm problem, what’s going to happen 

to our community. 

 

So I think we have to give them a peace of mind and an 

assurance that your department will not come along and have 

the attitude that this fuel farm is an environmental hazard and 

we don’t care whether it affects 200 people or 2,000, we’ve got 

to shut it down; we’ve got to replace these tanks no matter 

what. 

 

But at this point in time we need common sense, logic, and 

compassion. And certainly I anticipate that’s what you would 

afford the people of Uranium City. So can I again confirm that 

yourself or one of your department officials will contact the 

appropriate people to resolve some of their concerns? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, you 

certainly can and we would ask that you provide the name and 

address, phone numbers, of any individuals that you think we 

should contact in Uranium City and we’ll follow that up very 

quickly. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that they 

will appreciate that. I guess continuing on with the . . . just 

going down my list here. I’ve only got another 10, 15 minutes 

here of questions because the hon. member from Melville is 

giving me a nudge here. 

 

However in reference to the northern leases of some of the 

lands, I just want to question . . . We have an article — I’m not 

sure of the date — but James Parker of the Star-Phoenix 

presented me with, you know, with the question on a fact that 

an Alberta group operated an illegal fishing camp in 

north-western Saskatchewan. And the camp ran for about five 

years before the government, provincial government, began to 

hear unsettling rumours about its operation in 1993. 

 

It seems that the underprivileged children that this camp was 

supposed to serve were actually unusually old and affluent and 

remarkably adept with a fishing rod. And I guess these people 

were from Alberta and they were actually older guys out there 

fishing and having a good time. 

 

Could you indicate to me what’s the situation of that particular 

case at this date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, you raised 

an example of what we don’t like to see happening to our 

resources and the article is correct. 

 

These individuals from Alberta came to Saskatchewan and 

applied for a lease on a northern lake, saying they were going to 

use it for underprivileged children. We thought this was a good 

cause and we issued the lease. And within a couple of years we 

were hearing reports back from people that this was not a camp 

for underprivileged children, but for people that had wanted to 

come fishing and probably weren’t too poor. 

 

So once we heard these rumours, we initiated an undercover 

operation and we confirmed that this was the case, that it was 

not used for what it was intended to be used for, and we pressed 

charges. And I’m happy to say that the individuals were found 

guilty and received substantial fines. The lease has since been 

cancelled. 

 

And this is just one example of how the public can help us out 

in managing our valuable wildlife and fisheries and all of our 

natural resources. We simply don’t want to have abuse like this 

and misuse and we do appreciate the great cooperation we have 

with the public. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And it goes back to 

my earlier statement about not cutting back the North and not 

cutting back some of the Buffalo Narrows officers and 

positions, because again you look at the situation. We talk about 

co-management boards on an ongoing basis. We talk about 

hiring aboriginal people to work within the organization, of 

promoting aboriginal people. Some of the people we have in 

northern Saskatchewan are very, very good conservation 

officers. And they’re from the northern communities and 

they’re native people. So I want to certainly commend your 

department on pushing some of those opportunities for our 

native people, and I encourage you to continue. And I certainly 

encourage you to continue to have these people climb up the 

ladder, if you will, in your corporate departmental plans. 

 

However just going on, the quote that I made in there is: 

 

“You have a huge tract of land that isn’t being monitored. 

There’s room for all kinds of abuse. They have to get local 

people involved,” Buckley Belanger said Wednesday. 

 

And that just goes to show, Mr. Minister, this is not about, 

again, politics; this is preservation of wildlife and protection of 

the environment. And who else do you afford that opportunity 

to, is the local northern people. So in reference to 

co-management and certainly reference to local people being 

employed, I encourage you to exhaust every avenue, because 

it’s very, very important to us. 

  



918  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

And also, don’t do it at the expense of other communities, 

because that just creates division amongst communities and it 

doesn’t do any good. And what you want to do is promote and 

enhance a cohesive effort of northern people working hand in 

hand to protect the environment. 

 

But continuing on. We’ll leave that alone. Just one final 

question on that. An elaborate camp with buildings worth more 

than 100,000 has been constructed and these disadvantaged 

fishermen from Alberta, or underprivileged fishermen from 

Alberta, what recourse have they got in reference to that 

building and what’s being planned for that building that they 

apparently constructed on that site? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With the 

response to that specific case again, the convictions has been 

fairly recent in the last couple of months. And there’s a very 

technical and legal process to go through in dealing with assets 

on the property, and we are just in the process getting that 

going. 

 

The individuals were found guilty, but their assets on the lease, 

although the lease is cancelled, the assets may still belong to 

them and we have to sort this out through the process. And we 

will certainly be pleased to keep you informed as to the 

outcome of this. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And perhaps we 

should look at some of the proceeds of the sale and perhaps 

some of the fine income that you will get from the conviction. 

Perhaps we should use those dollars to look at more hirings in 

the North and more training of northern people so people like 

your Norman Fontaines, Brian Morins, Robbie Gardiners, 

Murdock Carriers, William Caisse, and to name a few people in 

my constituency that have a done a tremendous job for your 

department. 

 

And perhaps we should look at involving the communities more 

in co-management and involving the people more, so problems 

like this do not persist. And that just goes to qualify my case to 

you when you talk about having the people out there that are 

occupying this huge land mass to not be cut back but to in fact 

have your positions enhanced and protected out there. 

 

Again, bouncing around a bit here, we have questions in 

reference to the town of Big River, and I’ve got a letter here I 

wish to share with you. You probably have a copy of this. It 

was sent to the Premier, Roy Romanow, on the Big River tree 

nursery. And one of the important things here and one of the 

quotes I want to use is: “We wish to persuade your government 

to keep the tree nursery in operation.” And that was from Ron 

Harnett, who is the mayor of Big River. 

 

And I guess the big question we’re going to ask is, why did you 

close down the tree nursery in Big River? What was the rhyme 

or reason for that decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The answer to 

the member’s question is, first of all, we wanted to have the 

forest industry pick up more of the costs in operating our forest 

industry. And one of these was the forest industry did agree to 

look after seedlings and reforestation, which we’re very pleased 

about. 

 

Unfortunately the Big River operation was a bare-root seedling 

plant which basically meant that the seedlings were out over 

winter and when they were pulled up they were bare roots. Now 

the most popular and most efficient seedlings and best survival 

rate, best quality, are seedlings grown in containers — and 

much easier to handle as well — and the survival rate is much 

better than the old system of digging the seedlings out. 

 

So simply it was a case that Big River did not have the 

technology, did not have the facilities and the forest industry. 

We advertised far and wide for somebody to take this operation 

over; nobody wanted it. And we indicated to the employees at 

Big River a year ago that unless somebody picked it up that it 

would be shut down. And we subsequently are working with the 

community to find out what we can use the facility for and we 

will continue to do this. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that Big 

River would certainly appreciate every effort that is undertaken 

by this government to try and find a similar opportunity, or the 

same opportunity afforded to them for many, many years. You 

know the Big River . . . the community of Big River is basically 

a forest-oriented community. 

 

And just want again quote from an article of March 25, in 

which town councillor and owner of the Big River Hotel, Mr. 

Duane Davidson, and his comment . . . well actually he said 

Monday: 

 

The provincial government is throwing away millions of 

dollars in shutting down the Big River Tree Nursery, 

Davidson said. The provincial government’s prepared to 

bury approximately $1 million in trees but not prepared to 

help the community get jobs. There is a brand-new 

building but they haven’t done anything, said Davidson. 

The facilities are far superior to those in Prince Albert, and 

in addition they have moved the greenhouses to Prince 

Albert that they had here. For 10 years the government 

knew that greenhouses are the way of the future but they 

aren’t prepared to do anything now. 

 

What response have you got to say to Mr. Davidson, sir? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s always nice 

to have coaching. 

 

With response to again, the Big River issue, the one component 

that the Big River nursery was lacking was the greenhouse 

where the seedlings can be kept going indoors and not having to 

worry about late or early frost. So again, the facility simply did 

not have the ability to compete and that’s why nobody picked 

the nursery up. 

 

And also, we do know that we only have the opportunity for 

one real efficient and successful seedling plant in the province, 

and industry has indicated that the Prince Albert site with the   



April 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

greenhouse opportunities is the preferred sight. Now that is if 

we can keep it going even, and we haven’t been able to decide 

that. 

 

So we are doing what we can to produce our own seedlings, but 

equally important, we are working with the community of Big 

River. We’re looking at various options for the site and the 

building at Big River. And this includes everything from a 

bowling alley to a recreational complex for local people at Big 

River. 

 

But we will continue to work with the community to come up 

with the best solution and the best use of the facilities. And at 

the same time, employment opportunities are very high on our 

list as well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again, with all due 

respect, you’re not able to bowl if you can’t work. And the 

industry of Big River is associated directly with the forestry. 

And I’ll quote again from a letter from the mayor again: 

 

It is felt that the Big River nursery would be an excellent 

public investment because of the market for trees for 

reforestation. More jobs could be created by the building of 

greenhouses, monitoring plantation success, and 

researching ways to improve tree quality and disease 

control. 

 

The increased jobs have not only improved Big River’s 

economy, but as some of the workers come from 

surrounding communities their economics would benefit 

also. 

 

I guess my point, Mr. Minister, is that the key thing here is that 

this community is fighting to save these jobs, tree nursery jobs. 

They live again in the fringe of the northern forests. They’ve 

been dealing with this industry for many, many years. It’s going 

to have a severe impact on their local economy. 

 

And they’re again saying . . . time and time again, they’re 

asking the government here to begin to make a commitment. 

They want to sit down and have steady, heavy consultation on 

the issue of their tree nursery. And for us to sit here and say, 

well it’s not an option, technology has improved, they’re doing 

better in Prince Albert — well those aren’t answers people wish 

to hear, simply because they haven’t got the full explanation. 

And I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to look and meet 

with the Big River residents on a continual basis to talk about 

how we can reverse this decision. 

 

If we are very serious about reforestation, moving seedlings that 

are grown in Big River into Prince Albert, and eventually 

getting seedlings that are grown and developed in B.C. (British 

Columbia). It doesn’t make sense to a whole pile of us why 

seedlings in B.C. would grow better in northern forests. Why 

don’t we build our own seedlings? Why don’t we build in 

greenhouses? There’s many, many questions associated with 

this decision, and I urge you to meet with the residents of Big 

River and to discuss this matter with them at great lengths. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, what we 

have done is turned over the reforestation, the seedling 

production, to the industry. Obviously the industry did not see 

fit to continue with the operation at Big River. In fact they have 

chosen to bring their seedlings in from B.C. We are doing what 

we can to try to get seedling production brought back to 

Saskatchewan, but Big River as a nursery is finished. It just is 

not economical to operate. 

 

But we will do as you suggest. We will continue to work with 

the people of Big River to make the best use of the facility and 

assist them in every way we can. And Big River, as you pointed 

out, has always been a timber, a lumber centre, and with the 

Weyerhaeuser sawmill there, we are aware that the number of 

people are employed. And again, the industry I’m sure will 

continue to employ local people, as we do in fire-fighting 

operations. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to thank 

you for your information that you shared with me for the last 30 

minutes. And obviously we’ll be having discussions with these 

matters as we go along. 

 

But in closing I want to assure you that I am fully aware of your 

commitment as minister to protecting the environment. I think 

in this particular issue, Big River needs a lot of leadership. 

 

And the whole issue of forestry in general is that, as much as 

we like to support the industry of forestry, we must ensure that 

the development of forestry is sustainable and that we monitor 

and that we reforestate all the areas that we cut. 

 

And unfortunately the issue of shutting down tree nurseries in 

Big River, not involving co-management boards, making 

decisions to cut back staff in the North — this simply doesn’t 

make sense. It seems like it’s going against the principles that 

we speak about. 

 

And I know that you’re committed to the protection of the 

forestry industry and you’re also committed to the balance of 

enhancing our forests and our wildlife and all the natural 

resources out there. And I appreciate your effort. 

 

However I assure you that we’re all watching and we all wish to 

assist and we all hope that your leadership does come through 

in terms of dealing with some of these issues. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My questions to the 

minister, through you, something that my hon. colleague, my 

esteemed colleague from Athabasca had touched on, Mr. 

Minister, with respect to underground tanks. And I want to 

spend a little time with you on this because I’m sure it must 

distress you, as it does me, every time I drive through 

Qu’Appelle where there once was a small business that served 

gasoline and other condiments to people that wanted to avail 

themselves of that business, it’s now shut down and it’s wasted 

space. It’s unable to be used for any type of business. 

 

Somebody’s gone out of business, a small-business person has 

gone bankrupt because of the environmental processes and 

needs with respect to underground tanks and seepages. And I   



920  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1997 

. . . Don’t misunderstand — I appreciate there is a need to 

protect our environment in that respect and our soils. 

 

When I drive through Balcarres I see another once thriving 

small-business person who supplemented a main livelihood 

with an operation that also looked after some of the needs of the 

local community. That’s no longer in business. It’s shut down 

and weeds are growing up — because of underground tank 

problems. 

 

Springside, another community, and there are probably many, 

many throughout the entire province that are suddenly become 

pieces of wasteland because of this very stringent requirement 

to have underground tanks that are found to be leaking . . . and 

that are there now — there are no more fuel in them; there’s 

nothing more to leak in the soil — but are leaking there and 

nothing can be done with them, with that property, until those 

tanks are uprooted and the ground, I understand, sterilized. 

 

Mr. Minister, is there any process in place to lessen the impact 

or the effects of the need to sterilize or clean up those soils and 

lessen the burden on the very people that can no longer operate 

a small business because of the horrendous costs they’re facing 

associated with cleaning up? In some cases some properties 

which are . . . through no fault of theirs, they find themselves 

trying to carry on a livelihood, but having someone now come 

along and say, well no, there was once an underground tank 

here and we believe it was leaking so you’re responsible for 

cleaning it up, and they can’t. 

 

I was just wondering if there was any reconsideration of the 

very stringent approach taken to cleaning up these messes? Can 

you comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the 

hon. member from Melville for raising this very important 

issue; it is an issue which affects many communities. We all 

know of some communities that have an underground fuel tank 

in-site, and in many cases the owner of this site was looking at 

selling his operation and retire on it. And as the hon. member 

says, the site is basically worthless because the tanks have been 

leaking, the ground is contaminated, a would-be buyer cannot 

get a loan to purchase the property, and very few people would 

want it at any rate. 

 

I guess the oil companies saw this coming and that is why they 

bailed out — sold a number of their service stations a few years 

back — because they knew that these tanks would only last so 

long in the ground before they would leak. 

 

This is an issue which has been discussed in this legislature for 

over 10 years now. And originally it was a sort of a heavy hand 

— if you’re tank’s X number of years old, out it comes at your 

cost. We have made a number of amendments to that to the 

extent now where, if a service station operator will put in a 

monitoring well which costs about $250 per tank, the tank can 

stay there until it leaks. 

 

Now certainly the service station owner does not want to keep 

dumping fuel into a leaking tank; the community doesn’t want 

the tank leaking and contaminating the soil, the water, and so 

on and so forth. 

 

We’ve recognized this and over a year ago, we appointed a 

committee — contaminated site liability committee — to decide 

who should pay to clean up these sites. And there’s a number of 

players involved. And on this committee we have the industry; 

we have local communities; we have interest groups — SARM, 

SUMA; and their report is to be presented to me very soon. It 

was supposed to be prepared a few months ago and they just 

had a real problem in sort of trying to decide who should pay 

because every situation is different. 

 

But we are looking forward to the report being tabled very soon 

and we want to, I guess, get at it, so to speak. You know, should 

it be the previous owner? Should it be the oil company? Should 

it be the government? Should it be the town? Should it be the 

current owner? Who should pay? And there’s, I guess, 

arguments for everybody paying some and so we want to deal 

with that. 

 

And we certainly appreciate the hardship that people are 

experiencing when they bought this property, to find out that 

it’s worthless and that they cannot use it. And we want to try to 

help these people out as quickly as we can. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 889 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 889 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 889 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 889 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 889 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 889 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 890 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 890 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 916 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 New Library Service for Visually Impaired 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

 Curling Rarity 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

 50th Anniversary of Crown Investments Corporation 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

 Weyburn Comprehensive School Girls’ Basketball Team 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

 Darlene Hay, Saskatchewan Landscape Artist 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 892 

 Drake Dinner Theatre 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 892 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 892 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 892 

 Reassessment 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 893 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 894 

 Future of Uranium City 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 894 

  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 894 

 Local Telephone Service Competition 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 

 Ban on Strippers in Bars 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

 Fixed Legislative Session Dates 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 896 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Government Releases Strategy Report on Job Training 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 897 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 898 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 898 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 216  The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 (Sessional Dates) 



 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 899 

 Bill No. 223 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 (Duration of Assembly) 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 899 

 Bill No. 224 — The Legislative Assembly Public Presentations Act 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 899 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 899 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 899 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 900 

 Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 902 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 

 Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 904 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 905 

 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 908 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 908 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 909 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 911 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 911 

 Bill No. 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 911 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 912 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 913 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 913 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Environment and Resource Management Vote 26 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 914 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 914 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 919 

 

 


