



















































Hansard: April 22, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1021 

 April 22, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to present a petition on behalf of citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes, including car thefts, as well as crimes of violence, 

and the charge of attempted murder of a police officer; 

such task force to be comprised of representatives of the 

RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present petitions 

on behalf of the citizens of the great communities of Melville 

and Grayson. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a task force to aid the government in its fight 

against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Regina. 

 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on behalf of 

citizens of Regina to present a petition. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes, including car thefts, as well as crimes of violence, 

and the charge of attempted murder of a police officer; 

such task force to be comprised of representatives of the 

RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

present a petition on behalf of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by citizens of Regina, 

namely from the areas of Grayson Crescent, McTavish Street, 

York Street, Boucher Crescent, Rae Street, Selby Place, Scarth 

Street, and . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member will recognize 

that in presenting petitions he is only to refer to communities. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, this 

petition is presented by citizens of the city of Regina, and all 

across the city, I might add. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise and join 

with my colleagues today in bringing forward petitions on 

behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a   



1022  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

the Balcarres, Lebret area of the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the growing 

problems of youth crime. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those who have signed these petitions are 

from the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 

today to present petitions of concerned citizens throughout the 

province concerned about the escalating wave of property 

crimes. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The petitioners are from the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 

petitions on the issue of young offenders. My petition is signed 

by citizens of the community of Kamsack: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, car thefts, as well as crimes of violence, 

including the charge of attempted murder of a police 

officer; such task force to be comprised of representatives 

of the RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problems of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions to do with the problem of youth crime. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the towns of Kamsack 

and Pelly. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid in the fight against youth crime. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

shall on day no. 36 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Justice: (1) what is the total 

number of charges laid against young offenders for violent 

crimes in 1994; what is the total number of charges laid 

against young offenders for property crimes in 1994; what 

is the total number of charges laid against young offenders 

for all other Criminal Code offences in 1994? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for 1995 and 1996. 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, three guests in the west gallery. Visiting 

Saskatchewan from Alberta is my sister-in-law Marilyn Bradley 

and Phyllis Hohtala from Red Deer. And accompanying them 

today is my husband Gary, from Milestone. 

 

They decided to take a little trip to Saskatchewan from Alberta. 

I think it was to visit our fine legislature, their wonderful 

relatives, and to see the best government in Canada in 

operation. And a little side trip, I guess, the Casino Regina. 

 

Anyways, I’d like all members to join me in a warm welcome 

to my friends, my guests here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce a gentleman in the east gallery. I think I was noting 

one of the pages had a special interest in this gentleman and 

we’d certainly like to welcome him to the Assembly this 

afternoon. His name is John, and I think Claire would like to 

extend a special welcome as well. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Earth Day 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

19th century chief, Seattle, said, and I quote: “We did not 

weave the web of life. We are merely a strand in it. Whatever 

we do to the web, we do to ourselves.” He recognized then what 

has become glaringly obvious today, that when we abuse the 

environment we endanger ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To remind ourselves of the matter of this pressing necessity, 

every year on April 22, 100 countries around the world 

celebrate Earth Day. The purpose of Earth Day is to remind us 

to take positive action to protect the environment and the 

resources on which we all depend. Individuals, schools, 

organizations, and communities are encouraged to take part in 

activities that are friendly to the environment. 

 

The actions we can take are simple and crucial, Mr. Speaker. 

We can, for instance, reduce the amount of waste we produce 

and the amount of resources we consume. We can turn off the 

lights and we can turn down the thermostat — not too far 

though. We can recycle; we can recover; and we can reuse. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, we can take the lead of the 25 

individuals who first met 26 years ago to discuss the precarious 

state of our earth and then to do something about it. I encourage 

all of us to do that today and every other day of our life. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Women of Distinction 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure last evening to attend the YWCA's Women of 

Distinction Awards Dinner in Saskatoon. There were 47 

nominees, which is a record, Mr. Speaker, and there were some 

600 family and friends in attendance, and just a wonderful 

event. 

 

It was exciting for me on a personal basis, if I can be permitted 

to say that my wife Gwen was up for an award in the health and 

education category. And her aboriginal nominator highlighted 

her profound knowledge and understanding of aboriginal 

culture and traditions, and so that was a special highlight for 

her. 

 

But I commend the YWCA for recognizing important 

contributions of women in our communities. I congratulate all 

the winners in today's paper. All the nominees were winners or 

are very special. And I commend all the women for their 

leadership and dedication to strengthening our families, 

communities, province, country, and of course, our global 

community. 

 

And I know all members will want to join me in this special 

tribute. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Right to Information Week 

 

Mr. Hillson: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is Right to 

Information Week and it is an appropriate time for us to 

acknowledge the strides that have been made by all levels of 

government in making government less secretive and more 

accessible to its citizenry. And I think we acknowledge that in 

order for government to be truly of the people and for the 

people, it is necessary that information be readily accessible and 

not hidden from them. 

 

I think that we have made great strides, say, in all levels of 

government in the last two years, but there are some remaining 

issues. While I’m pleased to note that we do in this province 

have an Information and Privacy Commissioner to whom 

appeals can be made — and I congratulate him for his work; I 

think we should acknowledge that — I do think there is one 

problem in that we have not designated an alternate or deputy,   



1024  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

so that when the commissioner is unavailable or out of the 

country, there is no-one to hear information appeals. 

 

I invite and encourage the Minister of Justice to consider 

naming a deputy as privacy commissioners who can act in the 

absence of the commissioner. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Digital Embroidery Business in Weyburn 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, how many people do you know 

who would invest a substantial portion of their savings into a 

new business they have little experience or knowledge of 

operating? My guess would be very few. 

 

However I know of a Weyburn couple who have taken that risk, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m very happy to say that they are once again 

proving that Saskatchewan people are first-rate entrepreneurs. 

 

Abe and Donna Wolvers, owners and operators of DI-GI-DAW 

(Digitizing by Donna and Abe Wolvers) have created a 

successful and a world-renowned business from their home in 

Weyburn. 

 

Embroidery is nothing new to most people. But what made 

DI-GI-DAW special is that it is digital. Mr. Speaker, this means 

the designs created by Donna and Abe can be scanned into a 

computer and saved on diskette. This in turn allows their 

designs to be sent to other companies which can automatically 

use their design or they can design patterns for their own 

machines. 

 

The Wolvers invested approximately $70,000 into their new 

business and they have no regrets. They are successful. They 

are exporting their designs to many parts of the world. They are 

extremely busy and, most importantly for entrepreneurs, they 

are having a lot of fun. 

 

I want to congratulate Donna and Abe on taking the steps to 

establish DI-GI-DAW and the success they have enjoyed since. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Young Women Hockey Players 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, as critic of the Women’s 

Secretariat, I am very much aware of the difficulties women 

face as they continue to strive for equality. Fortunately the 

barriers are merging and women are getting positions in jobs 

and sports that were considered traditionally for men. One such 

sport is hockey. 

 

Kelvington is well-known for having produced such great 

hockey stars as Wendel Clark, Barry Melrose, and Joey Kocur. 

It is also becoming known for the number of female players on 

the boys’ hockey teams. 

 

In the Mallard Hockey League the Kelvington teams had the 

highest number of girls playing hockey in the novice section. 

These girls are not just token players, they are a very valuable 

part of the team and they’re doing their fair share of goal 

scoring. 

 

Kelvington has three girls — Rheanna Len, Crystal Mottram, 

and Lacey Shultz — who have been attending Saskatchewan 

First, an all-girl tournament, as well as playing on home teams. 

 

Crystal and Rheanna’s goals are to make the 1999 

Saskatchewan girls’ team for the Canadian Winter Games, and 

Lacey is aiming for the national women’s team and the 

Olympics. 

 

Another girl who has played all her minor hockey with boys’ 

teams is Nicole Knittig of Annaheim. Nicole currently plays 

with the Naicam Midgets as well as the provincial 

Saskatchewan First female team. 

 

Nicole was part of the Saskatchewan team that won bronze at 

the 1997 Midget Girls’ National Championship at Summerside, 

P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island). At this tournament Nicole was 

presented with the most sportsmanlike player award. 

 

Congratulation to the women hockey players. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ecol Laser Services Provides Environmental Leadership 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to pay 

tribute to a company that is observing Earth Day every day, and 

I’m speaking of Ecol Laser of Saskatoon. 

 

In fact Ecol has received an environmental award from the 

Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council for their environmental 

practice of recycling laser printer cartridges, reducing plastic 

and cardboard materials that would ordinarily wind up in our 

landfills. During the past 12 months Ecol has re-manufactured 

some 8,000 laser printer cartridges — using the plastic several 

times, the cardboard several times over, and saving individual 

businesses some 30 to 70 per cent on the cost of new laser 

printer cartridges. 

 

Ecol Laser is also donating up to $10 a cartridge to City 

Hospital Foundation in Saskatoon for each cartridge that is 

returned to them. On top of all this, as if that wasn’t enough, 

Ecol is sponsoring a community volunteer clean-up, along with 

the Pleasant Hill Community Association in Saskatoon, Loraas 

Disposal, and Saskatoon Funeral Home. 

 

And so we have, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon a company that is 

leading the way in cleaning up our environment and observing 

Earth Day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recognition for Salvation Army 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

privilege a few moments ago, or actually this afternoon, of   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

attending a luncheon in honour of the Salvation Army and their 

work, not only in the province of Saskatchewan but certainly 

around the world. I think, Mr. Speaker, that each and every one 

of us in this Assembly at some time or other have heard about 

or been involved with projects that the Salvation Army has been 

involved in. 

 

We’re aware of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that they have had some 

misfortunes in the last little while as well, the fact that they had 

a fire in one of their clothing depots. And yet the spirit of giving 

in Saskatchewan was certainly shown as people reached out to 

help replace that which was lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there is no question that the objectives 

brought forward by General Booth in his idea of reaching out to 

meet the needs of humanity, not only in the physical but the 

spiritual realm, continue to be evident today and I certainly 

would like to congratulate the Salvation Army for everything 

they do, for not only Saskatchewan residents but people across 

the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Meadow Lake Co-op Has Best Year Ever 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  The cooperative sector is an important part of 

our provincial economy. But their importance is nowhere more 

pronounced than in rural Saskatchewan. Co-op stores and farm 

centres provide our rural residents with services that, in many 

instances, would not be available otherwise. 

 

The Meadow Lake Co-op is no exception, Mr. Speaker. Over 

the years it has provided residents of the area with exceptional 

service. An indication of the co-op’s importance to the 

community is its total sales, and last year it set a new record 

with over 18 million in total sales. Its net savings reached $1.4 

million. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a co-op’s importance to the community it 

serves goes beyond its bottom line. Its importance also rests 

with its commitment to the community. The Meadow Lake 

Co-op has shown its commitment. It has expanded its service 

centre in order to enhance customer service. It employs 87 

individuals and pays $1.7 million in salaries. And more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, the Meadow Lake Co-op paid out 

almost $870,000 in patronage dividends to its members, 

proving that it works for the benefit of those who own it — the 

people. 

 

I want to congratulate the management and staff of the Meadow 

Lake Co-op, with its branches in Goodsoil and Makwa, for the 

dedication they have shown to the community to provide 

quality service. 

 

I would also like to commend the approximately 5,000 

members of the association for their commitment to their co-op. 

Working for its members and enhancing the community — it is 

the cooperative way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Prostitution in Regina 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the city of 

Regina has a new report showing as many as 100 children — 

some as young as eight years old — regularly being preyed on 

for sex. A young 12-year-old girl named Amber is profiled in 

the report. She approached street workers for a condom so she 

could make some money to buy milk and diapers for her 

brother. This is heartbreaking and a sad commentary on the 

state of many children in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina report proposes many of the 

same measures included in my private members’ Bill — a Bill I 

presented more than a month ago. 

 

But time is running out for the growing numbers of children 

experiencing this horrendous nightmare. Will the minister 

finally tell me if he plans to support my measures to combat 

child prostitution Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as we have indicated in the 

House on many occasions, the member opposite and this 

government, I’m sure all members, share a deep concern about 

this issue, and it’s reinforced by the kind of numbers that we see 

in the paper today. I expect that within a matter of two weeks 

that there will be further announcements coming from this 

government that I am sure that that member for one will be very 

supportive of. 

 

Let me respond very specifically to the matter of legislation. 

The professionals who advised me, looking at the limited 

change that the member has suggested to The Child and Family 

Services Act, indicate that the suggestions that she brings 

forward in fact are already contained within the Act. The 

provision is already contained within the Act, the two 

provisions that the member suggests. 

 

I’m not satisfied, Mr. Speaker, that there is not yet room to be 

considering some of the ideas that the member has discussed, 

and I will be reporting further to her and to the House in a 

matter of a couple of weeks. 

 

I do want to say to the member that one of the difficult issues in 

child prostitution is getting successful convictions against those 

johns who are abusing our children in the streets. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that we require some significant change at the 

Criminal Code level to make it easier to get those prosecutions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the point is 

that people are tired of waiting. We have had a chance, many 

chances, to look at the Bill, the existing legislation. And people 

in this province are really getting very tired of asking the 

question of how many empty words and broken promises will 

these children have to hear before this government finally does 

something to help them. 

  



1026  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

The government often accuses us of politicizing the issue, but 

every day that this government waits to take action is one more 

day that they are politicizing the issue. It appears that these 

children are not a priority with this government. If your 

government had the political will to push through the IPSCO 

Bill in one day, where is the political will to support a Bill that 

will help end the nightmare many of these children are living? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member either 

purposely or accidentally fails to recognize the work that is 

happening in this community, in the community of Saskatoon, 

and the communities across our province, Mr. Speaker. In the 

most recent budget the member will know that we allocated 

some new and significant funding to projects that will assist, 

directly assist, children on our streets. Since that budget day to 

this day, there have been a significant number of meetings, 

gatherings, discussions at the community level. When the 

member suggests that something is not happening in the 

province, she is not being true to what is happening in our 

communities. 

 

Now on the specific point of legislation, on the specific point of 

legislation and political will to get legislation accomplished, 

everybody in the country agrees that we should amend the 

Criminal Code, amend the Criminal Code that we can get some 

successful prosecutions on these people who are abusing our 

children on the streets. We have likely, we have likely days left 

in the current parliament. If the political will of the Liberal 

Party was there, those changes would have been made to the 

Criminal Code. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, we have heard time and time again 

where this government constantly talks about what the federal 

government can do. We know very well and so does everyone 

in this province that this government has some responsibility 

and ability to take the legislation that they have and do 

something with it in this very province. It is time that this 

government was made accountable to our very vulnerable 

children. 

 

If the minister will not accept my proposal or won’t accept the 

numerous other proposals that he’s correct in saying 

communities have put forward, I want him to give me a straight 

answer and tell me, why does this government continue to play 

politics with the lives of these children, who are not only being 

exploited by the men who prey on them, but are in essence also 

being neglected by this very government which so far has done 

nothing to end their suffering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, this kind of rhetoric 

belittles the status of that member and her colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me refer very specifically to the legislative 

changes that that member has proposed. She would propose, 

under our Child and Family Services Act, to extend the age of 

protection to 18. That’s proposal number one. Proposal number 

two would make it possible for the minister and Department of 

Social Services to receive gifts to provide for these children. 

 

Both of those opportunities, Mr. Speaker, I repeat, are available 

in the current Act. They are available. If that is the extent, if that 

is the extent of the member’s proposals, we need something 

more than that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural School Closures 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 

rural school has been given its last rites. The Humboldt Rural 

School Division voted yesterday to close the school in 

Englefeld at the end of this current school year to solve a 

quarter of a million dollar deficit problem. Board chairman 

Jordon Bergerman justified the closure by stating, there’s 

nothing wrong with it; it’s a matter of public funding and 

balancing budgets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s something very wrong when a board 

is forced to close a school because the government has failed to 

properly fund education. 

 

Will the Minister of Education explain how her government can 

shrug off a $16 million loss in SaskTel, how they can allow 

their $160 million Liquor and Gaming slush fund to build, and 

how they can continue to support a wasteful Crown tendering 

policy, but they can’t find enough money to fund education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

member wasn’t listening when the Minister of Finance stood up 

in this House on March 20 and delivered her budget. And in 

that budget we approved an additional $8 million in this 

province for K to 12 schools. 

 

Now what the member doesn’t acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, also 

in her riding is the Weekes School. And today they announced 

that the Weekes School was going to stay open. And why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because this government changed the small schools 

factor this year to put an additional $8.3 million into rural 

schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the school of 

Weekes does thank you. But the school at Englefeld, I’m afraid 

the people there have nothing to be thankful for. School 

closures have always been part of history, and they were usually 

based on dwindling enrolments. But the Englefeld School has a 

strong enrolment. They have 90 students in K to 10. 

 

Many of the parents there are employed in light manufacturing 

industries which are increasing the viability of that community. 

One has to question how a community is to hold on to a   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

workforce or to attract new employees when essential services 

such as education and health are being eliminated. We’re not 

talking about eliminating a school, we’re talking about 

eliminating a community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development was 

questioned about this very issue in the House, and he said that 

there must be partnerships where local communities are very, 

very much involved. This government’s new 

made-in-Saskatchewan job training strategy also recognizes the 

need for businesses to work together. 

 

Mr. Minister, if your government is committed to cooperation, 

why are you doing anything but cooperating with the 

community of Englefeld? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know 

that in this province The Education Act is very clear — it has 

been for decades — that school divisions make the decision as 

to whether or not a school continues to exist in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That is not something the Minister of Education 

or the Government of Saskatchewan is involved in. 

 

What I can tell the member is that this government understands 

that it is more costly to provide an education to students living 

in rural Saskatchewan than urban Saskatchewan, and 

consequently we pay about an additional 25 per cent per student 

living outside of the major centres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget we changed the small 

school factor in that we recognized that it costs a great deal of 

money to provide an education for low numbers of students in 

small schools that are some distance from other schools. Mr. 

Speaker, we increased the factor for kindergarten from $440 to 

$1,000 per student. We increased for all other students from 

$800 to $1,000 per student. Mr. Speaker, we put an additional 

$8.3 million into those small, isolated schools, and that’s why 

Weekes is still here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the schools at Englefeld and 

Annaheim have released a joint press release and both of them 

oppose the closure of the Englefeld School. In fact both boards 

are involved in ongoing negotiations to move to the Humboldt 

. . . from Humboldt School Division to the neighbouring Tiger 

Lily School Division, which they believe would prevent the 

closure of the school at Englefeld. 

 

This proposal is supported by Schulte Industries, which is the 

largest area manufacturer. 

 

Madam Minister, you have the final say in allowing local 

school boards to transfer its land and schools to another 

jurisdiction. Will you make a commitment in the House today 

to approve the transfer for these local districts if there is a 

completion of negotiations at the local level? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have in fact 

received petitions from the local boards of trustees in both 

communities asking to have their districts transferred to the 

Tiger Lily School Division. And in light of the decision to keep 

Annaheim open, we will have to know whether or not this 

position is still held by the people in Annaheim. 

 

What I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we’re talking about a 

transfer of huge magnitude — the land transfers are huge — 

and we will need to discuss this obviously with all of the people 

involved, both at the Humboldt School Division level, the 

people in Annaheim, the people in Englefeld. And I can say that 

in the province we have an independent Educational Boundaries 

Commission which could be available to review this case once 

we have all of the information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teachers’ Salary Costs 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is also to the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, 

there’s an old saying that goes: he who pays the piper calls the 

tune. And unfortunately in our education system doesn’t work 

that way, according to the Provincial Auditor. He says school 

boards and local ratepayers are paying the piper but the 

provincial government is calling the tune because the provincial 

government sets teachers’ salaries — the single largest expense 

for school divisions. 

 

In fact in 1996, teachers’ salaries accounted for two-thirds of 

the school divisions’ budgets. Madam Minister, the auditor says 

the current system is inconsistent with the principle that the 

person raising the taxes should answer for how those taxes are 

spent. 

 

Madam Minister, what are you doing to address this 

inconsistency? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, what the department is 

doing is working with the Saskatchewan Association of School 

Business Officials, or SASBO, to update and strengthen our 

budget accounting manual. And I can assure you that we are 

also reviewing the research report, financial reporting by 

Canadian school boards, to see whether or not we can comply 

with the auditor's recommendation. What I can assure the 

House this afternoon is that we will listen very carefully to what 

our Provincial Auditor has to say and we will determine, in due 

course, whether or not we can comply with his request. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You may be 

talking with SASBO, Madam Minister, but SASBO is not the 

decision-making body for the school divisions; they’re the 

employees. 

 

Madam Minister, this problem is only getting worse because of 

your continued cuts to many school divisions. Our caucus has 

learned that the Saskatchewan Valley School Division, north of 

Saskatoon, has had its provincial funding cut by $1.4 million in   



1028  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

one year — $1.4 million. That's a massive blow, Madam 

Minister. And what's worse, this school division only controls 

about $4 million of its own budget. The rest consists of 

teachers' salaries set by your government. So they have to find 

$1.4 million to cut out of their $4 million they control. That's 

over one-third in one year, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you continuing to make massive cuts 

to education while still refusing to give school divisions control 

over their biggest expense — teachers' salaries? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this member must 

not have been here on budget day either. We increased 

educational funding to school boards in the province by some 

$8 million. 

 

Now what this member fails to forget, I gather . . . or does 

forget, is that we're in a year of reassessment, Mr. Speaker. It 

was his previous administration that brought in the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency which called 

for reassessment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our grants to individual school boards are based 

upon, for the most part, reassessment and enrolment numbers. 

In the case of the Sask Valley School Division, which 

encompasses a great deal of the area outside of the city of 

Saskatoon, I can say that their assessment has grown beyond the 

provincial average in the province. 

 

Our grant is based on the principles of equalization — the 

higher your assessment, the lower your grant; the lower your 

assessment, the higher your grant. And I should add, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are many school divisions that were going to 

receive in excess of a 25 per cent reduction because of 

reassessment and this government capped the reduction for the 

next three years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Welfare Fraud 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, 

yesterday's report by the Provincial Auditor revealed that police 

in Saskatoon and Regina have stopped investigating cases of 

welfare fraud. 

 

Mr. Minister, for years we’ve been questioning you about this 

welfare fraud and you have never once identified this problem. 

Last year in estimates on June 17, I specifically asked you if 

police forces investigate cases of welfare fraud, and you said 

yes, there are referrals to the police where charges may be laid 

and prosecutions can happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, that isn’t true. Police in Saskatoon and Regina 

weren’t investigating these cases, and you knew it. Mr. 

Minister, why are we just learning about this now, only after it 

appears in the auditor’s report, and why have you misled the 

Assembly? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I want to provide for the 

member and for all members some information around this 

issue. I would ask the member to note this lest he would want to 

exaggerate this problem. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan on a daily basis we have 

approximately 40,000 cases of social assistance. It’s a little less 

than 40,000 now, but approximately 40,000. In 1995-96 we 

referred for investigation for fraud, 115 cases — 115 cases out 

of an average of 40,000 cases on a daily basis. In the course of a 

year, 60,000 cases will pass through our doors. 

 

Just so the member understands the size of the issue, we’re 

talking here about less than one-half of one per cent of all of 

those receiving social assistance in our province. Now is 

one-half of one per cent tolerable, Mr. Speaker? No, it’s not. 

It’s not, because we take the view that our resources for social 

assistance are limited, are limited resources, and we want those 

resources, every one of them, to go to those in real need. 

 

Therefore we are today working with the city police force in 

Saskatoon and Regina to develop an arrangement where we’re 

sure that those appropriate cases can be investigated and, where 

it’s appropriate, brought to prosecution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, any 

amount of fraud takes away from people who legitimately need 

help. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s clear why you wanted to cover up the fact that 

police were no longer investigating welfare fraud. It’s because 

this is a direct result of the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) 

decision to disband the welfare investigation unit within Social 

Services. Both the Regina and Saskatoon police say that’s 

exactly when the problem started, back in 1992, when the fraud 

investigation unit was eliminated. 

 

We have questioned you about welfare fraud on numerous 

occasions, yet for five years you never said a word about the 

problem. So much for open and accountable government. 

 

Mr. Minister, for five years there has been no real mechanism 

for investigating and prosecuting welfare fraud in Saskatoon 

and Regina because the police can’t do it. Why have you been 

covering this up for five years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m thankful that the 

member raised the issue of the former fraud squad that was put 

in place, as I recall it, by the then minister, the Hon. Grant 

Schmidt, who I recall also sought to be the leader of his 

political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member is recommending that we should 

reintroduce the Schmidt fraud squad, let me tell you how 

effective that was. That fraud squad cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan $600,000 a year to operate — $600,00. The best 

that it ever recovered for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan was   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

$230,000. Now if that’s the recommendation, that we should 

spend the taxpayers’ money, 600,000, to recover 230, I don’t 

think the people want that kind of an arrangement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, further to that . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Now all hon. members 

will recognize the Chair is having difficulty hearing the answer 

being put because of interruptions from both sides of the House. 

Order. Order. And I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the 

minister’s response to be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Now, Mr. Speaker, when we came to 

government in 1991-92, one of the first things we did was to 

unburden the taxpayer of that particular fraud squad. 

 

What have we done, Mr. Speaker? The member fails to mention 

this. In 1992 we put in place 30 verification officers, social 

workers whose task it is to be sure that there is not abuse 

happening in our system. In ’94 and ’95 we made 

inter-provincial links with other provinces in western Canada 

and across Canada. 

 

And last year, Mr. Speaker, we have built a link with the federal 

government through CPP (Canada Pension Plan ) and Revenue 

Canada to ensure, as best we can, that there is not abuse of the 

system. The result, Mr. Speaker, the result is that we now see 

we have approximately one-half of one per cent abuse in our 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Substance Abuse 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while I’d 

like to continue this line of questioning, I do have another 

question I’d like to raise. This one, however, with the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Mr. Minister, at least one store owner in Saskatoon says 

children as young as six or seven are buying and drinking 

breath freshener with a high alcohol content. And I understand 

this store owner has taken the very responsible action of pulling 

the product in question off the shelves. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the problem remains. There are certain 

products that contain alcohol that are available for sale to 

minors. Mr. Minister, what are you and your department doing 

to address this problem? Do you think there should be 

restrictions to prevent minors from buying products containing 

alcohol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, this question relates to some 

of the kinds of products that are sold primarily in corner stores. 

And obviously the identification of this problem was made by, 

as I understand it, one of the owners in the store who saw there 

was an abuse of a product that they were selling. And that’s 

something that I think is a positive thing for a person who owns 

one of these stores to do. And we know that other times that 

products have been identified that way. 

 

I think practically, there are abuses of legitimate products that 

happen and it’s quite difficult to set up laws that are specific on 

these kind of products. So I think what we would do is take the 

information from the store owners, take it from, also from the 

people who are involved in the community who identify these 

things, work together with all of the people and see what kind 

of a solution we can come up with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Information Network 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve raised a 

number of times in this House, concerns about the 

establishment of a Saskatchewan Health Information Network. 

The development of this system will cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan at least $70 million, using the Minister of 

Health’s figures. 

 

The Provincial Auditor has recommended that this government 

approve a long-term plan by preparing an in-depth cost/benefit 

analysis for the project. And given the fact that the health care 

reform of course went sour, as it has, is this fiasco going to 

continue in the same way? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor indicates as well that a study of the 

request of the required investment and benefits was to have 

been completed last month. Can the minister tell us today if the 

report has been completed and will he table it in the House 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member that 

the matter is certainly under consideration by the government, 

and I want to say to the member that I think the Provincial 

Auditor has some very wise advice for the government which 

we should take very seriously. And that is that before 

embarking on such a venture we should ensure that appropriate 

cost/benefit analyses are conducted. Before embarking upon 

such a venture, we should ensure that there are proper controls 

in place. And we’re in complete agreement with what the 

Provincial Auditor has to say on the matter, and I know that the 

member will be very happy to hear that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to hear that 

the government’s attitude toward the Provincial Auditor has 

changed somewhat today and I’m not sure why that is but we 

can only assume. Mr. Speaker, the government has not yet told 

us who will be footing the Bill for this information network. 

Obviously the health districts don’t have funds to spare; the 

chairman of SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations), Mr. Brian Rourke, says his organization and of 

course and its membership, which are the health districts, have 

used up all its reserves. Will the minister make a commitment 

in this House today as well and tell us who is going to foot the 

bill for this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ve already answered the question by 

indicating to the member, Mr. Speaker, that the matter is still 

under consideration, but I think we all know one thing, Mr.   



1030  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

Speaker. I think we all know that one party that won’t be 

footing the bill will be the federal government. 

 

Because as we all know, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are cutting 

money out of health care like crazy. We’ve had to back-fill 

$100 million in the last two years. And that’s why the most 

recent addition of the CMA News, Mr. Speaker, contains the 

headline, “Ottawa fails to protect medicare.” So I know Ottawa 

won’t be paying for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52  The Community Bonds 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I move that Bill No. 52, The 

Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1997 be introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 53, The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 54, The 

Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) be 

now introduced and read for the very first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, 

The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, The 

Trust and Loan Corporations Acts, 1997 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 57, 

The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to table the 

28th annual report for 1996 of the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association, Saskatchewan branch, and also to 

remind all hon. members of the annual meeting being held 

tomorrow evening. 

 

Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 

pursuant to rule 46, I would like to seek leave of the Assembly 

— get unanimous leave and approval of the Assembly — to 

introduce this motion. If I may just read it so that they can make 

the judgement as to whether leave is granted or not: 

 

That this Assembly declare its strong, continuing concern 

about the future of the Moose Jaw airbase; and notes that 

this facility is the only major military base in 

Saskatchewan; and that its loss would make Saskatchewan 

the only province in Canada without a base; and that 

government and opposition members have expressed their 

grave concern about the future of the base to the federal 

government on numerous occasions; and that this 

Assembly calls on the federal government to guarantee the 

future of the Moose Jaw airbase now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Future of Moose Jaw Airbase 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

do not intend to speak very long on this very important issue, 

although one could make a lengthy speech and certainly the 

gravity of the situation would warrant some lengthy speech. But 

I think most people know the importance of CFB (Canadian 

Forces Base) 15 — the Moose Jaw airbase — to the people of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Moose Jaw. Indeed I would say to 

Canada and beyond Canada. 

 

As I see it, Mr. Speaker, I describe it as importance in historic 

terms, importance in economic terms, importance to the 

community, and reflective of community responses to CFB 15. 

And it’s also important in a future sense. 

  



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

Ever since the first declaration of possible intent to close down 

CFB 15 was made — those statements of intent made around 

1994, 1995 — all people in Saskatchewan, regardless of 

political ideology, and most communities, rallied around the 

need to ensure that CFB 15 remained open for some of the 

reasons stated in the motion. But there are many other reasons, 

of course, in support thereof. 

 

There is of course as we would say, as I said at the very 

beginning, the historic reason. We know the importance that 

Moose Jaw has played in the training of military personnel not 

only in Canada but on a worldwide basis. 

 

If I may, to recount one personal anecdote, I remember being on 

an Air Canada flight to Toronto about two years ago at the time 

the issue first erupted in the public side and the captain of the 

Air Canada flight to Toronto invited me to come to the flight 

deck to watch this new airplane take off and the machinery and 

all of the fancy gadgetry on the airplane. 

 

Turns out that the captain — if I recall his name correctly — 

was Captain Ottison, who took his first flight training in Moose 

Jaw during the Second World War as a Dane in agreement with 

respect to Denmark and Canada and the Allied forces in the 

preparation and the training of fighter pilots in defence of 

freedom, in defence of the western democracies, in defence of 

the threat that faced all the world at that time — at the Second 

World War occasion. 

 

And Captain Ottison was describing to me his many wonderful 

experiences; that how he felt the circumstances for training 

were so perfect, not only in terms of the quality of the staff that 

did the training — the lecturers — but the actual flying 

conditions, the weather conditions, the support of the 

community which embraced people from all over the free 

western world to take part in this noble cause. 

 

(1430) 

 

It’s one small little side story — an anecdote perhaps — but I 

think it’s reflective of hundreds of those kinds of stories where 

there have been bondings and friendships and relationships 

formed on a worldwide basis out of CFB Moose Jaw. This is an 

important historic fact which I think warrants consideration, 

does warrant consideration, continued consideration, for the 

continued maintenance of this particular CFB base. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the economic arguments of CFB 15 are 

equally clear. The economic profile has been documented on 

many occasions. I have a little number here in front of me that 

says that the $50 million annual payroll, the $135 million 

annual operating budget clearly is a major expenditure on an 

annual basis — 185, $200 million both for the city of Moose 

Jaw, but for the province of Saskatchewan. A military staff of 

about 1,300 plus 500 civilian employees represents about 13 to 

14 per cent of the working men and women in that city directly. 

A thousand school-age dependants attend school; they represent 

15 per cent of the school population. The estimated direct local 

expenditures by CFB personnel are upwards of 21 million — 

and that’s back in 1991 so one can anticipate that those figures 

are higher. And I could go on with statistics that basically make 

the same point that I hope I have made and should be clear to 

the members here. 

 

This is a very important economic factor to the continued 

viability and health economically of the people of Moose Jaw 

and the people of Saskatchewan, because the tentacles, the 

activities, are spread out in such a far-ranging, wide-ranging 

way in the province of Saskatchewan from CFB 15. 

 

I said a third reason — moving from history and economy — a 

third reason is community. Apart from the dollars and cents, 

what we see here is what Captain Ottison talked about, the 

welcoming and the intermingling in a very positive way of 

people in Moose Jaw. People who have come from all over 

Canada to take their training, and other parts of the world, 

they’ve contributed — the people at CFB 15 — to the life of 

Moose Jaw, elevating it. And vice versa, Moose Jaw has 

contributed to CFB. 

 

One can see that any time that you attend there — and I’ve been 

there on many occasions — that there is a close 

interrelationship. This is surely a value that we want to preserve 

and protect, not only in the Saskatchewan context but, if I may 

say so, in a larger Canadian context as well. 

 

And there’s another dynamic about community which very 

much impressed me when this first announcement took place 

that CFB 15 was under threat of closure, made back in the 

1995-96 period. And that is how the community rallied. 

Whether it was the mayor of Moose Jaw and the councillors; 

whether it was the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly); whether it was the MLAs on the opposition side, 

Liberal and Conservative; whether it was the Members of 

Parliament of all political ideologies, we came together and 

formed a coalition. And in fact the former Liberal leader, the 

member from Greystone, I’m sure will well remember a 

meeting that we had in room 218 here in the legislature, where 

in fact the coalition — if I may use that word — was formed to 

advance in a positive way, in a non-political way, the historic, 

economic, and community impact, positive impact, of CFB 15. 

 

And in the consequence, I myself have written to the Prime 

Minister on two or three occasions, and the Minister of 

Defence, on this issue. We’ve all at the government level 

spoken to the appropriate federal authorities in this regard. 

 

I remind the members of the House that back on February 16, 

1994, this legislature unanimously passed a motion, 

unanimously passed a motion that indicated support for the 

continued existence of No. 15 Wing along the lines of the 

motion which I have, and thanks to the members, with their 

leave, I’ve introduced here today. 

 

So there has been a great deal of activity involving the members 

directly from Moose Jaw and area, the member from Thunder 

Creek, the members from the Legislative Assembly generally 

— this is community action in a positive way to preserve a very 

vital entity for Moose Jaw and for the people of Saskatchewan 

and for Canada. 

 

May I conclude, Mr. Speaker, there is, in my judgement, a   



1032  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

fourth obvious reason why this motion should be supported. 

And that is the future. I’ve talked about the past, I’ve talked 

about the current, the economy, and the community, but I want 

to talk a little bit about the future. 

 

As we all know, what is taking place and has been taking place, 

partly as a result of the coalition’s activities and partly as a 

result of the federal government’s responsiveness to the 

coalition’s activities, to the non-partisan nature of people 

rallying behind CFB 15, we have been exploring the option of 

using Moose Jaw as the base for the training of NATO (North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization) pilots all over the world, NATO 

pilots in Moose Jaw. 

 

I know you, sir, were there, and other members of the Assembly 

were at a special reception where we met the NATO technical 

team from all parts of the NATO grouping of countries, who 

toured the base, who wanted to meet the political leaders, the 

community leaders, individual men and women in Moose Jaw, 

to talk about what NATO would gain if in fact it selected 

Moose Jaw as the site. 

 

I was very impressed again here with the quality of the 

international observers. Their skill and their training in aviation 

was obvious. But more than that, they had a commercial sense, 

they had an international sense of politics. They had a 

knowledge of Canada’s historic role that I talked about, 

referring to the Air Canada pilots and other examples. And I got 

a very good feeling out of it that there was a symmetry, an 

ideological symmetry, a western, free world understanding of 

the importance of CFB Moose Jaw, CFB 15. 

 

Since this time, this initiative has expanded to involve people 

like Bombardier, the Bombardier corporation of Quebec, and a 

variety of other air corporations and the federal government. 

And I'm very, very hopeful that very soon the federal authorities 

will be able to announce that they have been, that we have been 

. . . It's not only theirs, I'm sure that they would be the first to 

admit. Minister Young, Prime Minister Chrétien, would be the 

first to admit that this was a team effort. This was truly a Team 

Saskatchewan, Team Canada effort. 

 

I'm very hopeful and optimistic that we can see out of this very, 

very quickly an announcement that CFB 15 has been selected 

by NATO as the training facility for NATO, which would in 

effect preserve all the things that I've talked about in this motion 

in introducing it — the historic, the economic, the community, 

the cultural, the interrelationship, the future, positive direction 

that we can paint for people of Moose Jaw. And for the 

guarantee of our partners in the free world in NATO and 

elsewhere, our partners, the guarantee that we make to them that 

their people will come out of that base the best trained that they 

can be anywhere in the world at all. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think with those few words — perhaps 

I've spoken a little longer than I’d intended to — with those few 

words I want to underline the importance of this motion, which 

I expect, anticipate, will receive the unanimous support of the 

members of this House, a motion which I would now like to 

introduce, leave having been granted and, may I say, with the 

consent of the official leader of the opposition, the member 

from Canora-Pelly, who has seconded this motion, to move: 

 

That this Assembly declare its strong, continuing concern 

about the future of the Moose Jaw airbase; and notes that 

this facility is the only major military base in 

Saskatchewan, and that its loss would make Saskatchewan 

the only province in Canada without a base; and that 

government and opposition members have expressed their 

grave concern about the future of the base to the federal 

government on numerous occasions; and that this 

Assembly calls on the federal government to guarantee the 

future of the Moose Jaw airbase now. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition to the 

words of the Premier, I'd like to add a couple of things as well. 

It's a position that our party has taken many times in the past 

through our member from Thunder Creek in terms of members' 

statements, in terms of questions during question period, and in 

fact in terms of meetings with federal ministers that have been 

going on in the province of Saskatchewan when those ministers 

have been present. 

 

As the Premier pointed out, I think the greatest concern here is 

the future. We can’t turn back the clock; we can’t look back at 

the past and say how important the base was to Moose Jaw in 

the past. It is the future. And we are very concerned, and the 

people of this province are very concerned, about the fact that 

the success of the base at Moose Jaw must be integral with the 

success of the province of Saskatchewan. And we look forward 

to that. 

 

As the Premier has pointed out, the possibility — the possibility 

of securing the NATO base and having pilots trained means that 

this is a long-term commitment to the province of 

Saskatchewan. We know that a 20-year commitment from the 

federal government will mean $150 billion worth of funding to 

that project, and in fact a further $150 billion from the NATO 

countries must be part of the project to make this viable. 

 

The positive spins to that kind of a project of course are huge. 

There will be jobs; there will be stability. There will be 

long-term viability of not only the city of Moose Jaw but, as the 

Premier has pointed out, we know that there will be students 

who will be in school. We know that there will be jobs, and 

there will be employment, and there will be people that will be 

paying taxes. 

 

The delicate negotiations that are under way right now I think 

must be stressed. These are very important negotiations that are 

taking place right now. And I encourage all political parties and 

all individuals to ensure that our remarks as individuals cannot 

be misconstrued in any way, to in any way damage the 

negotiations that are taking place right now. 

 

We understand and we’re very hopeful that a positive 

announcement will be made soon. And on behalf of the official 

opposition, we are very proud to support that motion. 

  



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the Conservative caucus I’m pleased to rise and include our 

comments in this debate and in this motion. The CFB Moose 

Jaw is a historical airbase, Mr. Speaker. It goes back to the 

Commonwealth air training program which played a very big 

part in training Canadians and indeed members of the 

Commonwealth for air combat in Europe during the Second 

World War. 

 

If you travel around the province of Saskatchewan — indeed all 

the Prairies — you spot old air strips all over the Prairies from 

the Commonwealth air training program. And of all those 

airports, the only one that’s currently active as a military base I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, is the one at Moose Jaw. 

 

There is a lot of long-term benefit for the community of Moose 

Jaw. I have family living there as you know, Mr. Speaker, and 

they make me very aware, when I discuss this situation with 

them, what the benefits of the airbase actually is to the entire 

community of Moose Jaw. It helps to keep that community 

young and vibrant and growing, Mr. Speaker. The loss of this 

airbase would be a tremendous disappointment and a 

tremendous impact on that community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a very major airbase, Mr. Speaker. It’s the only major 

military base in Saskatchewan. We have the militia base at 

Dundurn, but Moose Jaw is the visible evidence that the federal 

government is present in Saskatchewan. 

 

When you look at other provinces, you see very many other 

structures, other institutions that provide a federal presence, Mr. 

Speaker, but in Saskatchewan, the Moose Jaw airbase is 

probably the most visible. We don’t have the GST (goods and 

services tax) centre as P.E.I. does, Mr. Speaker, but we do have 

the Moose Jaw airbase. And it’s important that that base remain 

open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have lost various federal institutions in this 

province over the last few years, such as the Crow rate, but the 

loss of this airbase will have a major psychological impact on 

the province. While it will have a very large economic impact 

on Moose Jaw, it will have a psychological impact on the entire 

province. That’s why it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that this 

airbase be carried on. 

 

My former colleagues and former leaders, Grant Devine and 

Rick Swenson, were very supportive of keeping the airbase in 

Moose Jaw. They spoke out at every opportunity to encourage 

that, to ensure that it remained in place. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

retired Colonel Yogi Huyghebaert, a Snowbird pilot, was our 

past candidate in the Wood River constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

and he is very involved in the project to get the NATO training 

base moved into Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because of all of these reasons, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

benefit to Saskatchewan, we will be supporting this particular 

motion to encourage and keep the Moose Jaw airbase active in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I only 

have but a few words to add to the eloquent words that have 

been put into debate by the Premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, and the member from the third party. And that, I 

think, is to speak on behalf of the local constituencies of Moose 

Jaw most affected of course by any decisions around 15 Wing. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, in one’s life in this legislature, in the 

course of events in public life in the province, it’s rare that we 

encounter an issue which so enjoys the unanimous support of 

all political parties. Since the discussions began back in 1994 

about the future of 15 Wing, it is my observation that in each 

and every one of those discussions, there has been a unanimity 

of public figures in our province. 

 

In the initial discussions with Ottawa, we enjoyed the support of 

our Premier, the support of the then leader of the opposition, the 

member from Saskatoon. And we’ve enjoyed, as the member 

recently pointed out, the support of the third party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is this kind of a common voice from this 

legislature and from this province in support of 15 Wing for all 

of the very good reasons that have been identified by the 

Premier and others that makes this such a significant, such a 

significant motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re . . . as a community of course we 

understand the very significant role that this base plays in the 

life of our community — not only in the economic life of our 

community but very much in the social life of our community. 

And we’ve known over these last number of years a 

strengthening of the ties between the city of Moose Jaw and the 

district around Moose Jaw and 15 Wing, its personnel and its 

civilian force. There has been a real deepening and 

strengthening of the ties between the base and the civilian 

community, and that has enriched both. 

 

And that I believe, Mr. Speaker, is one of those, one of those 

major selling points that we have to offer to those nations who 

would send their young men and young women to Moose Jaw 

for training — that there is that deep link with the community 

of Moose Jaw and with the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 

one of our real strengths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate, on behalf of the citizens 

of Moose Jaw and district, the support of all parties and all 

members in this legislature around this motion. 

 

There is one thing else, Mr. Speaker, that I think we would all 

be very, very grateful to see as a result of this motion, as a 

result of all the work that the federal government is doing and 

others are doing, and that would be to preserve Moose Jaw as 

the home base of the Canadian Snowbirds. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, they just had their initial show, their 

approval show, just days ago. I believe today, Mr. Speaker, they 

are somewhere in California presenting their very first show of 

this season. 

 

  



1034  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

They are international ambassadors for Canada. They’re a 

symbol of this nation, a symbol of our Canadian unity, and we 

would hope equally that the Snowbirds might maintain their 

home base in Moose Jaw and in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate the support of all 

members in this House for this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the Deputy Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move, 

seconded by the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

That the preceding remarks of all parties be forwarded to 

the Hon. Doug Young, Minister of Defence, Mayor Ray 

Boughen of Moose Jaw, and Colonel Jim Hunter, 

Commander of CFB 15 Wing. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Drug Patent Legislation 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  I’m not leaving. I’m not leaving. Mr. Speaker, 

after that very warm applause, I’m happy to make the following 

motion, seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 

 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 

repeal the drug patent legislation, a law which costs the 

province of Saskatchewan $10 million a year in additional 

prescription drug costs and jeopardizes the ability of all 

governments at all levels to institute a pharmacare program 

as recommended in the report of the National Forum on 

Health. 

 

I so move. Give this now? Okay. Speak first? Okay. 

 

That’s an indication, Mr. Speaker, of the motion. I wanted to 

get that on the record initially. And I have no doubt that the sort 

of spirit of cooperation that was evidenced earlier will continue 

as this House unanimously passes this motion which can give a 

strong message to the government in Ottawa about how we feel 

in terms of the drug program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's much one can say with regard to Bill C-92, 

which I'm specifically going to talk about. Obviously I’ll just be 

able to hit a few highlights and my colleague from 

Lloydminster will add a few comments as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important seriously to give a clear 

message from Saskatchewan, from this House, in the few days 

remaining in the — perhaps — the federal parliament that this 

Bill, that this review that was undergone over a year ago come 

to some conclusion in the best interests of Canadian people in 

regard to the accessibility and affordability of drugs in the 

future. 

 

Just a brief review is in order, Mr. Speaker, regarding the whole 

drug patent protection situation. In 1987, Bill C-22 extended 

patent protection of the multinational drug companies. And then 

in 1992, an additional Bill, Bill C-92, passed by the then 

Mulroney government, passed a law giving monopoly patent 

protection for foreign brand name drug companies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is well-known because the debate 

has been raging in Canada. This Bill essentially delays market 

competition by keeping cheaper Canadian generic drugs off the 

market for a period of 20 years. Now patent drug companies, 

Mr. Speaker, are actually wanting to even extend that protection 

for a longer period of time if you can believe that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1992, which is well documented and no one 

in this House will deny, prescription drugs have sky-rocketed in 

Canada. And this has drained money from health care, which is 

in short supply already, and further aggravated by a number of 

federal transfer cuts as they've tried to get their budget under 

control. But, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Could I have leave to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, I thank the members for the leave. 

Mr. Speaker, over at the west gallery we have William Dumais. 

We have councillors from Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation — 

Cornelius Ballantyne and Louis Bear. And also we have Alex 

Morin. I would have all members please welcome them to the 

House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Drug Patent Legislation 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 

join my hon. colleague in welcoming our guests as well. Hope 

you enjoy the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in return for the monopoly protection, as I was 

saying, to the drug companies, the patent, multinational drug 

companies promised that there will be stable prices for new   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

drugs. They promised there would be job growth in the 

industry, and especially in Canada. And they promised that 

there would be additional funding in the areas of research and 

development for drugs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fairly clear what has happened in 

reality, as again is well documented. And that is what many 

people were predicting at the time, Mr. Speaker. That is that 

just the opposite happened in all of those areas. For example, 

what we’ve seen are higher drug prices for new drugs, 

substantially higher prices. We’ve seen major Canadian job 

losses by the patent companies, except we’ve seen some 

additional job creation by the large patent companies in the area 

of marketing the drugs. 

 

So they’re spending about a billion dollars a year marketing the 

drugs, the new drugs, and only about 78 million in research and 

development, which has resulted in job losses in Canada and 

actually expanded plants in the United States. So the jobs have 

really moved to the U.S. (United States). And so the promises 

by the drug companies have had the opposite effect in the last 

five years of our experience. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill to protect the drug patent is more than 

broken promises by the drug companies, but has meant massive 

public subsidies by Canadians to them. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s been a 30 per cent return, research has shown, on new 

drugs — a 30 per cent return on investment. Now the 

manufacturing sector as a whole has about a 10 per cent return 

on investment under the best scenario. 

 

So there’s a 30 per cent return on new drugs in the area of 

health care which has meant, Mr. Speaker, that many people 

cannot afford the drugs. As all hon. members likely know, 3.8 

million Canadian people had access to no drug coverage. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, relative to the other drug . . . or to the other 

health care costs, in the area of drug costs there has been no 

control put on. So the average cost per year of additional drugs 

has been 12 per cent per year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as people know, the Canadian parliament has 

been reviewing this particular Bill and they’ve been doing this 

for the last year or so. And I guess the concern we have — a 

number of concerns, but one is that they’re not reviewing it 

with regards to the impact on health care. The committee on 

competitiveness is reviewing the impact of the Bill from the 

competitive advantage within the drug industry and we think 

that’s the wrong focus. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Canadians need — and I know that all 

members would agree here —that Canadians need affordable, 

accessible drugs. They need safer drugs, safer controls, and in 

many cases more appropriate dosages and so on. And as I say, 

the 3.8 million Canadians with no drug coverage of any kind is 

just not acceptable in a country like Canada. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that Canada is only . . . Canada and 

the United States are the only two countries of the 24 

industrialized countries with no drug program, no national drug 

program, which I find is interesting, the two North American 

countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we need, according to the Canadian health 

coalition of many seniors’ groups and other consumer groups, 

the federal government’s own forum on health care, and of 

course our provincial government led by the minister last week 

who made a presentation in Ottawa, we need a national 

insurance program so that we can be . . . join the industrialized 

world, if you will, where everyone but us and the U.S. has a 

national drug program now. 

 

(1500) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would urge members to support this 

motion. We could fax the unanimous support to Ottawa today to 

urge them to deal with this, to repeal this Bill before the House 

is dissolved for the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the face of massive cuts by the federal 

government to the provinces in health care, it just isn’t 

acceptable that it not do anything about the sky-rocketing drug 

costs which gives provinces and territories less and less money 

to work with. And certainly there are planned cuts in the future 

in health care. 

 

So it’s even more critical that the costs of drugs come under 

some control, especially the way they’re expected and 

anticipated to increase over the next . . . each of the next year to 

the point of settling in at about 14 to $18 million additional 

money to, say the Saskatchewan drug plan. So surely we can do 

something about this in order to have better management of the 

overall health care program, including drugs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just a few stats. Since 1993, just since ’93, 

the last three years, there’s been, in the research area alone, 

2,228 job losses in research and development in the drug 

industry in Canada. Now the U.S. drug imports have gone up 

200 per cent in this same period. Again, testimony that the jobs 

are being created there and more drugs are being imported in 

from the United States. 

 

Drug costs are up anywhere from . . . some drugs, 28 per cent to 

some drugs have gone up 100 per cent in the last three or four 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the patent protection drug costs are, on the 

average, 50 to 70 per cent higher than their generic counterpart. 

Case in point, Prozac. Recently we saw a decrease of 70 per 

cent — 70 per cent decrease in Prozac when the generic 

equivalent came on the market. That’s a 70 per cent decrease in 

the cost. Imagine what you can do with that kind of additional 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Health Coalition — just a couple 

more indications of data to give the flavour — they indicate that 

of all the new drugs released from 1991 to 1995, 92 per cent of 

them did not improve the therapy that they were prescribed for; 

92 per cent of them, which even questions the effectiveness of 

the drug research and the development of new drugs. In 

addition, as they say, they highlight that the percentage of the 

health care budget spent on drugs is the only   



1036  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

area of spending that is out of control. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the indicators and there 

are many more. These costs — these additional costs, Mr. 

Speaker — will be borne by citizens, employee insurance 

programs, by provincial drug programs. Only three provinces 

have a provincial drug program. We’re thankfully one of those. 

But that program’s capacity to respond and meet the needs is 

limited as the prices sky-rocket. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if maintaining the health care system is a priority 

by the federal Liberal government, and there are some people 

who are questioning that it is their priority — I’m not saying 

that — but if it is their priority, then they’ve got to do 

something about controlling drug prices because they’re the 

only body that can do this. And I think Canadians are expecting 

that they will deal with this. 

 

Now the generic companies, contrasted to the patent, large drug 

companies, have actually increased the Canadian jobs. The 

generic companies have actually increased the Canadian jobs by 

140 per cent since 1990. In research and development they 

return a higher rate of investment back into research and 

development than do the patent drug companies. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the generic companies — unlike the patent, 

multinational companies — also are very involved in 

developing prevention programs, education programs in the 

proper use of drugs, in safer dosages, and in terms of better 

communication with pharmacists and physicians and so on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I like the national strategy for drugs as promoted 

by the Canadian Health Coalition — a five point plan. I’ll just 

briefly highlight their view which I agree with. One, establish a 

national, universal drug insurance plan in Canada. Secondly, 

ensure that generic drugs reach the market quickly by allowing 

for compulsory licences after four years of exclusive patent 

protection. Number three, commit sufficient public resources to 

monitor quality and effectiveness of private research. And 

number four, make the drug approval process safe and publicly 

accountable, which it isn’t now. And number five, control 

prices for all medicines including generic drugs; make drug 

prices reflect the true cost of research and development. 

 

Prices should not be based on what drug companies think the 

market will bear but what is reasonable and affordable to 

Canadian people to ensure that there’s a good level of health 

care. Mr. Speaker, I concur with that five-point strategy. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, if the federal government does not want to 

listen to the Canadian health care coalition, they could listen to 

their own health care forum chaired by the Minister of Health, 

and the Prime Minister, because basically their observations and 

recommendations are the same. And I think most Canadians 

agree that the health forum approach and recommendations are 

looking for a balanced and comprehensive, affordable program. 

 

Now there’s many more things I could say, Mr. Speaker, but 

my time is almost up. As I say, I urge unanimous support of this 

motion, and let’s make a difference from Saskatchewan in 

the past . . . or in the future like we have in the past. And I 

would just like to close by reading the motion, seconded by the 

member from Lloydminster, my colleague: 

 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 

repeal the drug patent legislation, a law which costs the 

province of Saskatchewan $10 million a year in added 

prescription drug costs and jeopardizes the ability of 

governments at all levels to institute a pharmacare program 

as recommended in the report of the National Forum on 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members and I feel confident that all 

members will support this motion and we can fax it to Ottawa 

today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be supporting 

this motion because since 1993 I have actually been appalled 

that the Government of Canada would pass a Bill like C-91. 

When I think of all of the people that depend on medication in 

my constituency and in this province, I cannot believe that they 

are giving in to multinational pharmaceutical firms instead of 

the health of the nation. 

 

From 1969 to 1993 Canadians enjoyed the benefits of a system 

known as the compulsory licensing. Under that system, Mr. 

Speaker, Canadian-owned generic drug companies could 

produce more affordable generic drugs. 

 

But what happened? Two Bills were introduced by the former 

Conservative government of Brian Mulroney: C-22, and in 

1993, C-91 extended patent protection for these drug 

companies. 

 

And what this means, Mr. Speaker, is that people often cannot 

afford the drug prices. We in Saskatchewan have had a plan, 

and post-deficit, post-deficit we would like to go into a plan 

again, but not with the cost of drugs as they are today because 

of this Bill C-92. The Tories and now the Liberals claim that 

this legislation was necessary in order to stimulate the 

pharmaceutical research and development in Canada. That’s not 

true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll tell you what has aided pharmaceutical research and 

development in Canada. What has aided that has been a 

generous tax break for pharmaceutical companies. In fact what 

has happened is not only have we passed this Bill to favour the 

drug companies, to give them 20 years where they can make 

more money, now the generic drug companies that used to do a 

lot of research and development aren’t able to do that research 

and development any more because they aren’t able to stay in 

business and compete. So that isn’t a valid argument at all. 

 

And it costs our government, all Canadian governments across 

Canada, millions of dollars in extra health care costs each and 

every year. And the Minister of Health was just to Ottawa, and 

in his recent presentation to the House of Commons Industry 

Committee reviewing Bill C-91, the Minister of Health from 

Saskatchewan estimated very conservatively that the cost to   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

consumers of our drug plan in 1996 was $3 million more 

because of this Bill. It went on to point out that this does not 

include the cost of prescription drugs in hospitals, which we 

have to pay. 

 

This rise in costs has led many provincial governments, 

including ours, to restrict the drugs covered under their 

formulary. Now that is the thing. Because of the cost of drugs, 

not as many drugs can be covered, Mr. Speaker, which is the 

list . . . the list of drugs that the plan pays for has been 

shortened. 

 

Former Tory Health minister Benoît Bouchard admitted himself 

that the legislation would mean a $30 million increase for all 

the provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, like I said before, our province has been providing 

some form of pharmacare for over 20 years. And again as we 

move to the post-deficit era, we’d like to expand it but the rising 

cost of drugs is preventing us from doing so. 

 

The recent report on the National Forum on Health, co-chaired 

by the Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, and Health minister 

David Dingwall, supported the creation of a national 

pharmacare plan. The Liberals are paying lip-service to this 

proposal in the period prior to the election. And that’s what 

irritates me. 

 

Did they take this review to a health committee? No. They took 

it to a committee that is concerned with industry. So that tells 

me that the committee reviewing the legislation is the House of 

Commons Committee on Industry, and not the Committee of 

Health. And this tells me that it seems to suggest that the 

Liberals consider Bill C-91 a competitiveness issue, not a health 

care issue. 

 

This is not how New Democrats see the issue. As our Minister 

of Health said when he was in Ottawa, your interest may be in 

the health of the pharmaceutical industry; my interest is in the 

health of individuals and the effect this legislation has on the 

overall population health. 

 

This is just another example of the way Liberals operate. They 

speak one way and then they act another way. When they are in 

opposition they speak like us; when they are in government, 

they govern like Tories. And that is dishonest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill C-91 should be rescinded. It should be repealed. And I 

don’t have any faith that the present federal Liberal government 

is going to do that. 

 

So I just want to end my remarks by saying there are so many 

people in my constituency that could benefit with a pharmacare 

plan. And it is my hope and dream before I finish my duty in 

this House to see the drug plan implemented and the children’s 

dental plan implemented. 

 

Now it’s easy for the opposition to keep saying to us, well you 

blame the federal government. We do not have the ability to tax 

like the federal government. The opposition full well knows 

that we rely on a lot of transfer payments from the federal 

government. And we as a provincial government are the second 

level of government. 

 

They full well know that we rely on the federal government to 

pass laws to help in national programs. And we cannot do it 

alone. And C-91 should be repealed, and to give us the 

assistance that we need to bring in a pharmacare program. 

 

And that is my remarks. I will be supporting the hon. member 

from Saskatoon Eastview and I wish that the opposition 

members do so too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure to join in this debate today. One of the problems I have 

with the motion presented today is the fact that it is pretty much 

open-ended. And I would wonder how much forethought has 

gone into this motion, Mr. Speaker, in saying let’s repeal the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, period. No if’s, and’s, or but’s whether 

we should shorten the length of protection or not. 

 

And that lends itself of course to the credibility of the 

government and the members opposite. Of course the mover of 

the motion, the member from Saskatoon Eastview, does have a 

lot of credibility in that regard and because of that I’m happy to 

speak to this motion. 

 

(1515) 

 

The reason that the members opposite do lack in a lot of 

credibility is because of what they started back in 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, and that of course was health reform and the wellness 

model itself. Nothing the matter with health reform. We all 

know that we had to do that in whatever sector there is. But the 

wellness model was flawed, is flawed, and will always be 

flawed in this format. And that is the reason why this 

government has a lack of credibility in bringing forward a 

motion such as this. 

 

When the government . . . if I could, Mr. Speaker, for a minute 

talk about the wellness model as it relates to the drug plan, both 

provincially and nationally — is that one of the major problems 

with the wellness model, Mr. Speaker, and to the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview, is that there were no yardsticks set up. The 

government of the day did not know where they were headed, 

they had no plan, and to this day there are no yardsticks to see if 

they have gained indeed or if they have not. 

 

And that is why I question the credibility of such a motion, Mr. 

Speaker. The associate Health minister of the day I believe, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I believe that he was the 

one that started this plan of a repealing of this legislation. And 

of course because the associate minister, Health minister of the 

day was part of the wellness model in initiating it, I think it 

takes away some of the credibility of him as well in regards of 

this type of a motion regarding health and drugs in the province. 

 

Now of course I would certainly support anything that will help 

the people of Canada and certainly the people of Saskatchewan   



1038  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

in being able to obtain drugs at a reasonable price to meet their 

needs, their illness needs. That goes without saying, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m sure every member in this House would agree 

with that. 

 

The problem with this, as I noted earlier with this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that I think it is short-sighted in that it’s just 

to repeal the legislation and there it ends. And that’s where we 

have a problem. 

 

One of the major thrusts of this government’s wellness model, 

Mr. Speaker, was to balance their budget, to balance the books 

— a noble feat. But when it’s done on the backs of the sick and 

the elderly, Mr. Speaker, it’s very inappropriate. 

 

If I could go back, Mr. Speaker . . . And I heard the members 

opposite, both the mover and the seconder, the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview and the member from Lloydminster, talk 

about wanting people to have access to drugs at an affordable 

price. I just want to go back and just if I could, Mr. Speaker, 

give a little history on the Saskatchewan drug plan itself. 

 

Of course back in 1991, Mr. Speaker, the deductible was $125 

for each family unit. The deductible was $50 for single seniors 

and $75 for senior families. Certain consumers with high drug 

costs were granted certain privileges to purchase prescriptions 

with upfront payment of 25 per cent of total prescription costs 

with a waiver of the deductible. 

 

Now in 1992 — of course it was the fall of 1991, Mr. Speaker, 

when this government came into power — in 1992 the NDP 

altered the plan. Beneficiaries now paid the full cost of drugs up 

front and submitted claims to the prescription drug plan to 

receive a 65 per cent rebate on all costs in excess of the 

deductible. 

 

The deductible became a semi-annual charge of $190 and then a 

35 per cent co-payment to a maximum of 375; then a 10 per 

cent co-payment. Seniors’ deductible remained at the former 

levels but became semi-annual with a co-payment of 35 per cent 

on the first 375 and then a 10 per cent co-payment — a fairly 

complex plan. 

 

Now in 1993, this is when this government did its best work. 

This is when they really took a shot at the sick and the seniors, 

the founders of this province, with the drug plan, Mr. Speaker. 

The deductible for most families rose to a semi-annual payment 

of 850 bucks. Now that’s well over $1,500, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A special program was brought in to aid low income families, 

which is wonderful. And we have lots of low income families in 

this province — families eligible for special support whereby a 

subsidy is determined on the basis of family income and the 

co-payment based on that subsidy level. Seniors receiving the 

Saskatchewan income supplement or the federal guaranteed 

income supplement and residing in a nursing home have a 

semi-annual deductible of $100 and a co-payment of 35 per 

cent. Other seniors on GIS (guaranteed income supplement) 

have a $200 semi-annual deductible and a 35 per cent 

co-payment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you talk about those numbers and say 

them fast, it doesn’t maybe mean a lot to a lot of the members 

opposite. But 17 or $1,800 deductible for people that are on 

fixed incomes or low incomes that can’t afford it, it’s a major 

feat for them to receive the necessary drugs that they need. 

 

I talked to many people, Mr. Speaker, certainly in my 

constituency, from right across the province, who tell me that 

there is a problem with them obtaining the necessary drugs. 

Now you could talk to many druggists around the province as 

well who will substantiate that very notion, that many of our 

people, especially our seniors that are sick and need drugs, are 

having problems obtaining the necessary medication that they 

need. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems may be that these 

people aren’t using the total amount of drugs that are prescribed 

by their physician, whether it’s family or whoever. But the 

point is, Mr. Speaker, that they’re still doing without them, 

whether they cannot actually afford to go and buy the 

prescription, fill the whole prescription. When they get home, 

maybe they’re short on a prescription and take it in a much 

smaller dose than they originally were told to do so by their 

physician. 

 

The problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that not only are the 

drugs not working as they should for these people, it provides a 

continued burden on the health system. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

these people do not get over the illness. They have to go back 

and eventually they end up in some sort of an institution in this 

province where there is a bed available to get treatment because 

the drugs haven’t cured the illness that they were treated for. 

 

Now the reason that the Saskatchewan drug plan has a lot to do 

with this motion, Mr. Speaker, is the fact of credibility once 

again. I go back, as I talked earlier. You’ve got a government 

across the way talking about the national drug plan, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this is no laughing matter; this is 

serious. And the members opposite may think it’s humorous, 

but it’s a dead serious problem that we have here. And it’s one 

of credibility across the floor, Mr. Speaker — that these very 

members across the floor, this very government, talk about a 

national drug plan. They condemn the federal government for 

what they’re doing. They take a short-sighted approach to a 

national drug plan, to the pharmaceutical companies. 

 

And don’t get me wrong, Mr. Speaker, I’m not standing here 

protecting large, multinational pharmaceutical companies 

because of who they are. I want to ensure that the people of 

Canada, the people of this province, have the necessary drugs to 

do the job. 

 

We continually hear about immunity to antibiotics, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s occurring in humans. It’s occurring in the 

animal sector. In agriculture we have the same problem there, 

where animals are building up immunity to certain drugs. And 

certainly we can extend that in the field of agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker, to plants, where we’ve seen immunity to chemicals to 

treat certain plants. 

 

So the thing we need to ensure, Mr. Speaker, is that if, if we do   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

take back and shorten the protection, Mr. Speaker, that the 

research will still be done. And as we move . . . I heard the 

Premier talking earlier about the future. We have to look into 

the future and say well, what will happen in five years if we 

don’t have these companies that are providing the protection 

and producing these new drugs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you see the problem with the member’s 

opposite motion is that there is a lack of credibility there 

because of the whole health reform process in Saskatchewan, 

and I would like to take them to task on that today. 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak on behalf of the 

motion by my colleague, the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. My remarks in the time I’m permitted this afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker, will first entail a bit of a background which I hope 

to be a little more non-partisan than the remarks of my 

colleague, the member from Arm River. 

 

I’ll also refer, Mr. Speaker, to a couple of reports done by 

third-party interested parties. One is a report done by Price 

Waterhouse, Mr. Speaker, entitled “The Bill C-91 Review: 

What are the Consumer Issues?” And also, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

refer a little bit to a study done by the Canada Health Coalition, 

entitled A Prescription for Plunder — “Ending the monopoly 

for multinational drug companies is necessary to control drug 

costs and protect Canada’s health care system.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all for a little bit of background on this 

C-91 debate and process that’s going on. Recently the House of 

Commons standing committee has been hearing presentations 

from witnesses on the subject of Bill C-91. The federal Liberal 

government has claimed to oppose this legislation, opposed this 

in opposition, now declare that they are prepared to accept only 

minor changes to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

New Democrats stated, Mr. Speaker, in 1993, that this 

legislation would be damaging to our health care system and 

subsequent events have proven us right, Mr. Speaker. If we 

cannot persuade the Ottawa Liberals to scrap this legislation or 

at least to make some drastic changes, Saskatchewan and other 

provinces will never be able to afford the cost of a national 

pharmacare program as recommended, Mr. Speaker, by the 

National Forum on Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 1969 until 1993, Canadians enjoyed the 

benefits of a system known as compulsory licensing. Under this 

system, Canadian-owned generic drug manufacturers could 

produce cheaper copies of prescription medicines developed by 

foreign-owned pharmaceutical multinationals and compensate 

the original manufacturer by paying them royalties. 

 

Bill C-22, introduced in 1987, Mr. Speaker, instituted a form of 

patent protection for drug manufacturers. Bill C-91, passed in 

1993, extended the period of patent protection to 20 years and 

applied this retroactively to 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These changes have resulted in higher prescription drug prices 

for provincial drug plans, for hospitals, and for individual 

Canadian consumers. The Saskatchewan Health minister 

recently estimated that the Bill cost Saskatchewan people $3 

million in 1996, Mr. Speaker. This is forecast to rise sharply in 

the years ahead. And a recent study by the Queen’s University 

suggests that the annual cost to Saskatchewan could end up 

being in the 13 to $18 million range, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1992 our former minister of Health, the current Minister of 

Social Services, went to Ottawa and suggested if Ottawa were 

determined to pursue this course it should be willing to 

compensate provincial health plans. Instead Ottawa 

Conservatives, and now Ottawa Liberals, proceeded with 

drastic cuts, Mr. Speaker, to federal funding in all areas of 

health. 

 

Federal Conservatives and Liberals have suggested that 

Canadians are benefiting from an increased number of 

pharmaceutical research and development jobs. This claim 

ignores the fact that Canada has some of the most generous tax 

breaks in the world for research and development jobs, and any 

new jobs can probably be attributed to not just the patent 

protection. 

 

Bill C-91, Mr. Speaker, also dealt our generic drug industry, 

which was a major employer in this country, a serious blow. 

Immediately after the Bill received Royal Assent, one generic 

manufacturer put plans for an expansion of their plant in 

Winnipeg, Manitoba on hold. 

 

If Ottawa Liberals aren’t prepared to scrap the legislation, they 

should at least find ways of coping with some of the more 

damaging aspects of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our Health minister recently called for an end to the practice 

wherein a slight modification to an original product can give a 

drug company the ability to extend the original patent. He also 

called, Mr. Speaker, for an end to the regulations that put 

roadblocks in the way of generic manufacturers seeking to enter 

the market, even after the 20-year patent has expired. These are 

sensible suggestions, Mr. Speaker, and Ottawa Liberals should 

listen. 

 

Our Minister of Health also, as recently as a week ago when 

speaking to the federal committee reviewing this, suggested that 

the interest in the health . . . that Ottawa is more interested in 

the health of the pharmaceutical industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those have been some actions done by our 

government and our Minister of Health. But, Mr. Speaker, let 

me also talk about some recent reports — and I’ll refer to one 

done by the management consultants firm of Price Waterhouse, 

prepared in September of last year. 

 

This report was entitled, Mr. Speaker, “The Bill C-91 Review: 

What are the Consumer Issues?” And I’d like to quote a little 

bit at length from the introduction of this report, Mr. Speaker, 

because I think it brings a good, third-party, objective view to 

the debate we’re talking about here this afternoon. 

 

(1530) 

 

I quote from the introduction of this report by Price   



1040  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

Waterhouse, and where they say: 

 

Everyday, the media provides us with new evidence of 

Canada’s health care crisis. Hospitals are closing, private 

clinics are springing up, seniors are being asked to pay user 

fees for medication they need, doctors are threatening to 

strike, the provinces are reducing services — the list of 

symptoms is almost endless. According to the people 

responsible for closing hospitals and introducing user fees, 

health care costs are out of control and there simply is not 

enough money available to maintain the existing level of 

service. 

 

I continue in this quote from the introduction to the Price 

Waterhouse report: 

 

What does any of this have to do with Bill C-91? 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

Until Bill C-91 was passed by the Conservative 

government in 1993, generic drug companies were able to 

use compulsory licences to manufacture . . . products while 

they were still under patent. In return, these generic 

companies paid a royalty to compensate the patent holder. 

Since generic drugs are priced significantly less than 

comparable brand name drugs, compulsory licensing saved 

consumers and taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars 

annually. In terms of health care expenditures, (Mr. 

Speaker, the report goes on to say) drugs were a big ticket 

item. In 1994, drugs accounted for 12.7 per cent, or 

roughly $9 billion, out of Canada’s $72.5 billion (in 

annual) health care expenditures. Drugs (also) represent the 

fastest growing category in health care expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Price Waterhouse goes on to say that: 

 

By eliminating compulsory licensing and delaying the 

introduction of generic drugs, Bill C-91 will cost 

Canadians billions of dollars over the next fifteen years. 

(This, Mr. Speaker) At a time when health care services are 

being cut back, why would the federal government pass 

legislation that increased health care costs by millions of 

dollars? 

 

Why would Ottawa do this? Very good question, I think, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this report goes on to 

say, and I quote: 

 

Since the damage has already been done, the answer 

doesn't really matter. The more important question is what 

can public interest groups do about (this)? 

 

There is a committee that's going on and has been getting a lot 

of input from various groups, not just provincial governments 

like our own, but a variety of interest groups interested in this 

very vital matter. 

 

The review of Bill C-91 amendments will give advocacy 

organizations with an interest in health care, the opportunity to 

express their concerns and the impact of this legislation on our 

health care industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I maybe just would also like to quote a very short 

conclusion on the Price Waterhouse report in talking about this, 

where they say, and I quote again: 

 

Advocacy groups strenuously opposed to Bill C-22 and 

Bill C-91 (have every right to take the government to task) 

. . . In hindsight, many of the arguments raised by the 

Consumers' Association of Canada, the Manitoba Society 

for Seniors, the Fédération nationale des associations de 

consommateurs du Québec, the National Anti-Poverty 

Organization, One Voice . . . 

 

and other organizations have played an important role in trying 

to identify the problems of the legislation to the costs of our 

health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my time is almost . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member's time has expired 

and debate will continue. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased to 

enter this debate today because I think we have to inject just a 

little bit of reality into this discussion. And I soundly concur 

with my hon. colleague from Arm River that there was not too 

much thought gone into the presentation of this motion. 

 

Matter of fact, one might even consider it somewhat frivolous. 

However, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the reasons that the 

members opposite would want to debate this issue. After all, we 

have a general election on the horizon and the federal NDP 

have staked out drug cut legislation as one of their issues. 

 

It's ironic, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that refuses to 

debate its handling of young offenders because they say it's a 

federal responsibility and not in the purview of this House — 

which of course is untrue. Yet they are willing to debate in this 

House this federal statute which it has no jurisdiction over. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it just shows the hypocrisy of this 

government and that party. However we're getting quite used to 

that from those members. They won't debate any issue they 

have some clear control over; but they will debate C-91 only 

because they feel it will benefit their federal counterparts. 

 

I understand a similar resolution was debated in the B.C. 

(British Columbia) legislature with the same purpose in mind 

— to help Alexa McDonough. And admittedly, Mr. Speaker, 

what’s left of the NDP federally does need a lot of help. 

Whether that’s the purpose of this legislature, I’m not sure. At 

any rate, I’m pleased to have the opportunity to inject a little bit 

of realism into this debate. 

 

After listening to the members opposite, it’s quite obvious their 

federal party hasn’t changed much since being decimated in 

1993. They still view anyone in business as the enemy of the 

people, not just our major, brand-name drug companies. At the 

very root of the NDP remains the very real notion that if you’re 

in business you must be out to hurt people. Canadian   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

corporations remain the NDP’s bogeyman to throw in front of 

the voters at election time. 

 

And we’ve seen how well that strategy has worked federally — 

never in power, never will be in power, and not even an official 

party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal NDP leader has decided to use Bill 

C-91 as a plank in her campaign platform. She says if she were 

prime minister, she would immediately repeal it and severely 

limit the patent protection for the brand-name pharmaceutical 

companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  And it’s very easy, Mr. Speaker, it’s very easy 

for Alexa McDonough to say that because she knows she’ll 

never be prime minister and does not have to face up to reality. 

In fact she says so. According to the newspaper the day after the 

federal convention, Ms. McDonough had already conceded 

defeat. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Now all hon. 

members here will want to provide the opportunity to the hon. 

member from Melville to have his remarks heard. The Chair 

appreciates the enthusiasm of the hon. members and reminds 

them that there will be opportunity for comments and questions 

later if you can’t get into debate. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re doing that 

because they know they’ll just cut into my time about some real 

sound, solid comments that I have to make here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Here we are just perhaps a few days from an 

election call and the NDP have already conceded defeat. What 

an inspiration, Mr. Speaker. So I think the people watching 

should take the NDP’s promise to scrap C-91 just for what it is 

— a promise made by a party which admits it has no hope of 

forming government now or ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would have us believe that 

if the 20-year drug patent legislation were repealed, everything 

would be just perfect when it comes to drugs, and in particular, 

drug costs. The NDP would have us believe that a 20-year 

patent is somehow out of line. 

 

But reality just doesn’t bear this out. In fact most countries in 

the world have 20-year protection for brand-name drugs. In fact 

most intellectual property has 20-year patent protection. That’s 

how business is done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If a company is willing to put up their money for research and 

develop — tens of hundreds of millions of dollars in the case of 

patent drugs — you’ve got to offer them sufficient protection. 

And unless the NDP (New Democratic Party) is willing to have 

the government itself put up all the cash, do all the research, do 

all the development, to take all the risks, it’s got to allow the 

drug companies to have a reasonable patent protection. And 

moving to a 20-year protection from 17 years brought Canada 

into line with most of the world. 

 

But maybe the NDP does advocate that the government develop 

all the new drugs. That’s about as realistic as anything else the 

federal NDP advocates these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in debating the 20-year patent protection, I guess 

the first question for the members opposite is, if 20 years is too 

long, what is the proper length of time? If the fact that most 

intellectual property has a 20-year patent, isn’t that good 

enough? Tell me why not. If the fact the rest of the world 

extends a 20-year patent protection to drug companies, tell me 

why Canada should be different? Canada is no more an island 

unto itself in the world than Saskatchewan is an island unto 

itself in Canada. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again we are talking about reality here, not 

something the federal NDP will have to deal with. That’s a 

luxury that party has. It’s not a luxury everyone enjoys, 

however. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I get back to the question of what the drug 

patent legislation should be. What period would make 

prescription drugs suddenly so affordable that a national drug 

program could be implemented immediately and everyone’s 

drug costs for everything would be covered by the government. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, such a program with provincial participation 

is a laudable goal, and I’m sure if it becomes possible for 

governments to pursue such a program, either in the near future 

or further down the line, the federal government will do so. But 

I hardly think the 20-year patent law is the only thing that’s 

stopping such a program from being implemented now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that this government opposite is 

now trying to paint itself as the champions of a drug plan when 

it was the government that completely gutted our own drug plan 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Look at the history of this government. In 1991 when the NDP 

came to power, the deductible for the drug plan was $125. 

That’s the deductible that party decried when it was 

implemented by the Conservatives. 

 

In ’92, this NDP government opposite slashed away at 

Saskatchewan’s drug program, raising the deductible to a 

semi-annual payment of $190 with a co-payment of 35 per cent. 

The next year they took their axe to the program again, this time 

completely gutting it. Deductibles rose to $850 for most 

families, with a further payment of 35 per cent of the costs. So 

much for a commitment to affordable drugs, Mr. Speaker. And 

all this came before the passage of the 20-year drug patent 

protection. 

 

The members opposite will have us believe that removing 

patent protection from drug companies will drop the cost of 

drugs right now. But I don’t hear them talking about what it 

would do to the drug manufacturing industry in Canada. They 

stand there and say that these companies which risk hundreds of 

millions of dollars of developing these drugs should have no   



1042  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

protection. What they’re arguing, Mr. Speaker, is that our 

country shouldn’t have a drug manufacturing industry. And 

let’s face it, the pharmaceutical industry has benefited from the 

20-year patent. There’s no question about that. 

 

But as these companies have benefited, so has research and 

development of new drugs right here in Canada. With the 

passage of C-91 the pharmaceutical companies promised to 

devote 10 per cent of sales to research and development by 

1996. That was actually achieved in 1993. And this year, twelve 

and a half per cent of sales will be devoted to research and 

development. That means new and better drugs, Mr. Speaker. 

And almost as important, it means more jobs in the 

pharmaceutical industry. 

 

The members opposite don’t seem to be interested in these jobs, 

Mr. Speaker. Again, it shows the hypocrisy of that party. Their 

leader has also tabbed jobs as one of the priorities of a mythical 

NDP government, as they should — as any party should. Here 

we have a high-quality, high-paying jobs, and the NDP says 

they’re not important. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the 20-year patent protection. 

The members opposite would have you believe that the clock 

doesn’t start ticking until the drugs hit the shelves. That’s 

blatantly untrue. In fact the clock begins as soon as the 

company applies for the patent. The average drug takes six to 

nine years of clinical trials before the company can apply for 

approval of the drug. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult that at this point in time there 

would be such an argument, or not a well-thought-out motion, 

to present for this kind of a debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly glad to be 

able to take part in this debate. Most of the issues have already 

been covered but being a schoolteacher, I found out that 

sometimes it takes a repetition of things in order for some 

people to understand it. So let’s take a look at this. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Don’t forget to talk slow for them. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you. 

 

I, and most Canadians, believe — and we strongly believe — 

that it’s not only unethical but also immoral to make huge 

profits on the backs of people who are ill. I really and truly 

believe that. Health care is in the public domain and as such 

should not be looked upon as a means to making absurd profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prescription drugs — unlike other commodities 

such as grain, cattle, oil and lumber — should not be used to 

make these exorbitant profits which are being made by the 

multinational companies. As stated by the National Forum on 

Health, a committee which was established by the Liberals and 

chaired by the PM, the Prime Minister, stated: 

 

The profit motive in financing health care is both 

inconsistent with the view of health as a public good and 

moreover leads to high administration costs and inequities 

in access and quality. International evidence suggests that 

public funding and administration are the best way to 

achieve fairness and value for money. 

 

That’s what the public forum on health stated. This is not what 

we are seeing from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this statement confirms that which we have 

always stated — that privatization of health care is wrong, not 

only for Canada but for the rest of the world. However we know 

that medicare is under attack by the federal Liberals — slashing 

the health transfers; giving up their national responsibility in 

maintaining strong health standards; and in their support of Bill 

C-91. 

 

From 1969 to 1993 Canadians were protected by a compulsory 

licensing Act. The Canadians who owned generic drug 

companies could produce more affordable generic drugs. And 

then they would pay the foreign-dominated, multinational drug 

companies a royalty. 

 

The multinational companies were doing very well. But they 

wanted to have more, so they went running to the prime 

minister who at that time was Brian Mulroney. And they had 

the Bill C-22 passed, which gave them patent protection for a 

certain number of years. 

 

But that still wasn’t good enough. Then they wanted 20-year 

patent protection and they went and they got C-91 passed — a 

shame and a bluff. And the Liberals, in their “red book,” were 

adamant that they would do away with C-91. But look at what 

happened. Just like all the other promises they had, you know 

and I know what happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  How could the Liberals agree to this horrendous 

Act. How could they? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Because they don’t care. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Because they don’t care. The multinationals 

stated that this added protection would lead to a lot of research 

and development, would lead to many, many jobs and so forth 

that they would generate in Canada. We all know that the tax 

breaks which are given to research and development by the 

Canadian law are the things which encourage the research. 

 

Do you realize that there’s been a total of 2,055 jobs eliminated 

— that’s eliminated — by the brand-name pharmaceutical 

companies. When did they do this? Between 1990 and 1995 

they eliminated over 2,000 jobs. Guess what the generic 

companies did? They made over 2,000 jobs. And these people 

can’t agree. They don’t know. 

 

This is a true example of Liberal job creation. That’s why we’re 

sitting at 10 per cent unemployment. We sure in the world are 

not sitting in that in Saskatchewan where we have a decent   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  The cost alone to consumers in the private health 

plans and the government drug plans are in the millions of 

dollars — we know that, and I think everybody agrees that it 

costs more. We’ve got to. 

 

In fact the estimated cost of such monopoly patent protection to 

consumers and taxpayers by the year 2010 will be anywhere 

from 3.6 to $7.3 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Billion? 

 

Mr. Wall:  Billion — not million — but billions of dollars. 

 

The federal minister of Health at the time when they introduced 

C-91 predicted that there would be an increase of at least 30 

million. This at the same time when the federal Liberals were 

brutally butchering the health care program by slashing 

hundreds of millions of dollars from the health transfer 

payments. The Liberals claim they are protecting medicare 

when their actions are just the opposite. Judge not by what is 

said, but by what is done. 

 

The introductory costs of course, are supposed to be controlled 

so that they’re supposed to be at a reasonable level. However 

they have become prohibitively high, and they’ve been based 

on the highest two countries, Switzerland and the United States, 

which have the highest costs of drugs — not the average, but 

the highest. This is the way the Liberals operate. Okay? And so 

that these prices . . . Then they say that they have a reduction in 

them. These high prices are not . . . they are immoral and 

reprehensible. 

 

An example, just recently a drug used to treat heart attack rose 

by $500 — $500. This drug, if you want to look it up, is 

Activase. Guess what it costs for one treatment of Activase for 

a heart attack when you’re being treated in the hospital? 

 

An Hon. Member:  How much? 

 

Mr. Wall:  Two thousand five hundred dollars. They weren’t 

making enough on the 2,000; they added another 500 onto it. 

Shame on them. 

 

That’s what the industry does when they get a monopoly. It 

gouges the individual, it gouges the private health plans, and it 

gouges any of the government drug plans. This drug alone will 

cost an additional 680,000 each and every year. 

 

What is happening is that profits are placed ahead of 

individuals. It is a time for change, a time when human beings 

become more important than profit, a time when compassion, 

concern, and cooperation replace the greed, the selfishness, and 

the disregard for the common good as portrayed by these 

multinational companies and endorsed by the Liberals in 

Ottawa, the federal Liberals in Ottawa. I say it is time to expose 

their hypocrisy and let the people know the truth. 

 

The Liberals are reviewing Bill C-91. A year before the review, 

they already stated that there would be no amendments made 

and that there would be no repeal of it. They went through the 

motions because they had to. And that is all that we can say 

about that. 

 

Where is this being reviewed? It’s being reviewed by the 

Committee on Industry. Can you believe that? It’s obvious that 

it should be the Committee on Health. But I suppose this is no 

different than the Leader of the Liberal Party appointing the 

member from North Battleford as critic of the North when 

bypassing a native son who grew up in the North, who lives in 

the North, who spent his entire life in the North, knows the 

concerns of the North, and is an eloquent orator. No different. 

Oh well, such is life in the ranks of the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry; I digress. I guess Bill C-91 is an 

economic issue, not to be confused with the health of the 

individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our concern is for the health of the individual, not 

the health of the multinational companies. And we know that 

this Bill must be amended. We must replace the discredited 

patent law — which has caused drugs to become the 

fastest-growing health care cost — with a law that makes 

affordable and effective generic drugs available earlier 

whenever that will improve the health of Canadians. 

 

I ask the Liberals to join with us in supporting this motion; to 

bring compassion, care, and concern not only for ourselves but 

for our fellow man. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been enjoying the debate 

from hon. members opposite. I enjoy the volume. I enjoy the 

rhetoric and the bluster. Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to see very 

well because this whole debate is nothing but a giant 

smokescreen designed to try and deceive the people of 

Saskatchewan about the real issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well what are the real issues? Mr. Speaker, 

since I got elected as MLA for North Battleford, I have been 

phoned by one senior after another, devastated by high drug 

costs since the provincial NDP government gutted our drug 

plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Who would have thought, who would have 

thunk it, Mr. Speaker, that even the Tories have more 

compassion, more social conscience for our seniors, our sick, 

and our elderly than those guys. 

 

And yet here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. Here, here are the facts, 

and they can’t be denied. In 1991 over 91 million went back to 

our seniors and our sick who needed drug protection. Last year, 

58 million. 

 

  



1044  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

That’s what this debate is all about — the calls I’m getting, Mr. 

Speaker, from people who say no coverage for my oxygen, no 

coverage for my insulin. Last week an 83-year-old lady phoned 

me at home in tears. She can’t make things go. She can’t go out 

to visit her daughter any more because she can’t afford the 

portable oxygen cylinders that . . . the coverage has been cut 

out. 

 

Used to be covered under the Tories. The Tories are 

humanitarians, are humanitarians. I mean they are social 

benefactors compared to what’s been done across the way. Who 

would have thought it. 

 

So this poor old lady, she wants to go visit her daughter in 

Alberta but she has to take these portable oxygen cylinders. She 

can’t afford them any more since the NDP took them away 

from her. 

 

Well the calls I’m getting, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that members 

opposite are also getting. It’s going to be a problem for them in 

the election. 

 

So what do you do when you get a problem? Well you try and 

shove the blame onto somebody else and the blame is going to 

be to say there should not be patent protection in this . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Pursuant to rule 17, the first 65 

minutes of debate has expired and the House will now entertain 

10 minutes of comments and questions. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 

the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview if I could. In this 

motion they talk about repealing the drug patent legislation just 

point blank, plain and simple, no if’s and’s or but’s. My 

question would be, was how would the member in this 

government deal with the huge price increases in the drugs, 

given that the pharmaceutical companies will try and recover 

their research costs in a much shorter time frame than they are 

presently doing now, and what would this government do to 

protect the consumers from that problem? 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t buy that argument for a 

minute because in fact I already outlined a plan as proposed by 

the Canadian Health Coalition on what should be done — a 

five-point strategy that will be Hansard tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Bill was repealed, any credible study would 

indicate that the generic companies would be free to research 

the drugs and provide a counterpart, you know, the equivalent, 

and the costs would go down. So I don’t accept his argument. 

 

Now I have a question for him if . . . could I ask question? No? 

Okay. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the member from North Battleford. My question is: will the 

Liberal Party be accepting donations from the pharmaceutical 

companies again this federal election? 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I am going to rule the 

question out of order according . . . Order, order. By rule 17, 

questions must be directed to the content of the speeches and I 

rule that question out of order. Next questions or comments. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We certainly 

saw a lot of crocodile tears from the government side how this 

particular patent legislation is a severe imposition on the ill of 

this province. They were, Mr. Speaker, they were crocodile 

tears because if this government opposite was truly concerned 

about people who buy drugs, who are ill in this province, they 

can save the entire $30 million that is supposedly projected to 

cost the government, by rolling back the CCTA (Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement). 

 

They’ve increased power. They’ve increased SaskTel rates. 

They’ve increased SaskEnergy rates. I would like to ask the 

member from Lloydminster what her government is going to do 

to make up for those increased, substantial costs to the ill of this 

province. 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you very much for the question. And 

the hon. member is right — we are paying more. We are paying 

more because of C-91 and we always pay more when the Tories 

and Liberals are in power. They say they are free enterprisers 

and we would expect them to invite competition. But we know 

from past experience, I know from experience to the last party, 

they don’t want competition. 

 

What they want is legislation that will protect exorbitant profits 

and that is exactly what they’re doing here — protecting 

exorbitant profits. I can tell you that the drug companies make 

profits that are exorbitant. So I’m telling you right now: yes we 

are paying more for our drugs; and yes we would repeal C-91 if 

we had the power to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question for the hon. member from Arm River. I will like to ask 

him if he agrees or disagrees — not with me — but if he agrees 

or disagrees with the Canadian Health Coalition and the 

National Forum on Health, those two studies. If he agrees or 

disagrees, first of all, that drug costs are too high in Canada, yes 

or no. And secondly, that Bill C-91 is one of the largest factors 

for those drug costs being too high. Do you agree with those 

two questions? 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I agree with, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fact we need to do what’s best for the people 

of Canada and the people of this province of Saskatchewan. 

And one thing that this government hasn’t — and I’m a little 

surprised at the member for asking me the question — that this 

government hasn’t done . . . and they’ve continued to cut 

services to the people of Saskatchewan, both in terms of health 

services and drugs. 

 

And when they’re cutting the drug program from 1991 to 1992, 

from 91 million down to 58 million on the backs of the sick and 

elderly in this province, I think they have little room to talk 

about what the federal government had done, Mr. Speaker.   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to address a question to the member from Swift Current. 

Mr. Speaker, many of us this time of year are afflicted with 

various viral and cough symptoms, and one of the things that 

I’ve heard and understand, that there is an incredible change in 

the effect of antibiotics on these various bugs and diseases. And 

so what’s got to happen, Mr. Speaker, is that we have to have 

some very significant changes in the antibiotic system that’s 

available as medicines in Canada. 

 

My question to the member is: how this great challenge of 

increased resistance of antibiotics . . . to drugs of diseases, how 

is the member going to propose that the necessary research is 

going to be done and funded in order that this very serious issue 

is addressed? 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you for that 

question. On the field of research and development, out of a 

total of 400 drugs, which they said came out that were new, 

there was a total of six that are known as breakthrough drugs. 

The other drugs had minor modifications made into it, and those 

minor modifications added another 20 years onto the patent. 

Now suddenly we have a pill which is protected for 40 years. 

And that’s what you are in favour of? Shame on you. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a 

question to the member from Arm River, if I could. As we’re 

talking about Bill C-91, which deals with patent protection in 

terms of drugs by these chemical companies, in many cases 

these chemical companies also produce farm chemicals, and 

there’s been a great struggle in the farming community to lessen 

these patents because of the monopoly situation, and it’s proven 

by farmers, the high cost of inputs. Would the member agree 

that these patent laws that exist to farm chemicals create a high 

cost for farmers there, and also at the same time create high 

drug costs for individuals? 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the input 

costs to our agriculture product producers in this province are 

enormous and are a major burden for the province. But the 

member will remember back some 10 years, when a generic 

Roundup was tried to be brought forward in this province. And 

there was people in our community that worked to try and get 

the generic Roundup, which conceivably would lower costs of 

that chemical — which is a terrific chemical — and it didn’t get 

off the ground. So I think that many of the people in this 

province, including the farmers, recognize the benefits of 

having the research done by these chemical companies. 

 

Yes, our input costs are enormous and yes, chemical companies 

do make a lot of money. But they do, as well, continue to create 

a lot of research. And I think the generic Roundup was a good 

example of some of the confidence that a lot of our farmers 

have in the research area of chemicals. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I see the hon. member for 

Lloydminster is dying to catch your eye so I will give her the 

chance to stand up here. She says that she would like to see 

generic drug companies do more research and development. Is 

she not aware that generic, the definition of generic, is that they 

don’t do research and development? They piggyback on other 

research and development? And does she not realize that 

without some limited patent protection there will be no drugs 

come on our market? And does she not think that the gutting of 

the drug plan by this province has more to do with high drug 

costs than anything the federal government has done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Well, Mr. Speaker, poor research again. I’m 

disappointed in the member from North Battleford. That isn’t 

true. What he just said is not a fact. I’ll tell you right now that 

opportunities in research and development in the generic drug 

industry as a result of the implementation of this legislation . . . 

After Bill C-92 received Royal Assent, generic manufacturers, 

and I’ll give you an example, Apotex, announced that plans for 

an expansion to Winnipeg were on hold. This generic drug 

company was doing research and development. I gave you the 

name of the company, and I’ll tell you, because of this Bill and 

because they could not compete, they weren’t able to go ahead. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, again these free enterprisers are 

scared of competition. That’s one thing the New Democrats 

aren’t scared of. We’re not scared of competition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Time has expired for the seventy-five minute 

debate. As good luck will have it, it will be on the agenda again 

in two weeks. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 301 — The Lutheran Church-Canada, 

Central District Act 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 301, The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District Act be 

now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 

on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Bill No. 302 — The Bank of Nova Scotia 

Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 302, The Bank of 

Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 

Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Bill No. 303 — The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 303, The TD   



1046  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

Trust Company Act, 1997 be now read a second time and 

referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No 3 — University Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today in the Assembly to talk about an issue of some great 

importance to many thousands of people in this province and 

that is the current tuition increases that the universities are 

considering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a fairly spirited debate in this 

Assembly so far today on the question of drug costs and some 

of the things the governments, and in particular the federal 

government, are doing to increase those. Unfortunately, this 

motion today is necessary for very much the same reasons and 

that is very much the inaction of the federal government in 

terms of supporting post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time today to outline some of 

the pressures facing our universities, obviously some of the 

pressures facing our students, and some of the things that we’re 

trying to do here in Saskatchewan to alleviate some of those 

problems. 

 

I think it’s important for us to start by recognizing that the 

universities are an integral part of both the province’s fabric but 

also its economy. And the role that they have to play in 

Saskatchewan is extremely important in terms of its education, 

the research and development that goes on in the province, and 

the betterment and enlightenment of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province has since 1905 basically, been 

committed to providing affordable, accessible education. 

University of Saskatchewan is one of the oldest institutions in 

this province. I believe it was incorporated in 1907. It was one 

of the first Acts of this Assembly. And I think it shows the 

importance to Saskatchewan people that our universities have 

played at a time when many people didn't even attain any grade 

school education. 

 

The people that sat in these chairs, in the start of this province, 

saw that it was important for us to provide institutions of higher 

learning to allow people to provide and attain an education, an 

advanced education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think today what we are facing is very much a 

challenge. We are facing a vital change that the federal 

government is forcing onto our provinces and onto our 

institutions, which is almost unprecedented in Canadian history. 

 

I think that it is important for us to understand, as we take a 

look at the post-secondary sector, that there are various different 

parties that have participated in terms of funding it and driving 

it forward. Basically those big three are the federal government, 

the provincial government, and the individual 

students. 

 

Over the years, while we have moved away from the idea of 

tuition fees in the K to 12 system, we've continued to allow this 

idea to continue within our post-secondary system. The belief 

is, is that the person who goes through higher education will 

attain greater benefit, greater employment opportunities, and 

better income. As a result we essentially justify tuition as a 

payment out of future earnings. 

 

I think it's an interesting issue. Although we could get into a 

debate whether or not we should continue to have tuition fees, I 

think it's important to recognize that for the time being we are 

going to have tuition fees. So the question becomes one of, 

what is the level? It becomes a question of what is the 

responsibility of the two senior levels of government to funding 

these universities; and what is the responsibility of the 

individual student? 

 

Central to that though also is what is the responsibility to the 

universities in terms of ensuring that students are getting a good 

bang for their buck, ensuring that the monies are well allocated, 

the expenditures are justified, and the education is in fact first 

rate. 

 

We have a system of universities in this province I think that is 

largely unparalleled. We have two excellent universities. The 

University of Regina is an excellent mid-size university. It is, I 

think, one of the best in the country in terms of its liberal arts 

education. It has pioneered many important programs like the 

co-op education program which is very important and a very 

positive piece in terms of helping students go from the 

university into the workforce in a smooth transition. It also 

provides a role for employers to play in terms of helping out. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the problem is that today we are getting to a 

point where the return from education . . . the return on the 

investment a student makes in education do not necessarily 

match the costs that they’re being asked to bear. 

 

(1615) 

 

Our government has, in this most recent budget, announced that 

we will back-fill 100 per cent of the federal cuts. This is a very 

important commitment to the universities. This is an important 

commitment to the students. We understand that when the 

provincial government cuts money, that there is only a couple 

of other places that the universities can go. They could 

obviously undertake internal downsizing — like we’ve been 

forced to as an administration here — or they can go to the 

students for increased revenues. 

 

The situation that we looked at this year in making these budget 

decisions is that we were not prepared to see more costs passed 

on to the students. We understood that the federal government 

making massive cuts to its post-secondary education budget 

through the CHST was going to have a very dramatic impact on 

tuitions in this province. 

 

That is why we changed our position and decided to put in all 

that money that the federal government cut, rather than simply   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

pass it on through. And it was important I think for the 

universities to understand this. That money that we have 

provided is money we are providing to offset tuition. That’s the 

purpose of it. It’s not there for really any other particular reason 

except to offset tuition increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it concerns me somewhat as I read the newspapers 

both in Saskatoon and here in Regina about the assumptions 

that the university administrators are making on why this 

money is being provided. And I want to start by saying I 

appreciate the diligence that both President George Ivany in 

Saskatoon and President Don Wells here in Regina have made 

to attempting to minimize the impact on students. 

 

But I think it’s also important that we understand that there is a 

bit of a hedging going on here. I’m looking at an article dated 

April 18, which is Friday, in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix in 

which President George Ivany says that he’ll be recommending 

to the board of governors that tuition be raised 6.3 per cent this 

fall and an additional 7.9 per cent next year. Now granted he 

said this will be instead of a 10 per cent increase that he was 

previously considering. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the provincial government is 

already fronting the money that would have been raised from 

that 10 per cent tuition increase. We are already providing that 

to the universities. So the question becomes one of whether or 

not a tuition increase at all should be considered this year or 

whether the university should be looking for other alternatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past several years we’ve seen, as I 

mentioned earlier, some fairly significant changes in the way 

that universities were being funded. Perhaps one of the most 

dramatic of those is obviously the change being made at the 

federal level as the federal government moved from a system 

previously known as established programs financing, or EPF, to 

the new CHST, Canada Health and Social Transfer. 

 

This change, to be charitable about it, I think is really a . . . it’s 

much more than simply housekeeping. It’s much more than 

simply a change in accounting. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

change is in fact a way to mask a massive budget cut and a 

massive offloading of post-secondary education responsibilities 

onto the provinces. And this has come at great cost to both the 

province and our provincial institutions. 

 

I think that it’s interesting to note that between 1991 and 1997 

that the funding provided from EPF and now CHST has 

declined by $157 million — $157 million that otherwise would 

have been targeted to the universities, to health care, and to 

social services. 

 

It is unfortunate that there has not been the ability of the 

province to pick up the increases that were necessary or that the 

universities were seeking. As we all know — and I won’t go 

through it again — the province of course inherited when we 

came to office in 1991, a financial crisis. We had a government 

that had a spending problem, a fairly significant one. It was 

running approximately a $1.2 billion deficit. And we had to get 

our own control on our own spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that meant that everyone had to share in carrying 

that burden. And I appreciate the work that the universities did 

in helping to meet and share with us in carrying that load. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to overstate that. Because to a large 

extent that load has been carried not by the university 

administrations, not by the universities as institutions, but by 

the individual students. 

 

While we looked at a $157 million decrease in EPF and the 

CHST payments, what we saw during that same time period, in 

1991 to 1996 — and I’ll use the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) as an example — is an increase in their overall 

budget of $19 million during that time period. Fully 16.9 

million of that came from tuition fee increases. Eighty-eight per 

cent of all the increases in the university budgets have been 

funded solely on the backs of the students. That is 

unprecedented in terms of the growth of this fee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it begs us to ask the question of what 

in fact do we do now to have the universities to take a look at 

providing real relief when they have the opportunity to do so. 

We’ve said we’re not going to pass on the federal cuts. I asked 

the universities not to pass on tuition fee increases. I want to say 

it again. This government has fronted the bill. We have paid the 

tuition fee increase bill for this year on behalf of the students, 

and we’ve done that because we’re concerned about that rise in 

tuition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has gone through restraint. I 

know different sectors of the public service have gone through 

restraint. The question is, have the universities? And to what 

extent have the universities gone through restraint? Now we’ve 

seen the universities’ budget grow. We know that it’s grown 

largely through tuition. 

 

I listened with interest some days ago as the Leader of the 

Opposition stood in this House to say that well, the budget had 

to grow because of the increase in electrical bills. I find it 

interesting that utility bills at the university increased in 

Saskatoon’s case by $200,000 last year. Yet I find it interesting 

to note that tuition went up by almost 2 million. 

 

I think that what we have to come to grips with here is that we 

have got to start looking at the universities as part of the overall 

Saskatchewan economy, as part of the public sector. And we 

have got to start looking at them as part of the solution in terms 

of helping to ensure students get education at a reasonable cost 

that is affordable and accessible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I worry about accessibility in our universities. I 

find it interesting to note that for the past several years, 

enrolment has been dropping. University of Saskatchewan 

alone there was a drop of more than 200 students last year, in 

terms of enrolment. Could be that students, because of the 

improving economy, are deferring their education, deciding to 

simply go into the workforce directly. 

 

But to be quite honest, I think that what is happening is the 

tuition has reached a level now where it has become a deterrent 

fee rather than simply a tuition fee. And this causes some, I 

think, concern for all of us. Because what we do not see from   



1048  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

the numbers immediately is what the impact is on older 

students, on students that are traditionally being denied access 

to the education system — in this case women, single parents, 

native students, low income students — people without that 

white-collar experience in their family; without that tradition of 

a university education. And I think we, over the next several 

years, will have to watch this more closely. 

 

Clearly this is a difficult issue and it’s not really one where I 

think we need to lay blame. Of course I appreciate that there 

were ways to avoid this situation. If the federal government had 

not made the drastic cuts that it chose to; if it had shared the 

burden of its federal budgetary problems across all sectors 

rather than simply focusing in on health, education, and social 

services, as it has chosen to do; if it had continued developing a 

national role for government in terms of post-secondary 

education, I think we could have avoided some of this. 

 

I was interested to read the other day that the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education for this province recently appeared 

before the Senate subcommittee on post-secondary education in 

Ottawa, and the message I think is an important one for all of us 

to take note of. What he argued is that Canada needs a national 

system for post-secondary education; that there is in fact a 

federal role in this. And it is a relatively straightforward and 

simple argument I think, in some ways, to take into account. 

 

The argument is basically this. In today’s labour market, where 

people are highly mobile, where the economy booms in some 

areas, decreases and declines in others, the labour force is 

extremely mobile and moves across the country. The federal 

government has opted for a policy which ignores that. It ignores 

the fact that there is in fact people coming into various differing 

institutions across this country to be educated and then they 

move off to another province to seek work. The result is is that 

they have offloaded onto provincial taxpayers, a system of 

education and a cost of education that is not necessarily 

returned through future taxes. 

 

This is a problem. This is a very serious problem, particularly 

when we have universities such as the University of Regina and 

the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, which are 

nationally acclaimed and renowned in certain areas. We have 

people come from across Canada to attend the University of 

Regina in the school of journalism. We have people from across 

Canada go to the University of Saskatchewan to attend the 

College of Medicine. Increasingly, increasingly those programs 

are being paid for by Saskatchewan taxpayers, almost 

exclusively by Saskatchewan taxpayers. And that trend will 

continue as the federal government continues to cut back on the 

CHST payments. 

 

This is a problem for us. The universities, as a response, have 

decided that the students should bear more of the cost. Perhaps 

it makes some sense in terms of a public policy debate, but the 

problem is is that it does not make any sense in terms of labour 

force development in Canada. 

 

What we have got to start to do is take a look at our national 

post-secondary education system as a national system. We must 

start to look at our universities working in cooperation with 

each other to start to build a national training and education and 

research system in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 

federal Conservatives were in office the Mulroney government 

embarked on a program that it started to call the centres of 

excellence program. The purpose of that was to identify 

programs at the various universities across Canada that were of 

national renown, that were in fact the best in the country, and 

focus research dollars into these institutions to essentially 

encourage the best and the brightest students to attend these 

provinces and then go to work throughout the country. 

 

Not surprisingly the University of Saskatchewan was named I 

believe in five of those nodes of centres of excellence. That was 

a very encouraging development I thought on the part of the 

federal government. And I have to say that the contrast between 

where the Mulroney government was in terms of its 

post-secondary education strategy, and where the Chrétien 

government is, is shocking and disheartening. Because to be 

quite honest, we didn’t expect much from Mulroney, but the 

expectations from Prime Minister Chrétien’s government I 

think were high. 

 

And I think they should have been borne out by a traditional 

Liberal approach that understood the importance of 

post-secondary education to our economy and to people 

throughout the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important for us to take a look at that because 

it has been an unfortunate reversal of fortunes on the part of the 

federal government to move forward with these drastic cuts that 

will continue well into the new century. 

 

I think what we should do though is just take a . . . setting aside 

this federal problem, I want to focus for a second on what 

exactly has happened in the universities with tuition. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, between 1991 and 1996 tuition increased at 

the University of Saskatchewan by 69 per cent. I’ll say it again. 

It increased by 69 per cent. That was the amount of money 

tuition fees brought into that university — a 69 per cent 

increase. 

 

Last year that brought in $41.4 million. Well I can assure you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is not solely a result of an 

increase in enrolment. In fact enrolment has been steady or 

declining at the university. So what this is a sign of is in fact 

escalating tuition fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent on all of us, as people interested in 

post-secondary education and people interested in the future of 

our province and our economy, to look for ways to resolve this. 

I appreciate that we are not able to look to the federal 

government for leadership. I regret that we are not able to look 

to them for help even on this situation. 

 

We have made a tough choice here in this caucus and in this 

government to provide additional funds to back-fill, to provide 

new money to replace the money that the federal Liberals have 

cut from the universities. And I think now it’s incumbent on the 

universities to look internally to find ways to cooperate, to   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

reduce expenditures, to . . . although maybe not reduce tuition, 

although that would be certainly an ideal. I think for the time 

being what we should be calling on them to do is simply freeze 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a . . . this motion, a private members’ motion, 

obviously does not have the force and effect of law; it’s not an 

Act. It simply serves I hope as moral suasion to our members on 

the boards of governors, to our university administrators, and I 

hope also to the public, to think about the importance the 

universities do play in our economy. 

 

(1630) 

 

The approach that we have taken here is to be upfront and 

cooperative with our universities. We have provided the money. 

We have provided assistance. We have even asked Mr. Harold 

MacKay to work with the universities to find ways of greater 

cooperation within the province. 

 

I think now it is time for the universities to ante up their share. I 

think it is time for the universities to start to talk outside of this 

province with their counterparts across Canada about how they 

can better make use of the scarce resources and the declining 

resources coming from Ottawa. 

 

I think that it is time for them to start to treat the students with 

. . . I won’t say that. I will stop before saying that. But I think 

that it’s important that they look to the students and give the 

students a break on the tuition fee increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation that we are facing is a difficult one 

and I appreciate it’s a difficult one for the universities. But we 

must get a hold of this. We must stop the offloading and the 

downloading of tuition fees onto the students. And we have got 

to start to deal with it. 

 

The students’ unions, I have to say, have been extremely 

progressive in terms of their approach. In other places 

throughout Saskatchewan . . . or throughout Canada, the 

university students’ unions have taken a very strident approach. 

They’ve essentially said no to tuition fee increases. 

 

Here — and for many years now — the students have worked 

with the administrations to work out a balanced approach to 

tuition. They’ve accepted that they want the universities to stay 

strong and they’ve accepted to pay more. 

 

But I say, reading the press release from the students’ union at 

the U of S, that I think the day has come now for the 

universities to say thank you, and to give some payback to the 

students. 

 

I note the comments by Cory Exner, who is the current, I’d say 

outgoing president of the students’ union in Saskatoon. He says 

that, and I’m quoting here from his press release: 

 

Ivany is recommending that only 1.6 million of that 7 

million is used for tuition relief. We find this absolutely 

unacceptable. 

 

I understand that there’s always a dynamic between student 

union presidents and university presidents. In fact I had more 

than one tussle with Dr. Ivany myself as a student union 

president. But the time I think has come to listen to what 

reasonable student union presidents like Mr. Exner say. 

 

I think it is also important to listen to what the new voice of that 

student union is saying, one Natashia Stinka. Ms. Stinka says, 

quote — I’m quoting her here from this same press release: 

 

It seems they’re more interested in preserving the status 

quo than in keeping education affordable for students. 

 

This is an important point. Affordability is coming into question 

— is coming into question because of these massive tuition 

increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have called on the universities to heed our call 

to keep the tuition increases to a minimum. We have made good 

by putting the money up front. And, Mr. Speaker, I would say 

that now is the time for the boards of governors and the 

university administrations to look within their own 

administrations, and find the way to provide a tuition increase 

that is zero. As I say this motion serves as moral suasion only, 

but there are alternatives. 

 

In the ’70s we had a Provincial Universities Commission in this 

province — would help to allocate the resources between the 

universities and help to set the tuition fees. In British Columbia 

they’ve gone so far as to legislate a freeze in tuition when the 

universities wouldn’t listen. Mr. Speaker, I hope we don’t come 

to that point in this House. I hope that we don’t come to a point 

where we have to step in as a legislature to protect the interests 

of students. We’ve tried to do that in our budget by paying for 

the tuition fee increase up front, out of the provincial coffers not 

the students’ pockets. And I would hope that the universities 

will take heed of that and that they will do the right thing this 

week as the University of Saskatchewan sets its tuition fee. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that, I would move: 

 

That this Assembly express its sincere hope that 

Saskatchewan universities will recognize the provincial 

government’s decision to back-fill 100 per cent of the 

federal cuts to universities and cancel planned tuition fee 

increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is moved by myself, seconded by the member 

for Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am so excited about 

this particular motion. I am so proud and honoured to second 

this motion from the member from Regina South dealing with 

university tuition fees. 

 

Our young people — primarily young people, although not 

exclusively — who attend university face for the most part a 

tremendously exciting time of their lives as they try and prepare 

themselves literally for the future — not simply for a job skill; 

universities are part of a much broader education. And it’s just   



1050  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

a very powerful growing, personally growing time for students 

while they’re at university and I am always proud to stand up 

and speak out on their behalf. 

 

I do, like the member for Regina South, I do hope that the 

universities acknowledge the 100 per cent back-fill that the 

provincial government has done, back-filling the federal 

government cuts to post-secondary education. The hundred per 

cent back-fill-plus, that we have been able to come up with in 

the budget that the legislature is dealing with, I am hoping will 

allow the universities to reduce, hopefully even eliminate, 

tuition fee increases. 

 

Tuition fees at the U of R (University of Regina) are heading to 

$2,640. And if you say it quick, it's not that bad, Mr. Speaker. If 

you say it quick, it's not that bad. But then add to this, because 

university students too have to live, and you will have room and 

board or rent and buying some groceries. I estimate the cost of 

that at about $3,200 for a semester; transportation, give or take, 

$600 per semester. 

 

I mentioned earlier that university students are not . . . pardon 

me, that this is a growing time of their lives. Entertainment is a 

part of that, Mr. Speaker; entertainment I calculate about $800 

and I don't even . . . actually I think I'm low at that. Books for a 

semester, about $500 — it's just this horrendously, 

horrendously expanding cost of books. I'm being heckled by my 

own members, Mr. Speaker, that $500 is low. 

 

I was trying to put together what I thought was a low-ball 

estimate of the costs for universities . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . As my colleague, the member for Regina Victoria, points 

out, things have changed in the last 20 years since I attended. 

With telephones — and I figure that for many students they will 

have considerable telephone costs. Often they’re away from 

home — I figure about $400 for a semester. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this little total comes to over $8,000 — 

8,140. And I think I’ve estimated the cost for university 

students for a semester rather on the shy side. This makes it all 

the more important that tuition fees, that tuition fees as a 

significant component of the cost of this education, be lowered 

or reduced or at least let’s stop the climb in tuition fee costs. 

University education is just too important to leave it alone. 

 

The result of this cost that I’ve outlined per semester is in 

addition to the fact that while a student is going to university, 

they’re not working at a full-time, career job. Now many, many 

students work at part-time jobs and they’re able to offset a 

portion of this cost. But as everyone in the real world knows, 

part-time jobs that university students get tend to be at the 

bottom end of the pay scale and come nowheres near paying 

more than $8,000 in a semester. So you know that university 

students are going to be going in the hole fiscally while they’re 

attending university. 

 

All of this of course begs the question of what about single 

parents or special needs students, Mr. Speaker, who face even 

greater costs. 

 

Well of course there’s student loans. Talk to students on the 

University of Regina campus, and I suspect it’s very similar at 

the University of Saskatchewan campus. Talk to students today. 

They will tell you that all too often what they have, Mr. 

Speaker, is they graduate from university and they have got a 

student loan payment that is the size of a decent mortgage 

payment. The difference is they don’t have the house. So 

they’re saddled with the equivalent of a mortgage payment and 

they’re still basically on the street in terms of a place to live. 

 

So students all too often graduate, look for and hopefully attain 

their first career job, and then they’re stuck, saddled with, as I 

say, the equivalent of a mortgage but they still have to find 

living accommodations, they still have to furnish their living 

accommodations and set up shop — all of the things that come 

naturally as we leave home. 

 

Tuition fees increasingly are causing a hardship for university 

students. This is what this motion is all about, is urging the 

universities to acknowledge the fact that the provincial 

government has back-filled the cuts that the federal government 

has imposed upon us; we’ve back-filled it 100 per cent, dollar 

for dollar, penny for penny. And we’d just like the universities 

to acknowledge that and reflect that in the tuition fees that they 

charge to the students. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about university tuition fees 

and I think it’s somewhat instructive if we look at the 

Saskatchewan provincial budget. And I want to compare 

Education and Post-Secondary Education for the years 1996-97 

and the budget that we’re debating in the . . . or that is before 

the legislature these days, in this session, that is the ’97-98 

budget. 

 

In Education 1996-97, there was a total of $542 million 

expended. In this budget that’s proposed, it’s $550 million — 

$8 million more. That’s in the Education portion of the budget. 

 

In the Post-Secondary Education and Skills portion of the 

budget, it went from last year, $351 million to $386 million this 

year, a $35 million increase in Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training. This is a commitment that this government 

feels we owe to the future of our province. 

 

We owe it, Mr. Speaker, to the students. We owe them our 

diligence as we do everything we can to see that an education is 

not something that depends on the size of your wallet but rather 

depends on the size of your intellect. That’s what our goal is. 

 

(1645) 

 

Unfortunately for us, we are doing what I’ve just outlined — 

increasing our support for Education and Post-Secondary 

Education and Training by significant amounts, some $43 

million this year over last. And we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, 

to try and keep a lid on tuition fee increases in our 

post-secondary education centres, and in particular our 

university and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology). 

 

We’re doing this all in a background of the federal government 

that has just offloaded costs onto the provincial government   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

year after year after year. I see the Liberal member for Arm 

River going, oh. Well, Mr. Liberal Member, let me point out, 

1990-91 estimates, total transfers from the federal government 

to the provincial government were estimated — and get this, 

because it’s in the 1991 Estimates book — $1.499 billion, the 

year 1990-91. 

 

The member for Melville says, that was then, what about now? 

Excellent question. Now 1997-98, the total transfer from the 

federal government to the provincial government for things like 

the Canada assistance program, established programs funding, 

and equalization have dropped to $650 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a drop, a drop of $849 million — $849 

million drop. I hear again the member from Melville saying it’s 

equalization payment drop, because the provincial economy is 

growing. 

 

To some small degree you’re accurate. I’ll point out, in 

1989-90, equalization payments — that’s recognizing have-not 

provinces — $440 million. This budget, 1997-98 equalization 

payments, $129 million. You do the math, and it’s $311 

million, $311 million of the lesser transfer payment from the 

federal government; $311 million is because of provincial 

economic growth; 311 million out of $849 million. I invite the 

member from Melville to square that. Where’s all the rest of 

that money coming from, and why is it that post-secondary 

students all have to carry such a weight of this burden? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is trying our level best at a time 

when the federal government, the federal Liberals, are just 

off-loading on the province of Saskatchewan like there’s no 

tomorrow. We are doing our very best. And often it feels like 

we’re on a treadmill just running as hard as we can just to break 

even. 

 

Now we’ve been blessed. We’ve got more than just over a 

million people in the province of Saskatchewan. Those just 

more than one million people have rolled up their sleeves; 

they’ve gotten to work. The economy is growing. I don’t care 

what portion of the economy we’re talking about: agriculture, 

mining, forestry, employment. The job numbers are up. Hog 

production looks good. All kinds of things — good news in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now is it perfect? No. Should we do better? Absolutely. That’s 

what we’re determined to try and do. Grow the economy so we 

can further reduce this equalization payment that we’re getting 

from 129 million not only to where we don’t receive it, but 

where we can actually pay to have-not provinces. That’s our 

goal. But that goal is sure not helped when the federal 

government, in the time we’ve been in office, have cut their 

total payments, total transfer payments to the province of 

Saskatchewan by $849 million. 

 

That is just an astonishing number, and it’s a credit to the 

million people in Saskatchewan that we’ve been able to grow 

our economy, make up for that, and make up for that and more 

because — I remind the member from Melville — when this 

government took office in 1991, we had a $1.1 billion deficit, 

1.1 billion annual deficit. 

That is gone. We’ve made moves . . . Again credit a million 

people of this province who have really pitched in, really 

helped. They’re all in this together. We are all in this together. 

They’ve done it. My hat goes off to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Everyone has dug in. 

 

Now what the member for Regina South and myself and others, 

I trust, are going to be saying to the universities is everybody 

has been doing the level best that they possibly can. Will you 

look at this tuition fee question? Take a special look at it. Try 

and stop cold, tuition fee increases. 

 

The member for Regina South talked about a legislative 

proposal — it’s actually legislation — that British Columbia 

has done that prohibits tuition fee increases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because of the question of governance, the universities have a 

unique or somewhat unique relationship. The provincial 

government is the major funder of the university. We’re the 

major funder. They have a separate governance Act. And 

they’ve got their board of directors — board of governors, they 

call it — and it’s duly set up, and it’s representative of the 

entire province. I’m not in any sense trying to be critical of their 

governance. I’m just pointing out they have their governance 

mechanism, much like the province has its governance 

mechanism. 

 

We elect MLAs to do the business for us; universities have their 

board of governors. We fund the universities. They then must 

set their budgets. And part of their budget, frankly, is tuition 

fees. Part of their budget is tuition fees. We all want the system 

to work. It's in the universities’ interest for it to work, as it is in 

ours. 

 

Students and certainly parents want tuition fees to be at a 

reasonable level so that our children and their children can go to 

university. It’s important for the future, not only of 

Saskatchewan but of the world. It’s important for our collective 

future that we have a well-educated population to lead us in the 

next millennium to lead us. So we all owe this effort, our best 

effort, to see that students can in fact have a post-secondary 

education. 

 

If universities, Mr. Speaker, raise tuition fees too quickly or 

unnecessarily in the views of students, they run the very real 

risk of student rebellion, and that rebellion can take different 

forms. 

 

Being a product of the ’70s, I remember the good old days 

when we’d just march or hold a sit-in or something like that. 

Fortunately things have moved along from that. And I say 

fortunately; it maybe wouldn’t be so bad to have a sit-in. But 

there are other ways of dealing with it, Mr. Speaker, that are 

probably more effective in today’s milieu. 

 

Students of course have every right . . . If you lived in — I’ll 

pick — Outlook, Saskatchewan, and you wanted to go to the 

University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina, in 

either case you’re living away from home. In either case the 

University of Edmonton or Calgary or Manitoba are equally 

accessible. There’s no reason that you have to stop at the   



1052  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

university that happens to be right closest to you. So it’s in the 

university’s interest to keep their tuition fees in line with those 

of other universities, not only the two universities in 

Saskatchewan but universities in neighbouring provinces and 

even farther afield, quite frankly. 

 

Our plea at a time, Mr. Speaker, when students are facing 

hardships . . . jobs have not been all that plentiful. Canada has 

an unemployment rate in excess of 10 per cent, at a time when 

we must recognize that it isn’t that easy to get a good-paying 

job so you can earn your tuition fees and your room and board 

and all of the other associated costs, books and so on, of going 

to school. 

 

It's important that, in that milieu where students are facing real 

hardship as they attend post-secondary education — and in this 

case, particularly universities — at the same time the provincial 

government is doing everything we humanly can . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Everything we can to back-fill, to see that there 

is no lack of effort, no lack of funding on the part of the 

provincial government. As I've pointed out, Education funding, 

up 8 million this year over last; Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training, up 35 million this year over last, at a time when 

the federal government has been slashing and cutting its transfer 

payments to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I pointed out, it's not simply equalization payment cuts. In fact 

they tend to make up a very small . . . or I shouldn't say very 

small . . . certainly less than a third of the cuts are equalization 

payments that are due. Those equalization payments relate 

directly to how the provincial economy is going. 

 

But the rest of the cuts are in things like established program 

funding: the Canada Assistance Plan, other federal-provincial 

programs, all those sorts of things that have been cut and 

slashed. Eight hundred and forty-nine million dollars worth of 

cuts since we took office, from the federal government — $849 

million. 

 

And it is incredibly difficult for us to try and maintain the 

funding for education. And education is not alone. We've got 

health care. Everybody is concerned about health care — 

everybody. It's in no small part why every one on this side of 

the legislature decided to run. We're concerned about health 

care. Medicare, Mr. Speaker, is our program. We want to 

defend it forever. 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, ties in to what we’re trying to do with 

tuition fees, post-secondary education funding because you 

can’t simply fund one thing without being aware of how it will 

affect something else. 

 

It would be like . . . I have three children. It would be like me 

giving one of them a thousand dollars when I’ve got a total of a 

thousand dollars extra in the entire year. I give it to one of my 

children? What about the other two? Now maybe I will give one 

of my children a thousand dollars. Maybe there’s a special 

need. Maybe there is a special reason for it, a one-time unique 

thing. But by gosh, I’d better be prepared to talk to my other 

two children to get that sorted out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked about tuition fees. I’ve talked about 

$849 million in transfer payment cuts from the federal Liberals. 

I have not mentioned that, at the same time that this has been 

going on, the federal government has caused more than 525 

million additional dollars cost onto primarily the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, but all taxpayers, through the extra traffic that is 

going on our highways as we’ve lost the Crow rate. We see rail 

line abandonment in unprecedented mileage. We see seaway 

charges and other transportation charges. We see the costs just 

piling up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this $525 million that I’ve just now entered into 

talking about is in addition to the cut of $849 million from 

1989-90 to ’97 . . . pardon me, 1990-91 to 1997-98. Huge costs 

— I don’t care how you slice it. Everyone has to kind of scratch 

your head when you take 849 million plus 525 million. That’s 

extra costs to a province that has been struggling, struggling, 

struggling desperately to grow our economy, to provide jobs 

opportunities, to keep tuition fees low for our university 

students so that they can graduate without having a mortgage. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our students can have a future, a future that 

depends on what’s between their ears, not what’s in their wallet. 

That is a critical part. We are sincerely asking the universities to 

acknowledge the 100 per cent back-fill plus that we’re doing. 

Acknowledge all of that and don’t increase tuition fees. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. It now being 5 o’clock the 

House will stand recessed until 7 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1021 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1021 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1021 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1022 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1022 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1022 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1022 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Earth Day 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1023 

 Women of Distinction 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

 Right to Information Week 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

 Digital Embroidery Business in Weyburn 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 Young Women Hockey Players 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 Ecol Laser Services Provides Environmental Leadership 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 Recognition for Salvation Army 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1024 

 Meadow Lake Co-op Has Best Year Ever 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Child Prostitution in Regina 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1025 

 Rural School Closures 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

 Teachers’ Salary Costs 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

 Welfare Fraud 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1028 

 Child Substance Abuse 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 

 Health Information Network 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1029 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 52  The Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1997 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1030 

 

 Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 



 

 Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

 Bill No. 55 — The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

 Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1030 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Future of Moose Jaw Airbase 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1030 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1034 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Drug Patent Legislation 

  Pringle ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1034, 1044 

  Stanger ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1036, 1044 

  McLane .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1037, 1044 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1039 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1040 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1042, 1045 

  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1043, 1045 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1044 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1044 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1045 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1045 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 301 — The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District Act 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1045 

 Bill No. 302 — The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 1997 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1045 

 Bill No. 303 — The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1045 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No 3 — University Tuition Fees 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1046 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1049 

 


