



















































Hansard: December 19, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  

 December 19, 1997 

 

2055 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will every pray. 

 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, come from communities of 

Saskatoon, Edam, Turtleford, Mossbank, and Assiniboia. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition comes from the Montmartre and Kendal areas of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too wish to present a 

petition to the Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films will be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the Regina area. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition to present on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to Saskatchewan  

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Morse, Ernfold, Chaplin, Central Butte, and Herbert. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring a petition 

forward today on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are all 

from the constituency of Melfort. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Wherefore . . . and I 

have a number of petitions and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films will be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And these come from Allan, Saskatoon, and Watrous. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition on behalf of 

people concerned about the Saskatchewan film library. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Porcupine 

and Weekes. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive  



2056  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Montmartre 

and Kendal. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

petitions as well this morning dealing with the very important 

issue of the Saskatchewan film library and people’s concerns 

with respect to that. These petitions come from the Prince 

Albert area. All of them would appear to have come from the 

Prince Albert area, and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. A 

prayer for relief reads as follows: 

 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 

may be pleased to enact legislation to ban the practice of 

night hunting in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in bound duty, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your petitioners come from the community of 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a petition 

on behalf of people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 

life, property, and long-term survival of big game. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed this petition are from Estevan 

and Hitchcock. I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I know it is early. I 

too have a petition, Mr. Speaker, this morning to present on 

behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, reading: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, this petition is signed by the good 

folks from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition that 

I’d like to present. These are people that are concerned that the 

Canadian Home Shopping Network is being pre-empted by the 

legislative channel during a December sitting of the Legislative 

Assembly, although December is a very busy shopping month. 

And they say that enough is enough, and they go on, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will now 

proceed to put the petition, as he knows this. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cease sitting, enjoy Christmas 

with your families, and vacate the airwaves in favour of 

more topical entertainment like the Home Shopping 

Network. 

 

And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Petitions respecting Saskatchewan film library, the ending 

the practice of night hunting, and the allocation of funding 

toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy, Mr. 

Speaker, this morning to introduce to you and through you to 

the members of this Assembly, four distinguished gentlemen 

who are in the gallery behind the government benches. Mr. 

Speaker, we have with us William Martindale. Bill of course is 

from Gull Lake, Saskatchewan. Bill is a farmer, insurance 

salesman, has worked with Crop Insurance, and has had a lot of 

experience in the oil patch, with things that are related to that. 

 

We also have with him, Mr. Bill Kruczko, who is the chairman 

of the Cypress Surface Rights Association. Bill of course is a 

farmer, rancher, businessman, cattle dealer, all kinds of things 

that he works at; has had a lot of experience with things in the 

oil patch and related problems and of course has represented a 

lot of people. 

 

We also have Wally Hamm, a soil scientist from Saskatoon. 

Wally Hamm of course has his master’s degree in soil scientist 

and one of the few people who is depended on in this province 

to give expert testimony in courts that concern problems in the 

oil and gas industry. 

 

With him is his son, Byron, who is also from Saskatoon, and he 

of course has been working with the Darwall Consultants group 

and does a lot of work with the natural foods industry in an 

attempt to provide people with foods that they can take if they 

have allergies and that sort of thing, because they have no 

sprays and no herbicides on them. 

 

It is with great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I ask this Assembly 

to join with me to welcome this distinguished group of people 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr.  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all 

members of the House, two gentlemen seated in your gallery. 

The first person is Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert, the first declared 

candidate for the leadership of the Saskatchewan Party, and his 

campaign manager, Mr. Tom Durbin. I’d like all members to 

welcome them to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you today, and to all members of the 

Assembly, a former member sitting behind the bar, a good 

friend and former colleague representative of the Thunder 

Creek constituency. I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming Rick Swenson back into the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Health Care Funding 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

week I wrote the Premier, both federal and provincial Health 

ministers, and the residents of the Gravelbourg district. I 

indicated in those letters that I oppose the 20 per cent bed 

reduction to the long-term care home in Gravelbourg. 

 

Funding pressures placed on the South Country Health District 

by this government will force area seniors to leave to get 

needed health services. While I’ve yet to receive a response 

from this government, in the last four days close to a 100 of the 

600 families that I wrote answered loudly and clearly. 

 

All of these responses are addressed to the Premier, and I would 

like to send these over to him after, Mr. Speaker. But before I 

do I’d like to quote from one resident. And this individual says 

to the Premier and his colleagues, I quote: 

 

His colleagues should get down from their ivory towers 

and look after the health of we the people who pay your 

wages. Get down to the basics of Tommy Douglas, who 

knew how to take care for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Forget about investing millions in rather questionable 

ventures. Your government has lost millions in an 

American cable company. These funds could have been 

better used for the health of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier to carefully read each of these 

and take responsibility. These people hold you accountable, so 

be accountable. Do the honourable thing and ensure health care 

is driven by human need not by financial statements. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Nelson Lumber Company 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker — some more good 

news. On October 28th, 26 employees of Nelson Lumber 

Company travelled from Lloydminster to Saskatoon to attend 

the chamber of commerce ABEX (Awards for Business 

Excellence) awards ceremony. In that ceremony, Mr. Ray  

Nelson — the founder, owner, and CEO (chief executive 

officer) of Nelson Lumber — accepted an award as Nelson 

Lumber was inducted into the Saskatchewan Business Hall of 

Fame by our province’s chamber of commerce. This is a 

well-deserved award, Mr. Speaker. Nelson Lumber has been in 

business in Lloydminster for 50 years. Raymond and his brother 

Austin started the business with three employees — now 400 

employees — selling the basic building materials of our 

economy. Nelson Lumber has built itself into a business with 

local, provincial, national, and international expertise, all the 

while remaining under the control of the family. 

 

This business, with employees on both sides of the border, is 

selling house packages to Japan and is currently expanding into 

several countries in Europe. And, Mr. Speaker, while it is 

expanding abroad, Nelson Lumber remains an active player in 

our community. It has created the Nelson Lumber Charitable 

Foundation, which contributes to the well-being of the 

Lloydminster community, also on both sides of the border. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody knows about the Bi-Provincial 

upgrader. I’m happy to give credit to another very successful 

bi-provincial business. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Satellite Dialysis Unit 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity to remind the members opposite, and 

especially the Minister of Health who just happens to be the 

member from Yorkton, of the oversight he made when 

expanding renal dialysis in Saskatchewan. I would like to make 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased that a satellite renal 

dialysis unit was placed in Tisdale Hospital. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

share the confusion and the frustration of the people from 

Yorkton, Kamsack, Churchbridge, Canora, Preeceville, and 

surrounding areas, who drive into Regina two and three times a 

week because a satellite unit was not established in Yorkton, 

where perfectly good equipment is available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the East Central Health District has access to 

everything it needs to provide kidney dialysis right in Yorkton, 

except funding for staff to run the machines. A number of 

patients from the Yorkton area that travelled to Regina every 

week is more than enough to provide for full-time positions in 

Regina. Instead these people should be able to receive dialysis 

in their own areas rather than driving three and four hours 

several times a week to Regina year round. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a perfect example of a two-tier 

health system this government is already operating — a health 

system which is the best system in the world, unless of course 

you are sick and actually need it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Importance of Aboriginal Role in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I, 

like many members of this House, was disappointed to hear 

some of the unfortunate comments made in this House 

yesterday directed personally at my colleague from Athabasca  



2058  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

when he was speaking. And I want to tell the hon. members that 

part of my life as MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

for North Battleford, I’m often invited to round dances, sun 

dances, and powwows, all of which include as part of the 

closing ceremonies a give-away of gifts to elders and guests. 

And I want to say to the people of this House that I’ve always 

found the aboriginals in my constituency to be a warm and 

sharing people. 

 

As part of the recent Remembrance Day observances this year, 

the bands in The Battlefords area held a memorial round dance 

to honour their veterans and casualties in Canada’s wars. At the 

conclusion the usual gifts, mostly blankets, were distributed. 

 

I want to assure the hon. member from Kindersley that when I 

go to these ceremonies no one has their hand out except in 

friendship and welcoming. 

 

I wish that all members in this Assembly could experience the 

warmth of native ceremonies. No one asks for any hand-outs 

from me, although I do usually take the traditional gift of 

tobacco. 

 

I believe that attending some of these ceremonies would be an 

important step in bringing some understanding and harmony to 

our province rather than for us, as politicians, to play on the 

divisions and tensions of our province for political gain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Award for Kitsaki Development Corporation 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise and speak 

about another successful venture in Saskatchewan. We all know 

that more jobs are being created and more people are working 

in Saskatchewan today than ever before. This statement is not 

only true for southern Saskatchewan but northern Saskatchewan 

as well. 

 

Kitsaki Development Corporation has received the 1997 

Economic Developer of the Year award from the Council for 

Advancement of Native Development Officers. 

 

KDC (Kitsaki Development Corporation) is 100 per cent owned 

by the Lac la Ronge Indian Band. It was started by the chief and 

council in 1981 to help develop an economic base for their 

band’s 6,000 members who live in several northern 

communities. The council identified long-term economic 

development as an avenue by which economic conditions for 

their band members can be improved. Since then, KDC has 

grown into a corporation with 12 subsidiaries worth more than 

$33 million and employing more than 400 people. 

 

Kitsaki Development Corporation’s office is in La Ronge. Mr. 

Speaker, the Lac la Ronge Indian Band can be proud of Kitsaki 

and its achievements and its contributions to self-determination 

for aboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Liberal Record on Saskatchewan Health Care 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One point was  

certainly made clear during this week’s short legislative session, 

and that is the fact that health care remains in a state of crisis 

and that this Liberal opposition is the true defender of health 

care in the province. 

 

Just to recap, Mr. Speaker, we moved the motion to provide 

compensation for hepatitis C victims. We challenged why the 

former minister of Health sat on a Betaseron report for nine 

months. We held the Premier accountable for failing to 

personally look into why a 79-year-old woman waited six days 

for surgery to repair a broken hip. We questioned why the 

Premier is prepared to reach out to the people of Quebec but is 

threatening to close long-term care beds of French-speaking 

Gravelbourg residents. We demonstrated that the closure of the 

Plains is premature and announced a new petition drive on the 

issue. 

 

We urged the Minister of Health to explain why he’s backing 

doctors into a corner and inviting job action by not resolving the 

on-call issue. We challenged the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government to explain what plan it has to address the shocking 

rate of TB (tuberculosis) in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But you know, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister of Health, if . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member will 

recognize, of course, that it is appropriate under normal 

circumstances to be directing debate through the Chair. Rule 28 

makes that very clear, and I’ll ask the hon. member to direct his 

member’s statement through the Chair. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Through you to the 

Premier and to the Minister of Health, if I could have one New 

Year’s resolution come true it would be that in 1998 it would 

mean no more suffering, no more health care concerns, and 

some new solutions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Two Economic Surveys 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we 

have heard many examples of how our economy is growing and 

creating jobs in Saskatchewan. And the latest is the release by 

the Minister of Finance today of the economic review for 1997. 

 

Now in passing, Mr. Speaker, I find it of some interest that not 

one opposition member in this short session has gotten up to 

talk about the good things that are happening in their 

communities which they represent. 

 

Today I want to mention two recent surveys by reputable 

organizations which put these individual stories into context. In 

short, both surveys say in general what my colleagues on this 

side of the House have been saying in particular. 

 

First, the Regina Chamber of Commerce two days ago released 

its annual economic forecast membership survey. As 

president-elect, Leith McKay, said, the results show improved 

optimism for the coming year: 70 per cent of businesses expect 

an increase in business volume in 1998; 42 per cent expect to 

employ more people — none expected their number to 

decrease; 40 per cent to invest more money in their businesses.  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

And that survey, Mr. Speaker, is a vote of confidence in our 

economy. 

 

As is a recent report by the Conference Board of Canada, which 

says in part, 10,000 new jobs will be created in Saskatchewan in 

1998, spurred by manufacturing, petroleum, and service 

industry, and gross domestic product this year will be 3.1 per 

cent and 2.6 per cent next year. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are highlights which are making 

Saskatchewan people proud and creating the confidence that is 

necessary in order that our economy grow even more next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower’s Investment in Guyana 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds as if he may want to rethink his taking of 

$31 million of taxpayers’ money and sending it off to Guyana. 

Just to recap, in case you missed this morning’s news, police 

have had to fire shotguns and use tear gas to disperse hundreds 

of demonstrators in Georgetown, Guyana — not exactly what 

you’d call a friendly reaction to the recent election. 

 

I say this, Mr. Minister, because law enforcement has had to 

resort to these tactics because of accusations of rigging the 

election and it sounds as if there’s a lot more where that came 

from. 

 

Mr. Minister, what’s it going to take before you scrap this 

thing? Will you once and for all put taxpayers’ minds at ease 

and cancel your plan to blow $31 million on a power company 

in a country as unstable as Guyana? Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister, today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite again that on Monday he was saying the 

election was over and we should either conclude the deal or get 

out of it. That was his opinion Monday. Tuesday he said that we 

should wait and watch. Today he is now gloating over the 

implication of a country of fledgling democracy, that they are 

having problems. 

 

I say to the member opposite that the very reason we haven’t 

made the decision is because we are still looking at aspects of 

the arrangement, and as you know a decision has not been 

made. 

 

But I say to the member opposite, I say to the member opposite 

that this attempt today to gloat over the problems that are 

existing in Guyana I think are shameful, for he and the 

right-wing party, the Saskatchewan Party, the former Liberals 

and Tories, who come here today with that approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, when are you going to get the 

point? Saskatchewan ratepayers are being smacked with big 

increases to SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), and SaskEnergy while at the same time you’re 

running all over the world looking for new places to spend their 

money. 

 

As far as Guyana goes, you know there are many reasons to 

rethink this investment. Mr. Minister, once the rioting stops and 

the guns are . . . stop firing and being put away, what are you 

going to do with the $31 million? Are you going to continue to 

insist on risking it in Guyana? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that to date there have been three equity 

investments by Crowns outside of the province in international 

investments. Each one of them have been very carefully 

analysed and we have said to the public that every one of these 

investments will be reviewed with proper due diligence and 

proper recommendations from our staff, in the Crowns and the 

holding company, CIC. 

 

No decision has been made on Guyana and I say to the member 

opposite, what you should be concerned about, sir, is that 

document that you signed to your leader that promised in blood 

that you would be a Liberal. And what I’d like to say today to 

the new, incoming leader of the Saskatchewan Party — the 

new, incoming leader — you better watch your back dealing 

with those birds on that side who have signed statements, have 

broken their promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Early Release of Sex Offender 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Justice minister. It was only after a good deal of pressure 

that you decided to put in place a process to warn residents 

when a dangerous sex offender is released. 

 

Today we have a case in Prince Albert where a dangerous 

criminal is going to be released in three weeks. Just two months 

ago the parole board said releasing this man early, who sexually 

assaulted a 10-year-old girl and threatened to kill another child 

if they told, should not be released early, but he’s going free 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Minister, the mother of these children wants to warn her 

neighbours and other parents about this man, but she’s been told 

she can’t. I’ll leave it to the Liberals to explain their federal 

cousins’ parole policies, but can you explain what’s going on? I 

thought you took care of this type of situation. Why is your 

legislation not helping this woman and other Prince Albert 

families? If ever, this is a season when the children of this 

province should not have to feel unsafe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

receive that question and provide a bit of information. 



2060  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Personal safety and safe communities are the main goal of the 

justice system in Saskatchewan. And we responded to the 

people of Saskatchewan and set up a Public Disclosure Act 

which would deal with some very difficult issues. The process 

of that Act involves the police working with the local 

community and making application to that board. And 

practically, the process there is for this woman to make 

application in her local area and proceed with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Services for Rural Women 

 

Ms. Draude: —Mr. Speaker, the announcement that 

government is going to spend three-quarters of a million dollars 

to help women’s groups get on the Internet proves the 

government is totally out of touch with women, especially in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Internet is a useful tool but there are many better ways to 

spend money to help women, considering many don’t have a 

computer in the first place. The program is supposed to benefit 

rural women in particular. 

 

Madam Minister, both you and I are from rural Saskatchewan. 

In rural Saskatchewan most women have no access to 911 for 

real emergencies. We have no safe shelters for battered women. 

There are no support groups or counselling services available 

for rural women. There’s no access to emergency funds for 

social services. There’s no shortage . . . there’s a shortage of 

subsidized housing, and the list goes on and on. On top of it all, 

women have to be part of an organization to qualify for this 

new program. 

 

Madam Minister, do you really believe there’s a women’s club 

out in Podunk, Saskatchewan waiting to apply for this grant? 

How can you possibly say this program is the number one 

priority for women in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to 

have the opportunity to answer this question. 

 

One of the things that we did in meeting with women right 

across Saskatchewan . . . This is one of the things that they had 

identified to us, that organizations that women wanted to be part 

of, rural women, of Indian and Metis women, of immigrant 

women, of organizations, that they wanted an opportunity to be 

able to communicate, be able to link each other together. And 

because of the great expanse of the province this is one of the 

ways in which we could link women’s organizations together. 

 

Teacher Contract Negotiations 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, yesterday the Minister of 

Education created tremendous uncertainty in the collective 

bargaining structure for education. Public pressure will be 

placed on both boards of education and teachers and in every 

community. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have another chance today to set taxpayers’ 

minds at ease. All you have to do is promise to cover every  

penny of a new agreement, including any salary cost increases, 

allowances, improvements to benefits, and other related costs. 

That’s the least you can do, Mr. Premier, because you’ve 

already cut our education system to the bone. It’s time to put 

something back. 

 

Will you commit today not just to pay any increase in salaries, 

but to cover all increases a new agreement will be bring? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Education, I’ll be pleased to answer the question on 

behalf of the government. 

 

The member opposite was told yesterday by the minister — and 

I repeat again — the trustees are at the bargaining table with the 

government in negotiations with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation. And those negotiations are either ongoing or about 

to be resumed. 

 

I think it is prudent for all of us to take the time to see the 

outcome of those deliberations before making any decisions 

that flow therefrom. 

 

I do know one thing, and that is that the trustees and the 

teachers and the governments are partners in good education, 

top quality education. And we have produced what I think is 

one of the finest, if not the finest, K to 12 systems in all of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question 

to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you have left school boards to fend for themselves 

in that kind of a situation. You have slashed the K to 12 budget 

by millions and millions of dollars since the NDP government 

took office a number of years ago. 

 

The Ontario government did a study on what percentage of K to 

12 education costs are picked up by each province, and you did 

not fare very well, Mr. Premier. You pay only about 40 per cent 

of operating costs while Manitoba pays 65 per cent and Alberta 

even more. 

 

Mr. Premier, when are you going to start making education a 

priority in this province, and when are you going to start paying 

60 per cent of operating grants to schools like you promised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you one thing: 

when he says, referring to me, that I closed, I didn’t close nearly 

as many, in fact no schools compared to the number that you 

personally closed when you were a trustee in your area. You 

closed them. You closed the schools, point blank. And when the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. 

members to come to order and allow the Premier the provide 

the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this is the person who  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

closed more schools in his district than anybody in this 

Legislative Assembly, and probably more than any trustee. But 

the hon. member . . . Mr. Speaker, I can’t hear myself speak — 

I can’t hear myself speak. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ll ask all hon. members on both sides 

of the House to allow the Premier to be heard, to provide the 

response to the question. Order. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I could only 

assume that their loud yelling is an allergic reaction to the 

truths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And the simple truth of the matter is 

that that person sitting behind you, and that person sitting 

beside you, who are Tories, and that person sitting beside him 

who’s a Tory, and that person there from Saltcoats who was a 

campaign manager for a Tory, and that person back there from 

Rosthern who’s a Tory, and that person there who wishes he’s a 

Tory, and that person sitting behind him who also is a Tory — 

they bankrupted this province for nine years under the former 

premier Devine.  

 

They left the teachers and the school system virtually zero 

because you bankrupted this province or brought it to the edge 

of bankruptcy. We’ve turned it around. We have provided fiscal 

help, and today I can proudly report that we have more people 

working in Saskatchewan than ever before in the history of 

Saskatchewan and we’ve eliminated the deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. All hon. members will 

come to order. Order. Order, order. All hon. members are in 

serious jeopardy of getting lumps of coal in their stockings next 

week here. 

 

Order, order, order. 

 

Now the hon. member from Arm River has been recognized to 

put his question and I’ll ask the cooperation of all members to 

allow the hon. member from Arm River to be heard. 

 

Reduced Hospital Services 

 

Mr. McLane: — And a Merry Christmas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance delivered a rosy financial 

picture to the public this morning and I’m sure that he and his 

bean counters will have a very merry Christmas. However it 

will a black Christmas for health care in Regina. Even though 

this government has already closed almost 400 hospital beds in 

the city, another 77 hospital beds will be closed for two weeks 

during the holiday period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain why he is 

forcing these bed closures just to save money regardless of the 

impact it may have on the emergency care needs of people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit surprised by 

the question from the member opposite, because, and I say this 

because this member, this member, Mr. Speaker, has served, 

this member has served with the Saskatchewan health 

association for a number of years and he knows in 

Saskatchewan that through two times of the year, at Christmas 

and during the summer season, all acute care centres in the 

province reduce the number of acute care beds. 

 

And he should know that, Mr. Speaker. This is a given. And 

this has been the practice, this has been the practice for ever. 

And the Liberal member should have a full appreciation of this 

and knows it very well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while this government is 

forcing the closure of another 77 hospital beds for Christmas, 

the city of Winnipeg is considering opening as many as 100 

beds for the holiday season for an expected increase in their 

workload. In fact we’re told that the Manitoba government is 

working with hospitals to develop a long-term strategy for 

funding the beds, something this NDP government could clearly 

take a lesson in. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are the people of Saskatchewan going to see 

a long-term strategy for funding beds? When are you going to 

move away from your bean-counter mentality and start basing 

health care on need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to answer on 

behalf of the government. The hon. member asks us questions 

which are prefaced by, when is the government going to 

acknowledge. Well I have something for the Liberal Party. 

 

When is the Saskatchewan Liberal Party ever going to 

acknowledge that the biggest damage inflicted on medicare, not 

only in Saskatchewan, but across Canada, was the $7 billion cut 

by Mr. Chrétien and Mr. Rock. When will you admit that? 

When will the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, of Saskatchewan, 

ever admit that they believe in two-tier medicine? 

 

You, sir, yourself, the member from Arm River, got up and you 

said favoured two-tier medicine. You’re like the so-called 

Saskatchewan Party. You want to two-tier medicine; you want 

to privatize medicine, you want to have private hospitals for 

profit, all of that. When will you get up to admit that? When 

will you get up and admit, on behalf of the Liberal Party, that 

you fought medicare tooth and nail? That you don’t believe in 

medicare, no more than the Saskatchewan Party believes in 

medicare? Both of you are of the same. 

 

Heaven forbid that they ever should elect you or the 

Saskatchewan Party because we’d see the end of medicare the 

way we know it and the way we love it in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. All hon. 

members on both sides of the House. Order. Order. 



2062  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, since 

you want to answer the health care questions I’ll ask you the 

same question I asked the Minister of Health. It appears that in 

Winnipeg they recognize there’s a problem over the holiday 

season with increased people that need help. The Minister of 

Health is saying, in Saskatchewan we need less beds because 

nobody’s going to get sick. 

 

If that indeed is the case, Mr. Premier, why not have the people 

in this province that need elective surgery utilize these beds 

over the Christmas season, if there isn’t a need for them? And 

can you answer that, Mr. Premier? Will you allow these beds to 

be reopened and used for elective surgery? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member knows, as the Minister of Health has said — being a 

former president of the Saskatchewan hospitals organization, 

SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) — 

he knows full well what the pattern has been for years and why 

it is so. During the Christmas period and during the summer 

period, surgeries and acute care hospital beds are in less 

demand for obvious reasons. 

 

If it’s at all possible, medically, patients want to be home with 

their families. Doctors want to be home with their families. And 

that’s where the utilization . . . (inaudible) . . . is in the place. 

You know that to be the case and it’s always been that way. 

 

And I want to tell you something. When this House resumes, if 

you deny that you don’t know the case, we’re going to take out 

what it was when you were president of SAHO and what the 

record of hospital beds and closures were during this period. 

And I bet you they reflect almost the same situation today. And 

if they reflect the same situation today, you will have to ask this 

and answer this question: why were you so silent? Why were 

you so silent when you were president of SAHO in this 

situation? Did the cat take your tongue at that time or what? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Funding 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

government brags that we have needs-based funding for health 

in Saskatchewan. The Provincial Auditor says, yes we do — it’s 

the fiscal needs of the government, not the health needs of the 

people. 

 

The Provincial Auditor said in his report this fall, when health 

districts set priorities, they were often related to the 

department’s fiscal expectations rather than the district’s 

priority health care needs. 

 

My question is for the Premier: when will you begin getting 

back to the health needs of the people, not the fiscal priorities of 

your government? When will the health care needs of 

Saskatchewan people rather than the bottom line be what drives 

our health policy? When will the priority be hospitals in 

Saskatchewan instead of power plants in Guyana? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Well I find this interesting, again  

coming from the Liberal Party. When will you get up and tell 

the people of this Legislative Assembly that the needs and the 

priorities of the Liberal Party are such that they should never 

have cut $7 billion from health care? 

 

We just got back from Ottawa, the premiers meeting with the 

Prime Minister just a week ago today, and at that meeting, 

unanimously, all the premiers and the territorial leaders said 

that the Liberal government in Ottawa ought not to have cut 

back the $7 billion in health care. And they want that restored 

back as part of the federal fiscal dividend. 

 

When will you get up and be consistent and honest to the 

people of Saskatchewan by saying that they should not have cut 

it back? And why don’t you get up and tell us right now that 

you’ve written a letter, tell us publicly that you’re asking the 

Prime Minister to restore funding for health care for the people 

of Saskatchewan and Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The Premier of course, would suggest that $7 

billion has been cut from Saskatchewan’s grants, and of course 

that’s absolute rubbish and nonsense. The health funding is 

increasing. 

 

Anyway . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, in this session we have pointed 

out how the people of Gravelbourg are facing long-term bed 

closures. East Central Health District has got a $2.4 million 

deficit which they describe as a crisis. We’ve talked about the 

six days of agonizing wait for hip surgery. In The Battlefords, 

we’ve lost 16 acute care beds and 52 long-term care beds. 

 

We now know that because of cut-backs and burnout and the 

stress faced by our few remaining nurses, that their sick time is 

double the national average because of the pressures they’re 

facing. 

 

Now we hear that there will be dozens more beds closed in 

Regina as a prelude to shutting down the entire Plains Health 

Centre. Although you campaigned against doing that, now 

that’s what you’re doing, blaming the health district. Well the 

health district says it’s your funding that forced that decision. 

 

What was once your biggest strength is now your biggest . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member has been 

extremely long in his preamble. Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask the 

hon. member from North Battleford to put his question 

immediately now. Directly to the question. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. 

When will you start facing up to the constitutional 

responsibilities of your government to meet the health needs of 

the people of Saskatchewan and quit blaming either the health 

districts or federal government and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. 



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, this hon. member asks 

us to face up to our responsibilities which I’m proud to say we 

have done. We have reformed our health care to be the model 

for all of Canada — for all of Canada. 

 

I know that your seatmate wants to have two-tier medicine. I 

know that the Liberal Party was part and parcel with the 

Conservative Party over there in the Keep our Doctors 

committee strike on medicare. Were you there at the time of the 

strike on medicare in 1962? Were you there? Were you there? 

Did some Liberal in your family take you there? Because I bet 

you almost everyone of your caucuses . . . The Liberal Party 

and the Conservative Party fought medicare tooth and nail and 

now you have the audacity of getting up and saying you support 

medicare? You don’t support medicare because you don’t 

understand it. 

 

But my question to you is this as I sit down. Look at all the 

premiers in Canada, all the premiers in Canada — Liberal 

premiers, Conservative premiers, NDP premiers, the territorial 

leaders — all of us got together and we said to Ottawa: give us 

a hand by returning some of that $7 billion that you cut 

Canada-wide. Why don’t you get up and help us and join us in 

that approach? What’s wrong with you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ranching Operation’s Water Problems 

 

Mr. Goohsen: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 

Speaker, this morning is to the minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. 

 

Mr. Minister, it has been disappointing to watch the lack of 

initiative that your government has taken with respect to solving 

the problems of families harmed by what is left over after the 

oil and gas industry have drilled their wells. 

 

Perry Anton and his family are a good example of this. Perry 

has been trying for years, Mr. Minister, to get a fair settlement 

from you after the water was contaminated on his ranch as a 

result of residue from the gas operations. He has reported from 

specialists . . . and has reports proving beyond a doubt that 

damage to his water and death to his cattle operation were 

directly a result of the leftover contaminants. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you please finally help this family? Tell us 

what your government is prepared to do for the Anton family, 

and will you commit today to meeting with the delegation that 

is here to represent them after question period to further discuss 

and give a commitment to this serious problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you very much, Speaker, and I thank 

the hon. member for raising this very important issue. Certainly 

the Perry and Charlotte Anton family has experienced a number 

of hardship and stress over the last number of years. 

 

Unfortunately after several years of completing over 20 reports 

on the situation on the Anton ranch dealing with potential 

contamination from the oil and gas industry, 19 reports 

indicated there was no confirmed evidence of this pollution and 

contamination. One report indicated that one dugout did contain 

toxic water in 1992-93. 

More recently, we met with the Antons last spring, and with 

their cooperation we conducted yet another study of the water 

on the Anton ranch. This included well water as well as 

dugouts. That report was released yesterday and we took the 

report out to the Antons and reviewed it with them. The report 

indicated that all of the water was clear, no contamination. 

Similarly we did a test on the cow herd on the Anton ranch. 

That report was also completed yesterday and the cow herd on 

the Anton ranch has a clean bill of health. 

 

I certainly will meet with the delegation here today. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker; supplemental to the 

same minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, we challenge your report that 19 studies say that 

there is no problem, and we’d ask you to table those reports, 

because we don’t actually believe that they exist or that they say 

that. We have a suitcase full of other things. 

 

The Antons are not the only family, Mr. Minister, especially 

from the sand hills region of our province who are experiencing 

these kind of problems. I realize that the oil and the gas industry 

are vital to our province’s economy. But so are the 

environmental . . . and the needs of families in their family 

operations in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, something must be done to address the 

environmental impact of the oil and gas industry that are having 

effects on the sensitive areas like The Great Sand Hills. 

Changes need to be made to The Surface Rights Acquisition 

and Compensation Act and they need to be made immediately 

in order for that board to be able to act. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to help the people 

suffering because of inadequate legislation? Are you going to 

make these companies clean up after themselves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the oil 

and gas industry is very important to the economy of 

Saskatchewan — everybody recognizes that — and the jobs 

created are also very beneficial to the province. 

 

At the same time, our environment is also very important and 

we are committed to using the latest technology, updating 

processes where we can, to ensure that we leave a healthy 

environment when the oil and gas industry is being conducted 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have sensitive areas, as the hon. member mentioned, such 

as The Great Sand Hills. In that particular area, for an example, 

we have a planning commission in place with local people. We 

have environmentally sensitive lands which have been 

identified and are off limits to the industry. And we have a 

number of other activities that we are doing. 

 

Most recently, last week I met with the Southeast Surface 

Rights Association representatives and heard firsthand some of 

their concerns. And we are committed to working with the 

landowners as well as the industry to ensure that our 

environment is safe and kept in as best shape as possible for 

future generations. 



2064  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplemental the 

same minister. Perhaps the other ministers will want to jump 

into this. 

 

Minister, you know very well that later today I’ll have an 

opportunity, and I will be presenting and tabling documentation 

that comes to about half a million dollars worth of consultants’ 

reports, all of which say that Perry Anton’s ranch was 

contaminated, and that there is a link, that cattle did die as a 

result of that pollution, and that it continues to exist all through 

this province, not only in The Great Sand Hills. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m glad that you have finally taken the initiative 

to accept the responsibility of meeting with these people. But 

the Perry Antons fell through a crack. They fell through a crack 

because scientists are scientists and they never agree. I can give 

you a litany of examples of that. 

 

You know very well that it will be 100 years and they’ll never 

agree. You have a moral responsibility to help these people and 

to see to it that nobody else falls through the cracks in this very 

important area. We want you not only to help the Antons but to 

seal up the crack and change the legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, ask the Minister of Energy and Mines to join you. 

The legislation is in his purview. The Minister of Justice 

handles another one. You’ve spread it all . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Now the hon. member 

has been extremely long in his preamble and I’ll ask him to put 

his final question directly now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Minister, will you take the appropriate action 

to bring the Minister of Energy with you and negotiate with this 

team today and carry on with what needs to be done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve certainly 

worked continually with the Department of Energy and Mines. 

And we will have representatives from Energy and Mines at the 

meeting with the delegation today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 239  The Crown Corporations 

Rate Review Act, 1997 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that An 

Act respecting the review of rates imposed by certain 

Saskatchewan Crown Corporations be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I ask leave of the Assembly to move, seconded by the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, a motion: 

That the name of Mr. Andy Renaud be substituted for that of 

Ms. Judy Bradley on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — I ask leave of the Assembly to 

move, seconded by the member from Prince Albert: 

 

That the names of Mr. Lindy Kasperski . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. First of all the minister has 

requested leave to introduce the motion. Leave has been granted 

but the motion needs to be introduced on the record, and I’ll 

recognize the Government House Leader to introduce the 

motion on the record. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Members on Legislative Committees 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Move that, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert-Carleton: 

 

That the name of Mr. Andy Renaud be substituted for that 

of Ms. Judy Bradley on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 

Assembly to move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carleton, a motion concerning membership changes to 

the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been requested and again perhaps 

in the interest of expediting procedure, if the Government 

House Leader has a series of motions and would request leave 

for introducing, would that be acceptable to the House? I’ll just 

simply then . . . leave is granted for introducing a series of 

motions if they’re related to change of membership on 

committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That the names of Mr. Lindy Kasperski and Mr. Myron 

Kowalsky be substituted for that of Mr. Ed Tchorzewski 

and Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter on the list of members 

composing the Standing Committee on Constitutional 

Affairs. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

of the Assembly to move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carleton: 

 

That the name of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen be substituted 

for that of Mr. Kim Trew on a list of members composing 

the Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

of the Assembly to move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That the names of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen and Mr. Jack 

Langford be substituted for that of Ms. Judy Bradley and 

Mr. Maynard Sonntag on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

of the Assembly to move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That the names of Mr. Grant Whitmore and Mr. Ed 

Tchorzewski be substituted for that of Mr. Maynard 

Sonntag and Mr. Bob Pringle, and that the name of Mr. 

Jack Goohsen be substituted for that of Ms. Lynda 

Haverstock, on a list of members composing the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1100) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

of the Assembly to move, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, a motion: 

 

That the name of Mr. Myron Kowalsky be substituted for 

that of Ms. Judy Bradley on a list of members composing 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well to ask leave of the Assembly 

to move substitution of names on committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the name of June Draude be deleted from the names 

composing the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well, by leave of the Assembly I 

move that the name of Don Toth . . . seconded by the member 

from Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the name of Don Toth be substituted for that of Ben 

Heppner on the Standing Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 

That the name of Rod Gantefoer be substituted for that of 

Don Toth on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, by leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the name of Bill Boyd be substituted for that of Ben 

Heppner on the Standing Committee on Private Members’ 

Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the name of Mr. Ben Heppner be substituted for that 

of Mr. Don Toth on the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last but not least, by 

leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the member from 

Canora-Pelly: 

 

That the name of Mr. Bill Boyd be substituted for that of 

Mr. Dan D’Autremont on the Standing Committee on 

Agriculture. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 

Environmental Problems in the South-west 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

introducing a motion later in my discussion, moved by myself 

and seconded by the member from Cannington. The motion is 

on record and so I won’t read it just now, but it has to do of 

course with the problems that we have discussed through 

question period that relate to contamination as a result of oil and 

gas well operations and their related activities. And particularly 

of course, we are going to talk about Perry Anton and his family 

because this is a classic example that shows what has happened 

to so many people. 

 

And when you, when you try to make a point with government, 

I think it’s important that you focus on one small area so that 

they can understand the whole process and work their way 

through it. If you don’t do that, of course, the issue and the 

problems related to such a large area of discussion as pollution 

become so large that people just can’t get their minds around it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit today to begin with 

about how these things happen. I’ve been in discussion with  



2066  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

government members and it seems like they really don’t 

understand why the government has a responsibility for the 

damage that the oil and gas industry have done. And they’re 

true in that — their arguments are right — that when you think 

about it, the people that make the mess should clean the mess 

up. There’s no question about that. 

 

But the reality is that there is a responsibility for government in 

regards to the oil and gas industry and it goes very simply like 

this. And I want the Minister of Energy and Mines to 

particularly take note of this explanation. It’s quite simple. 

 

Some years ago the governments of this province decided that 

they wanted the oil and gas industry to come into the province 

to explore for oil and gas because of course that would be good 

for the economy. Oil and gas is necessary for everybody’s lives 

and it’s a very important industry. 

 

And so they decided that there would be a process by which this 

would all unfold. That process would be that the government 

would lease the minerals that are underneath the ground on the 

basis of measurements of land above the ground and they would 

lease those minerals to the petroleum companies on the basis of, 

the highest bidder takes the lease — an auction, very simple, 

very fair. 

 

Unfortunately though, lots of these leases lie under private land 

and Crown land, and so they had to come up with some way 

that would allow the oil and gas industry to get onto that land 

easily, because the oil and gas industry said we don’t want to 

pay a bunch of money for royalties, a bunch of money for 

permits and leases, and then not be able to get on the land. And 

so the government said, we’re going to guarantee you the ability 

to get on to private people’s lands. 

 

Now under today’s rules under the private . . . under the human 

rights acts of this nation if this sort of thing were done again, I 

don’t think it would ever be allowed to go through. I think it 

would be challenged in the Supreme Court. But we didn’t have 

those kind of protections for people in those days and this has 

evolved through. 

 

And so quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, what happened is the 

government said we’ll write legislation in the province that will 

allow these companies the right to expropriation; the right of 

entry onto private people’s lands without their wanting them on 

there. And of course that’s been done. That legislation is in 

place. This government has chosen, when it got elected, to leave 

that legislation in place, and so they are responsible for what 

happens to people as a result of that legislation. 

 

And what happens to people is this: they cannot stop the oil and 

gas industry from coming on. And so when the oil and gas 

industry does something that is environmentally threatening 

nobody is there to control it. The farmer can’t stop them. 

 

They can put their pipeline any place they want. They can go 

through an alkali slough. They can go through a surface water 

area. They can go through shallow, sensitive areas. They can go 

through sand dunes. They can go straight through any place 

they want. They don’t have to answer to the farmer that has 

lived on that land for maybe two, three or four generations of 

people. 

And four generations of people on many of the ranches out in 

the sand hills know how critical the environment is out there. 

And they know the areas of their ranches are the most . . . that 

are the most critical a lot better than an oil company or a gas 

company would ever know or care about. But they can’t stop 

them, and they can’t tell them what to do. 

 

And I’ve had personal experience in this on my farm. I told the 

gas company . . . or an oil company, don’t put a line through 

that sensitive area because it’s highly corrosive. Your line will 

rot out and then the water will be mixed with your effluent. But 

no, they put it through. Eight years later the line had rusted 

through and the pollutants are flooding into the underground 

water system. 

 

Now you may think that that doesn’t matter. But it does because 

the underground water system is where you get your drinking 

water from. And it runs in rivers under the ground just as surely 

as the water above the ground runs in rivers. And it runs across 

this province just as fast. So if you have a pollution spill in the 

south-west corner think about the Swift Current Creek water on 

top of the ground. How long will it take for that water from the 

Swift Current Creek to run through the system to the 

Diefenbaker dam and up to Saskatoon — and all the people 

through the South Saskatchewan and into the North 

Saskatchewan drink that water that’s polluted — if you put a 

pollutant in it down south of Gull Lake? That’s how long it 

takes for the same kind of pollutant under the ground to move 

through the underground water system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s responsibility lies where I’ve 

just pointed out, in the fact that they have taken away the rights 

of farmers to stop these industries or to negotiate with them. 

And by doing that, by giving expropriatory powers to the oil 

and gas industries, the government has accepted the 

responsibility then to take care of the people’s needs, of 

society’s greater need for pollutants not to get into our drinking 

water, our soil, and our foodstuffs. 

 

When a cow takes a drink of polluted water, where do you think 

that water ends up? In the meat and in the milk. Who drinks the 

milk? The calf. Who eats the meat? You and I, every time we 

stop at McDonald’s hamburgers. That’s where that can end up 

at. Highly critical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I want the Minister of Energy and 

Mines to listen so closely. Because the legislation is largely 

under his jurisdiction. The Minister of Justice has The Surface 

Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act under his 

jurisdiction. The Pipe Lines Act is under Energy and Mines. 

SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management) has an involvement through the other 

legislations, and there’s a half a dozen of those. 

 

And so you’ve got three different departments all fighting with 

one another for jurisdiction, and once again you never know if 

you can get a straight answer out of one, if you’ll ever get a 

straight answer that agrees from the others. And so the whole 

thing is a mishmash of fighting back and forth and nobody ever 

solves these problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is why we are saying the government has 

the responsibility, because they have made themselves the  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

watchdog over the industry by giving away the rights of farmers 

to be able to say no — expropriatory powers. 

 

And I believe that right today the oil and gas companies, 

because they work on the basis of making a profit . . . And I 

don’t fault them for that. Lord knows, we have to have profits 

in the industry or they won’t be here. Lord knows, we need the 

industries and the jobs. We absolutely do. But we have to be 

careful not to kill ourselves in the process. And so we ask the 

ministers to recognize the fact that they have this responsibility 

as the watchdogs to make sure that pollution doesn’t occur, and 

that it’s cleaned up if it does. 

 

Now we’re not so naïve to think that we can have a great 

industry like this without some problems. Accidents will 

happen, Mr. Speaker. There is no question in my mind that 

there will be accidents that will happen and there will be oil 

spills and water spills. The tragedy is not having a system that 

can properly react. 

 

When you have a system that allows for five or six years of a 

farmer having to go through the process that Perry Anton has 

gone through and not have this problem resolved and still don’t 

even have the pollutants cleaned up, something is desperately 

wrong. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have with me today the evidence that the 

government wants. They wanted evidence that they have 

responsibility. I have just argued that point for them. They gave 

away our rights and in exchange they accepted the 

responsibilities, because with rights there must be 

responsibility. 

 

You gave away our rights as farmers and ranchers, and the 

Crown landowners — the government itself — you gave away 

the rights for people to be able to regulate this industry for 

themselves by simply being able to say no sometimes. And 

right of entry orders are given without question. I haven’t heard 

one in recent history that’s been turned down. And so that 

rubber stamp has to be broken. 

 

Next question is that the minister says he wants evidence and 

proof that Perry Anton, as an individual, has a link with his 

problem. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s go through some of the 

documentation that I’ve been provided with today. 

 

I have here the Anton-Ocelot dispute resolutions and solutions 

brief that is prepared by a group of people that have worked 

together after looking at all of these other reports. We are 

prepared, Mr. Speaker, to have all of this material photocopied 

today and laid on the table, and presented not only to the 

members of the government but also to the press and the 

general public. Because it’s time that some of this stuff became 

public. That’s one file, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll talk about that a 

little later. 

 

Then we go into some of the reports. Here we have the ground 

conductivity surveys, Freefight Lake, Saskatchewan, by 

geophysical consultants, and that was done on the Perry Anton 

ranch. Not a very thick report this one, but certainly a lot of 

material in here and it is impressive — a lot of good, detailed  

maps and pictures in that one for those folks that can’t read too 

well. 

 

We also have the document from Darwall Consultants. Darwall 

Consultants lived at this ranch — physically lived at this ranch 

— to do the necessary testing, the drilling into the soils where 

they found the pollutants, the contaminants. That report, Mr. 

Speaker, along with this report — both of these now, and the 

final conclusions, all three of these — absolutely say that there 

is a link and that Ocelot energy is a bad corporate citizen who 

did not clean up their mess and should be held responsible to 

clean up that mess and to pay compensation. 

 

Then of course we have one from Roper environmental 

engineers. Now this one was, of course, commissioned by 

Ocelot, and lo and behold there are a couple of things that are a 

little different here. The first thing that is important for the 

minister to know is that this report that is favourable to Ocelot 

concedes that there is pollutants and that those pollutants are in 

fact there. They only disagree with the other people on the 

conclusion — how far has the pollutant migrated through the 

soil and did it or did it not get into the dugout where the water 

was drank? 

 

Well it really doesn’t matter, Mr. Minister, if it wasn’t in the 

water. The cattle don’t necessarily have to get pollutants out of 

the water. They might’ve ate the grass that grew on this stuff 

and got it out of the plants. You see there is a reality that plants 

also suck up pollutants and so they’d link by this report — even 

though they say there is no link, the reality is that they all do 

say that Ocelot has pits there that are full of pollutants and that 

they are responsible for that, even this one that favours the 

company. 

 

Then we get to a little bigger and better kind of a thing because 

you see the Antons couldn’t agree with Ocelot and Ocelot 

couldn’t agree with the Antons and so they hired some lawyers 

and they’ve got hundreds of thousands of dollars spent on this 

thing. A half a million dollars is probably right. The minister 

said it himself, probably half a million dollars spent on this case 

alone on consultants. If they’d have give Perry Anton that 

money he’d have been a happy man and we’d have cleaned the 

mess up already. But we spend half a million dollars on 

consultants’ reports and yesterday we got another one and I bet 

you this afternoon we’re going to be proposed to sit down with 

somebody else to go through it all and make a decision based 

on what he finds. 

 

And we’re going to carry on and pay him another 100,000, I 

suspect. And the lawyers that have worked. Perry Anton, of 

course haven’t been paid because he went broke and that’s why 

he couldn’t carry it on to the Supreme Court of Canada because 

no individual farmer can ever afford that. 

 

And this of course is the Weir Report as it’s referred to. Now 

it’s got a little more professional. Ocelot said we will agree to 

pay an independent consultant that we both will agree on and 

whatever the consultant finds out, we will do that. Okay, Perry 

Anton said — he’s a nice fellow — incidentally he couldn’t be 

here today. He’s here in spirit, believe me, he’s sitting in the 

gallery in spirit. But this whole process has wore him down. 

 

Yesterday the government sent out their delegation to try to  



2068  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

brainwash him into stopping this process today. And he quite 

seriously succumbed to that. And . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes they did. And I have a written report on what happened 

there yesterday and it’s not pretty, Mr. Minister, and it’s not 

very nice what happened there. This man now is so sick, he’s in 

bed because of the mental stress that you’ve caused him. And 

that’s not very nice in a Christmas spirit. 

 

Anyway, back to this report, the Weir report. They all agreed, 

everybody agreed, Perry agreed. Then they did the report, but 

Ocelot didn’t like the answer because the report said Ocelot is 

guilty. They polluted the land and there is a link, based on the 

evidence . . . in terms of circumstantial evidence, there is 

enough proof to link this that you have to accept it. That was 

their argument. And lots of people are sent to jail for crimes that 

are committed on circumstantial evidence. We know that there 

isn’t black and white evidence in many things in our world. 

 

This report was done by these people and it represents the 

findings of scientists from all across the world. These people 

went out all across Alberta, all around the world, and these are 

the highest paid, the most intelligent scientists that we’ve got in 

the world today and their information was put into this report. 

Two hundred and fifty thousand dollars later Ocelot was found 

to be guilty and Ocelot said, we don’t like it and we’re not 

going to pay any attention to it. They not only didn’t pay any 

attention to it, they didn’t even pay for the report that they 

promised to pay for and they’ve got those guys on the hook as 

well. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, in itself could represent, I’m sure, about 

10 or 15 hours of debate just to talk about what’s in this report. 

But we don’t need to do that because we are looking at all of 

the evidence. And the minister wants some evidence. We’ve got 

some more evidence for him. 

 

Here we now have the Alberta beef producers report and 

another report, Mr. Speaker, that was done at the request of the 

Alberta beef producers. And it hired consultants and it costs 

hundreds of thousands of dollars to put this together. And there 

are hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pages of evidence 

in here of what actually has happened in Alberta to cattle herds 

that have been exposed to what has happened in the oil and gas 

field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is evidence conclusive. I have to be careful 

about drinking this water you see because in Regina there are 

some salts, and if you drink too much while you’re making a 

speech, you have to leave quickly. That’s why Perry Anton’s 

cattle are dead, you see, because the water they drank poisoned 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of cooperation to try and resolve this 

issue, I have agreed to go along with the government and to 

allow them to introduce an amendment to my motion, because I 

believe we have to have cooperation here or we’ll never solve 

this problem. 

 

I’m therefore going to sit down and allow the member opposite 

to introduce his amendment so that we can solve this problem. 

 

The Speaker: — It’d be out of order to recognize another 

member until the motion’s been moved and must be on the  

floor. And I’ll invite the hon. member for Cypress Hills to 

conclude his debate. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will now 

introduce my motion. I move, seconded by the member from 

Cannington: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to take immediate 

action to make amendments to existing legislation and 

regulations to provide swift, binding restitution to the 

clean-up of pollutants and related problems; and as a 

humanitarian gesture to assist the Perry Anton family and 

other families in the south-west corner of Saskatchewan 

who are threatened by polluted water that is used for 

human and animal consumption; and further, to correct soil 

contamination problems with immediate emphasis on The 

Great Sand Hills. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will speak very 

briefly today. The member from Cypress Hills has spoken very 

eloquently and passionately about the problem that exists today 

and sketched it very well for us and for the public at large. 

 

I want to say simply that we do have a problem in this regard in 

the province of Saskatchewan, that we do need better vehicles 

to deal with the consequences of oil and natural gas activity in 

our province, better mechanisms to deal with disputes — not 

just more money, not just tighter legislation, not just better 

science — but we need better mechanisms to ensure that there 

is equitable treatment for both landowners and people in the oil 

and gas industry. We need better mechanisms to give citizens 

recourse where problems exist, so that this recourse can be 

timely, user-friendly, and inexpensive. Recourse to mediation, 

where helpful, re-mediation where necessary, and yes, even 

better compensation. 

 

Today we hear a call to make improvements to legislation and 

regulations. Today we are challenged as legislators to enhance 

the quality of life for people in Saskatchewan. The member 

from Cypress Hills has done this legislature a favour and has 

done the public a service in raising this matter, both the 

particular problem of Perry Anton and his family and the larger 

issues associated with the oil and gas industry. This morning on 

my way to Regina, on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) Radio, I heard Bruce Steele talk about Christmas 

time being a time, quote: “to mend fences and heal old 

wounds.” 

 

The Perry Anton situation is a problem that has been unresolved 

far too long. We need to try to bring some closure to this 

wound, some healing to this situation, and as this legislative 

session closes today and as this year comes to a conclusion, my 

hope would be that this resolution today would be a springboard 

for action, would set the stage for some change in the new year 

for a healthy environment and a healthy society. 

 

And so I move an amendment which enlarges the focus of the 

original motion, seconded by the member from Regina 

Coronation Park: 

 

That this Assembly support the government’s ongoing  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

actions to ensure existing legislation and regulations are 

adequate and updated where necessary, that is Surface 

Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act, to protect the 

ecological integrity of the Great Sand Hills; to work 

cooperatively with landowners and industry to protect 

Saskatchewan families from pollution and contamination 

stemming from oil and gas activity; to ensure that concerns 

created by past and future practices are addressed; to apply 

the principle of “polluter pays” so those responsible for 

contamination are also responsible for clean-up and 

compensation as required; and to monitor ongoing 

situations to ensure water quality is protected over the long 

term. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask that the clock be stopped momentarily 

while I review the amendment. 

 

Order. I’ve reviewed the amendment proposed by the hon. 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland and find that it is technically 

not acceptable in its format, and we’ll provide to the hon. 

member for Sutherland the opportunity to move his motion 

again to attempt to make it acceptable in proper format for the 

House. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I have a 

solution, which would be to move the amendment: 

 

That all the words after “That this Assembly” be deleted 

and the following substituted therefor: 

 

Support the government’s ongoing actions to ensure 

existing legislation and regulations are adequate and 

updated where necessary, that is The Surface Rights 

Acquisition and Compensation Act, to protect the 

ecological integrity of the Great Sand Hills; to work 

cooperatively with landowners and industry to protect 

Saskatchewan families from pollution and contamination 

stemming from oil and gas activity; to ensure the concerns 

created by past and future practices are addressed; to apply 

the principle of “polluter pays” so those responsible for 

contamination are also responsible for clean-up and 

compensation as required; and to monitor ongoing 

situations to ensure water quality is protected over the long 

term. 

 

I do so move, seconded by the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

(1130) 

 

The Speaker: — I find the amendment in order and the 

question before the Assembly then is the amendment moved by 

the hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland, seconded by the 

hon. member from Regina Coronation Park, and the original 

motion moved by the hon. member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to speak just 

briefly to the amendment. I think the amendment is friendly 

enough to the cause that we are championing here. I believe that 

the fact that Perry Anton’s name has been taken out does not 

relieve the government of responsibility directly to that family  

as an individual family. 

 

I am therefore going to ask the Assembly to support the 

amendment, in order so that we can get on with the business of 

solving this problem with the Antons and get on with the 

business of rewriting some of the legislation; so that this very 

serious crack in our system can be corrected. It’s the only way 

that we can close this crack in our society, in our system, is to 

address this issue so that it can’t happen in the future. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, is what I want to do. For the minister who 

questioned whether or not Perry Anton really should have 

gotten ill yesterday, let me read very carefully . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Now I have to remind the hon. 

member that in speaking to the amendment and having already 

spoken to the main motion, his comments are extremely limited 

and must be directly related to the amendment only. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — The amendment, of course, Mr. Speaker, asks 

that steps be taken to correct pollution, and those steps of 

course would include correcting the pollution in a dugout that 

presently exists. 

 

Some people attended Mr. Anton’s ranch yesterday and they 

said yesterday afternoon SERM officials arrived at the Anton 

ranch to communicate the results of yet another study, total cost 

of which they don’t know but it’s estimated in the hundreds of 

thousands of dollars. They said, your water is clean, it’s 

beautiful; it’s now not polluted. Mr. Anton said, oh that’s great, 

maybe I’ll take my herd of cattle down there tomorrow because 

the grass is good there and it hasn’t been grazed. And the 

official turned to him and said, oh wait a minute, maybe you’d 

better just take 10. 

 

What does that tell you, Mr. Minister? Are you afraid that that 

water . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Now I need to remind the hon. 

member that the debate must be through the Chair, as per rule 

28, not directly to members in the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that. I 

also want to lay on the Table today a list of the kinds of 

pollutants that the amendment will refer to. The kinds of things 

that we have to be careful for. I’ve asked for Darwall 

Consultants to give that to us so that I could put it on the Table, 

and a copy or copies for the minister and the other people that 

are interested to look at. I will do that now. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Pursuant to a special order dated 

December 15 in this House, debate on this motion, time has 

now expired. And the Chair is required to put the question 

directly. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 



2070  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Provincial Government Offloading 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise this morning and to present to the House a 

motion condemning the NDP government for it’s lack of 

financial commitment to, among other things, the K to 12 and 

post-secondary education systems in Saskatchewan. And I will 

present that motion at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m especially glad to be raising these issues at a 

fall sitting of the legislature. I believe that it is an opportune 

time for us as opposition members to raise issues on behalf of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. It is, I think, important that this 

government commit to having a fall session each and every fall. 

Issues like this must be brought forward, must be raised on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to indeed get a better 

understanding of why certain decisions are being made. 

 

I would like to begin by repeating some of the concerns that I 

raised yesterday with the Minister of Education and this 

morning with the Premier. 

 

Yesterday we were informed by the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association that the minister has thrown out the 

protocol agreement that was negotiated to establish an equitable 

collective bargaining process between boards of education and 

the teachers' federation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every time the current Minister of Education talks 

to Saskatchewan teachers about difficulties which arise in 

contract negotiations, she blames it on the protocol agreement. 

There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday when the 

member opposite threw out this important agreement, she 

stripped the taxpayers of this province of their voice in any 

negotiations in teacher contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is simply another example of the NDP 

hypocrisy this province has become accustomed to. Since this 

government has come to power, we have seen the same trend in 

health care, municipal government, and education. Even though 

provincial funding gets lower and lower, this government tries 

everything it can to centralize decision making. That is what I 

mean by hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, because this is the same NDP 

government that criticizes the federal government for doing 

exactly the same thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the hypocrisy I have come to expect from 

the NDP. So I can’t say I was surprised to learn that the 

Minister of Education axed this agreement and the position of 

local taxpayers. I was not surprised, but I can’t help wonder if 

delegates who attended the 82nd annual SSTA (Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association) convention in November were 

surprised. 

 

At their convention, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education 

went on and on about the importance of local school boards. 

She said, quote: 

 

School trustees, as locally elected and locally accountable 

decision makers, have a vital and integral role to play in 

our education system. In Saskatchewan we believe in the 

idea that local people should have input into the decisions 

that affect their families. 

Then the minister went on to share her insightful commentary 

on the problems with school boards. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister went on to say: 

 

The legitimacy of the school boards and school trustees is 

being threatened by a very subtle foe. In the most recent 

local elections, about 63 per cent of trustee positions were 

filled by acclamation. 

 

And what is her summation, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The greatest threat to the role of school boards appears to 

be apathy. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I think if you ask school boards who 

their biggest foe is, you will get an entirely different answer. 

Second of all, as politicians we should all know about low voter 

turnout and acclamation. People don’t want to run for office if 

they don’t think their voice will be heard or if all of the 

important decisions are made at the top. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people don’t like to be puppets on a string. Nor do 

they like making all of the tough decisions for a provincial 

government that offloads financial responsibility but refuses to 

take the heat for the consequences of those cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to get back to my earlier point, undermining the 

ratepayers’ voice at the negotiating table does nothing for 

apathy. You cannot say on the one hand that you believe in 

school boards and trustees and on the other hand mute their 

voices in important decisions such as salary negotiations. 

 

Especially, Mr. Speaker, it is the local ratepayer who picks up 

the majority of the bill for education in this province. And I do 

not think I need to remind the minister that it is the local 

taxpayers of this province that pay for 60 per cent of the total 

education bill in this province. 

 

Just this week my colleague from Saltcoats received a letter 

from the Minister of Education containing a backgrounder from 

the Ontario Department of Education detailing education 

finance systems in Canadian provinces. This report indicated 

that the Saskatchewan government pays the lowest proportion 

of overall provincial education funding except for the province 

of New Brunswick. 

 

In order for school boards to maintain quality education in their 

schools, they have had to hit local taxpayers — the local 

property taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. But the well is almost dry. 

Property taxes simply can’t go up any more. 

 

The operating and capital grant of this year, fiscal year that 

we’re speaking about, is $61 million less than the government’s 

commitment in their first year of office — $61 million less. 

 

(1145) 

 

As a result of inadequate funding for education, Mr. Speaker, a 

number of things have occurred to the K to 12 system in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I want to identify a number of points 

that were raised by teachers in a survey done by the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and that document is in the 

hands of the Minister of Education. 



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

Teachers said: that teachers themselves were spending a lot of 

their own money on textbooks because there was no additional 

resources provided; there were overcrowded schools and 

classrooms; inadequate school facilities, especially for students 

with disabilities. 

 

Thirteen per cent of Saskatchewan school buildings are 

inadequate. That means over 27,000 Saskatchewan students go 

to school in environments deemed inadequate for learning by 

their administrators. Thirty-one per cent of those buildings have 

mechanical difficulties, 24 per cent have electrical difficulties, 6 

per cent list safety as a concern. 

 

Further to those comments, one specific school division, and I 

will not mention the school division’s name, and this is a 

quotation, says: 

 

We the administrators of school division (X) . . . wish to 

express our concern regarding the inadequate resources for 

textbooks, materials and supplies to support curriculum 

implementation. Due to the overwhelming number of 

curricula introduced in the last eight years, our libraries 

and classrooms have reached a critical point. Often there’s 

only one book for 10 students. 

 

The lack of guidance counsellors in our schools means real 

issues are not being addressed. In our school the social 

worker comes to the school twice a month for the 

afternoon. Parents are contacting the school looking for 

some services for their children. 

 

Career guidance is inadequate. It is difficult to prepare 

students for the future when teachers have little to provide 

students with knowledge they need. With the emphasis on 

resource-based learning, we feel that all schools should 

have access to a teacher-librarian. Additional funding is 

needed for libraries. 

 

Final paragraph: 

 

Because of funding cuts, divisions are downloading onto 

teachers to provide services they are not adequately trained 

for — social workers, dieticians, nurses, career 

counsellors, and addiction counsellors. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, you can very clearly see that as a result of 

downloading we have placed two very significant burdens. 

Number one, schools and the burden that have been placed on 

teachers in the schools has become almost unbearable. The 

conditions need to be improved. 

 

I was very happy to see just a short while ago a presentation to 

the cabinet, to the government opposite, by a combined effort of 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association, the League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents, and school 

business officials. That document indicated very clearly that the 

government has to place education funding higher on their 

priority scale. The concerns on behalf of Saskatchewan students 

are real concerns. That’s half of the problem. 

 

The other half of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that as a result of 

millions and millions of dollars of downloading and offloading  

onto the local boards, the tax increases that have been felt by 

property owners in the province of Saskatchewan has reached 

the point of individuals indicating that it is a maximum. 

 

Property tax owners, as a result of reassessment this last year, 

have looked at their education property tax and have said, this 

must stop. It’s a tremendous predicament that we’ve placed the 

school boards of this province, the teachers of this province, 

and now we’re looking at the whole scenario and looking at the 

crumbling effect this has on the on the education system. 

 

A couple of comments about the post-secondary side of 

education, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone raised the concern about post-secondary capital 

funding. And that is not only for the city of Saskatoon and the 

University of Saskatchewan, but we also saw it here in Regina 

at the U of R (University of Regina) with the fact that a 

brand-new building was opened last year and no additional 

monies were provided in funding from this government for 

increased expenses for operating a new building. 

 

We see crumbling buildings in Saskatchewan . . . at the 

University of Saskatchewan. The member from Greystone 

adequately, I think, described those kinds of situations. 

 

What we also see though is a concern from students. Students 

have had . . . at the post-secondary level have picked up more 

and more of their education costs as we’ve moved along. Last 

year, November 29, the former minister responsible for 

Post-Secondary Education indicated that he was establishing a 

student assistance task force to look at the entire problems, all 

of the problems, that students faced in their education needs and 

education costs. And he announced the formation of that 

committee by stating this, and I quote: 

 

I will be appointing a task group on student assistance. The 

task group will include students, representatives of the 

universities and SIAST, and government officials. The task 

group will be charged with the responsibility to 

recommend possible improvements to current student 

assistance programs and to (present innovative approaches 

— sorry) present innovative approaches to student 

assistance that the government will be able to advance in 

discussions with the federal government and the other 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that quotation is November 29, 1996. We have 

heard from the government’s additional person that the 

government hired; a gentleman by the name of Harold MacKay, 

stated: 

 

Students are, with reason, increasingly concerned by the 

high cost of education. Increased tuition and other 

on-campus charges, general increases in the cost of living, 

and reduced summer employment job opportunities have 

combined to create significant financial pressures on 

university students. These are pressures which continue 

after graduation as students cope with the high levels of 

debt and early repayment schedule. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what you see there in that quotation is the fact that 

it’s a recognition that students have had to pick up additional 

costs. The burden of student loans is reaching a point of  



2072  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

maximum amounts, and indeed students are not sure that they 

will be able to repay the huge amounts of money that they are 

incurring as a result of obtaining loans. 

 

That document, Mr. Speaker, was called for by the University 

of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. It was asked to be released 

so that the public at large, the opposition members, in fact all 

government members, would have a chance to look at the 

recommendations of students, look at the recommendations of 

this task force, and decide whether or not there are things that 

can be implemented. 

 

To date, Mr. Speaker, the document sits in the hands of the 

minister. And we need to be able to assure students that their 

concerns, their concerns about costs, the costs that the 

universities are incurring, the costs that technical facilities are 

incurring, are being looked at by this government. And we urge 

the minister to seriously look at releasing that report in the 

not-too-distant future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion — and I’d like to allow my 

colleagues to debate the issue as well — we have a number of 

concerns, we have a number of concerns in both K to 12 

education and post-secondary education. Whether they’re 

related to the operating costs or whether they’re related to 

capital, extreme pressure is being put on the field of education 

in general, and I ask that this government take a very serious 

look at placing education much higher on its priority list. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the minister . . . 

the member for the constituency of Moosomin: 

 

That this Assembly condemn this government for its 

offloading of funding to the health care system, causing 

undue hardship to Saskatchewan people needing medical 

attention; to both K to 12 and post-secondary education to 

the point where Saskatchewan now pays the lowest 

percentage of provincial operating grants in the country; 

and to municipalities, which has resulted in further 

deterioration of roads and high increases in property taxes 

for landowners. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I realize 

we’re getting close to the Christmas season and not far from 

Christmas Day and members probably want to be on the road 

going home to enjoy time with family and friends, but there are 

a number of areas that it’s certainly important that we address 

and the reason for the resolution coming forward this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about offloading, as this resolution 

deals with, and the responsibilities of different levels of 

government, over the past number of years we have certainly 

seen this government take and address a number of concerns 

within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you could say they did it responsibly, I 

would suggest to you that most people would say no, they 

haven’t shown a lot of responsibility or they haven’t shown a 

lot of compassion or a lot of care in how they have addressed 

situations of funding in health care, or funding for education, as 

my colleague, the member from Canora-Pelly was talking  

about, or funding from Municipal Government as I’m sure we’ll 

hear about a little later on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at areas, especially like 

health care, an area that I’ve been involved with for a number of 

years as critic and certainly have had the privilege of sitting on 

a health board and dealing with issues in the past, we have to 

ask ourselves what has the government really done to address 

the critical needs that face us in the areas of health care. 

 

What the government basically says and will argue — and the 

Premier did it again today — will argue that the reasons they 

made some of the choices they did were, number one, they 

would go back and say it was because of the government of the 

’80s and the debt that this province was saddled with. He 

forgets about part of the debt that was there prior to the 

government of the ’80s being involved, or what’s been added to 

the debt since then. 

 

Or the Premier will say, as he did today . . . he’ll blame the 

federal government, blame the Liberals. And yes, there is room 

to blame the federal government for part of the problems that 

we face today and the fact that they have cut transfer payments. 

But what have we seen in all of this, Mr. Speaker? 

 

What we do see is governments at all levels — other than the 

local level, where there’s no place left to go but to go to the 

taxpayers — we see governments at all levels looking at 

blaming somebody else rather than accepting the responsibility 

for their actions. And when the Premier talks about the federal 

government offloading, I would suggest that maybe the federal 

government took a very close look at what the Government of 

Saskatchewan did since ’91 and said, hmm, this is a nice . . . 

this is probably the easiest way we can find of balancing the 

books. We’re just going to shift more of the burden onto the 

provinces. 

 

Because what the province did since 1991, what they have 

done, is shifted more of the load to the local tax base. We see 

that directly in educational costs. We see that directly in 

municipal costs, and we’re seeing it as far as health services 

available to people across rural Saskatchewan. And when I talk 

about offloading, I talk about the district boards that this 

government brought into place. 

 

They said we needed to address the cost of administration of 

health boards across this province. Well I don’t disagree, Mr. 

Speaker, that we needed to find a way of bringing communities 

and the district . . . and all the local boards to a common 

denominator of working together to address health needs in that 

community. But I would have to suggest the government’s 

response of larger district health boards has maybe not 

necessarily met all the problems that were there before or even 

addressed all those problems. 

 

If you were to talk to a lot of local health board members — 

members who were involved before the district boards came 

into place — they would say: did I get any remuneration for the 

work I put into working for my ambulance board, or working 

on my hospital board, or working on my care home board? I 

would suggest many of them would say, you know, when you 

look back at it, most of the work that I . . . and the effort that I 

gave was done on a voluntary basis. I did it because I wanted to  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

see . . . and have an impact and be involved in presenting a 

sound and . . . access to health . . . sound health care in my area. 

 

And so what the government did, they brought in the district 

health boards, suggesting that they’re going to clean up 

administration. When I go through my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, what — or Mr. Deputy Speaker — what do I find? 

People don’t believe that we’ve actually cleaned up the 

administrative costs. They believe that we have actually added 

to those costs. They see large district office complexes now 

filled with many staff members, whether it’s clerical or 

secretarial or someone to answer the phones or different 

leaderships, whether it’s involved in facilities management or 

addressing the needs of the workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what most people see. They see and they 

basically say, have we really saved any money? But boy, when 

it comes to, do we have any more acute care beds or do we have 

enough acute care beds to meet the needs in our district, they 

say no. Do we have enough long-term care beds to meet the 

needs in our district? And they say, no. The government or the 

district boards will argue yes we do, because our waiting-lists 

aren’t as long. 

 

But what’s happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not that the need 

isn’t there, it’s just that they’ve readdressed the criteria to the 

point that you basically have to be on your back and totally 

incapacitated to actually get access to our care homes versus 

what they used to be before. 

 

Now I’m not saying you go back to providing services and 

facilities for individuals who can genuinely take care of 

themselves, because I’ve always believed . . . and most people 

in my constituency would suggest that they can take care of 

themselves. They would like to have and like to feel that they 

have, the ability to remain at home for as long as is physically 

and mentally possible. 

 

And that’s why the home care program came into place, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. However, what we’ve done — what this 

government has done — has put more responsibility at the 

home care level, put more responsibility at the local level, but 

. . . And here’s where the problem comes in. And the auditor 

certainly pointed it out, that number one, health . . . in one of his 

comments, the auditor says we found four out of five districts 

did not have adequate practices to consistently identify priority 

health needs. And he also goes on to say when districts set 

priorities, they were often related to the department’s 

expectations rather than the district’s priority health needs. 

 

(1200) 

 

And then another comment: most districts respond to specific 

department priorities rather than assessing the health status of 

their district. And I think that’s one of the major problems we 

have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that while we have 

district boards in place . . . even people I’ve talked to . . . and 

just recently we have a minor health crisis that has cropped up 

in one of the communities that I represent, the community of 

Whitewood, an area that people were really glad when they saw 

. . . were feeling that well, we’ve got something. We’re going to 

combine our acute care with our heavy care — something that 

I’ve talked about for a number of years — and provide a real  

service, and make sure that we’re actually going to have 

services and facilities and access to beds available in our area. 

 

But we find what has happened, rather than people originally 

feeling that this was a good project, we do have a number of 

individuals now who are questioning whether or not we’re 

going to have better service or whether or not we’re going to 

have less service. And as we find in most cases, districts will 

say we’re going to have better service. The public will say at 

the end of the day, well it’s pretty good for what’s there but it 

seems to me we just lost another step. 

 

And then on top of it, when you look at the district boards and 

how they were set up, the government first of all appointed all 

the board members. So it just comes back to this argument we 

have here right now, that local people have very little input and 

say into the health priorities for their district, even the local 

boards. And if you were to say today what . . . the make-up of 

eight elected and four appointed district boards have the ability 

to meet the specific needs, the auditor is pointing out that no, 

they don’t. Why don’t they? Because of the way the 

Department of Health sets the funding. 

 

So what the government has done, when you raise a question 

about fewer health care beds, when you raise the question about 

the Plains health care centre and the fact that it’s going to be 

closed down, the Minister of Health would argue that we’re 

going to have better services once it’s closed down, even 

though we may be 200, even fewer, 200 or so acute care beds 

fewer than we had before, which, if you take a careful look 

today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the beds we have in place 

today with the Plains Health Centre operating, we find that 

people are still being turned away. 

 

And in case, I point to a recent comment made by an ambulance 

operator in our area who was sent with a patient to Regina, sent 

to the Plains health care centre. But as he’s on his way with this 

patient, he receives a phone call and says, don’t go to the Plains. 

Don’t come to the Plains health care centre. We do not have a 

bed to handle a patient. 

 

Well where do I go? Try the General. Call the General. No, you 

better not come here because we don’t have a bed to handle a 

patient. Well where do I go? Try the Pasqua. Well the Pasqua 

eventually did work a position for that patient, or find a bed for 

that patient. 

 

But the frustration of dealing with all of these problems is 

certainly coming to the forefront. People are becoming more 

and more annoyed, because they’re getting tired of the fact that 

the government is arguing that we’ve balanced the books and 

we’ve done it responsibly and it certainly hasn’t been our 

problem that has been created in the health care system; it’s the 

district boards that have made the decisions. And as the Health 

minister . . . as the auditor is saying, the district boards have 

really been limited. 

 

It’s the same thing in Education or with regards to Municipal 

Government. Regardless of the minister, when they say we have 

managed this province responsibly, but anyone at any of those 

levels would say, I don’t think so. I don’t think you’ve managed 

it responsibly. All you’ve done is shifted the load. And so at the 

end of the day the taxpayer has to dig into his pocket deeper  



2074  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

while the government continues to take more out of his pocket 

and builds on the funds coming into the General Revenue Fund 

and cutting services. 

 

When you look at the Department of Health and how the 

government has balanced the books . . . I remember the former 

member of Health, back in the early ‘90s when restructuring the 

wellness plan came into place, the minister of Health said at 

that time, we must make these decisions to address some critical 

problems and to save some money. Why? First of all they were 

going to save some money in health care so they could address 

the so-called deficit that we had. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you take a look at the 

expenditures in health care since 1991 you will find that while 

we’ve seen 52 hospitals close, while we’ve seen numerous jobs 

lost out of the health care system, while we’ve seen health care 

beds, acute care beds, and heavy care beds terminated, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, have you seen a significant reduction in 

expenditures? I would suggest take a careful look and you will 

see no. We’re actually spending more money today than we did 

in 1991. 

 

So to say that we did all of these things to save some money is 

being not totally accurate, but in fact it’s being false. What the 

minister is basically saying — no. In fact when I confronted the 

past minister of Health regarding that situation and his 

comments about the fact that we didn’t save money, and said, 

well take a look at the books — your own books show that 

you’re spending more, but you’ve reduced all of this — the 

minister’s comments were, well it wasn’t about saving money; 

it was about spending money differently. 

 

I think if you look throughout the province and why rural 

Saskatchewan has been hit significantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— I think even the large urban centres will indicate as well that 

they have seen some significant changes in how health care is 

operated — and many people would suggest it hasn’t been to 

the betterment of better health for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s appropriate that this resolution has 

come forward, because health care is on people’s minds. We’re 

in a time of the year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where many people 

are thinking ahead to Christmas and they’re thinking ahead to a 

time of joy and happiness. They’re thinking ahead to a time of 

spending time with family and friends. And yet they have to 

deal with the realities of, what if an emergency transpires 

today? What if an emergency transpires over the next few days 

while we’re in this holiday mode and this time of happiness and 

joy? What if we have to take a family member to utilize a health 

facility, and we find we’ve actually got some shut-down of beds 

because it’s holiday time. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that may be true that we do reduce 

some of the bed usage in regards to specific elective procedures. 

But what about the emergency situation? If you close that bed 

down what do you say when an emergency situation arises? 

 

And we’ve seen it time and time and time again where people 

have arrived at emergency wards only to find that they may be 

the 20th or 30th on the list. And in many cases people are on 

stretchers because there aren’t the acute care beds available, or 

the beds needed to address that specific need. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have to ask the government if 

they have indeed taken the time to talk to people about how we 

provide quality health care in this province. And by putting the 

district boards in place, I don’t think they necessarily addressed 

it. By continually demanding that they have the opportunity to 

appoint at least four of the district board members doesn’t 

necessarily address the problems out there. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to 

appointments, I had a recent letter that was sent to me and a 

person made this comment. What can you do to basically bring 

up the problem that I see of individuals who are on very good 

pensions tying up well-paying positions on government boards, 

such as the district health board — in this case we’re talking 

about Mr. Garf Stevenson, the chairman of the Regina District 

Health Board — a gentleman who has been appointed. 

 

Unfortunately I can’t do much about it because of his 

appointment. However, I can suggest to you that our, that our 

. . . one of our recent policy resolutions, our members said no 

more appointments to district boards — all elected, so they are 

accountable to the electorate not to the government, such as we 

have right now. 

 

So that’s something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our caucus will 

certainly be working with, proposing, and our party is certainly 

coming forward with. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at other ways of how do we 

address the problems in consulting people, do we do like the 

departments or like the Crown corporations, announce an 

increase in rates and then say you’ve got 45 days to consult 

with us, and tell us whether or not you like the rate increases? 

Such as we see in the recent rate increases for SaskEnergy, 

where they announced almost 9 per cent increases, had their 

45-day review process, and then yesterday announced that the 

rate increase will only be 7.9 per cent because we’ve consulted. 

 

My feeling is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the department and the 

government knew that those rates were going to be at that level 

but they put it higher, so that they can say to the public when 

they announced that less . . . a little less, a little less than the 1 

per cent or 1 per cent less than the 9, they’re going to say, well 

it’s Christmas time; we’re giving you a gift. Yet the public are 

looking at paying their bill at the end of the day, and they’re 

saying, well some gift. It seems to me that the government’s 

been the Scrooge at Christmas time rather than the gift-giver. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to health care as well, 

people across this province have come up with ideas and 

innovative ways of making our health care system work better. 

If you were to talk to Mr. Douglas, going back to Tommy 

Douglas and when this whole debate of medicare took place, 

Mr. Douglas had a vision of medicare in this province. But at 

that time, even Mr. Douglas realized that you needed some 

public involvement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, did Mr. Douglas say that the taxpayer is 

going to bear all the load? No, he didn’t. What did he . . . he had 

a premium . . . a health premium in place for a number of years 

until, I believe it was Mr. Blakeney removed that because it was 

going to . . . he was going into an election and he wanted to, he 

wanted to get some votes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

And I believe the member from Saskatoon Eastview wants to 

make some comments and offer some input as well. He’s 

bringing Mr. Thatcher’s name into the case here. I think Mr. 

Thatcher saw that people wanted to be involved as well and he 

put a fee on at the doctors’ offices. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the government would 

argue that the public are totally opposed, I would suggest to you 

that no, they’re not. Since I’ve been elected to this Assembly, 

the public have said to me, what’s wrong with me being 

involved a little bit? What’s wrong with me having . . . paying a 

premium and guaranteeing a level of service that I feel would 

be appropriate for my area or for the community that I’m 

involved in or wherever? What’s wrong with the fact of saying 

. . . 

 

An area that I think most people don’t understand is visitations 

to doctors’ offices. On many occasions I . . . If you go into a 

local hospital, especially in the rural areas and probably so even 

in the larger centres, you’ll see people at the outpatient clinic. 

And you ask, well how come . . . why are they there? Like I 

mean the doctor’s office, the clinic is open at 9 o’clock in the 

morning. There’s a physician there to see you because of 

arrangements that the doctors have made. How come you are 

here at the outpatient service for that same consultation, because 

of the fact that a consultation visit at an outpatient service is 

somewhat four times as much as a clinical visit? 

 

And I want to commend the doctors and physicians throughout 

this province who have even indicated to the patients, you 

know, unless I am asking you for specific lab treatments or it’s 

a real emergency, come and visit me at my clinic. You are 

actually providing a saving to the health care system and we’re 

going to be able to provide service to more people. 

 

So the medical profession is offering ideas. The public is saying 

. . . and what’s the public’s response? Well maybe we need to 

set a fee on if you’re going to the outpatient service just for a 

consultation visit that you could do in a clinic. We’ll exempt 

emergencies or visits that have been requested by your 

physician. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to you that there are many 

people across this province who have some very unique and 

innovative ideas as to how we address health care, and they are 

very concerned about the fact that the government continues to 

offload the responsibility onto local people and local people 

don’t have any involvement or any say. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are many other 

individuals who want to speak on this issue, want to bring up 

the problems that have been brought forward by this 

government, who want to talk about the offloading of 

responsibility. And it would certainly be appropriate that I don’t 

tie up all the time in this limited debate — because I could 

certainly go on and on. I could talk about the MS (multiple 

sclerosis) sufferers who have fought for years, and the question 

that we’ve raised for people on hepatitis C who only recently, 

as the result of bringing the issue more to the forefront . . . and 

certainly Chief Justice Krever’s comments in his review of the 

tainted blood problem we’ve had in this country have certainly 

been of help. But still I believe the government is still lacking in 

how they are addressing some of these questions. 

So like I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could certainly stand here 

and address a number of other areas and basically eat up the rest 

of the time period of debate on this resolution, but I just want to 

close by saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time the government 

took responsibility for their actions. It’s time they quit 

offloading their responsibility. If they want to blame the federal 

government, that’s fine. But don’t then you turn around and 

offload onto a lower base which stops at the doorstep of the 

taxpayer. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in support of this 

resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1215) 

 

Ms. Murrell: — I’m very pleased to enter this debate today on 

the motion put forward by the Leader of the Opposition. His 

motion makes reference to health care and to education, and I 

will address those broader issues as well as the specific issue of 

K to 12 education. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is important that we establish 

very clearly two central facts at the outset. First let us 

acknowledge what all Saskatchewan people clearly understand 

— the biggest fiscal offloading in the history of Canada has 

been deliberately imposed by the federal Liberal government in 

Ottawa over these past few years. Billions of dollars in financial 

responsibility for health care, education, and social programs 

have been offloaded by Ottawa onto all provinces, including 

Saskatchewan. That was the policy and the decision of the 

federal Liberal government during the time that the member 

was himself a Liberal. 

 

Second, let us also recognize a second fact that all 

Saskatchewan people clearly understand. It was the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) Party, now calling itself the 

Saskatchewan Party, that had unmanageable budget deficits 

every single year they were in office; spending borrowed 

money that they didn’t have; pilling up a huge debt which 

Saskatchewan people are still having to service and repay. 

 

When our government took office in 1991, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Saskatchewan faced a deep financial crisis caused by 

the mismanagement of the Devine PCs. That’s the same crowd 

who have now changed their name and are currently being led 

by the former Liberal whose motion is here before us today. 

 

Saskatchewan has come a long way since those dark days of 

1991. We have cleaned up the financial mess created by the 

Saskatchewan Party when it was the PC Party. We have turned 

the corner. We are investing in Saskatchewan people, and we 

have implemented a 2 per cent sales tax cut. 

 

And Saskatchewan’s education system. Students, parents and 

teachers are looking forward to the future with confidence and 

optimism. In our 1996 budget we increased provincial operating 

grants to schools. In our 1997 budget this past spring we further 

increased our provincial operating grants to schools. And we 

have already announced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a further increase 

in school grants for 1998. 



2076  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Saskatchewan people are proud of our public school system, 

and every member of this Assembly should be proud of it as 

well. Just as this government has acted responsibly in rough 

times, so too have our school boards acted responsibly. The 

Leader of the Opposition would be better off if he would give 

credit where credit is due — to all of those who have worked 

together during the difficult years our province faced. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be supporting 

this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

colleagues have spoke this morning on education, health, the 

cuts that go on and on. And I’d like to touch on municipal 

government. 

 

There’s no other area that has been hit worse than municipal 

government, that has caused more devastation to all areas of the 

province but especially rural Saskatchewan. We saw revenue 

sharing for cities, towns, villages, RMs (rural municipalities), 

and we saw the devastation caused by the cuts that this 

government has made by loss of jobs, closure of schools, the 

erosion of our people into the cities, from this government’s 

policies. 

 

And the member opposite cries about federal offloading. Well I 

suggest they learnt from the best. They watched the 

Government of Saskatchewan dump on everybody else and then 

took their turn from there and did the same thing to you. So 

they’re only following what you have already done and taught 

them to do. 

 

I’d like to touch on some of the cuts that this government has 

done to local governments. This year alone local government 

lost 25 per cent reduction in the grants that were given to RMs 

and towns; $29 million in one year — 25 per cent of the 

funding, the overall funding. And then at the same time they 

turn around and say, well look what we’re doing for highways 

— $30 million for highways. Municipal governments just did it 

with $29 million you took out of their pocket. 

 

Some grants out there, conditional and unconditional for RMs, 

have been cut 90 per cent. And you’re crying about federal 

offloading. You should be ashamed of yourselves, what you’re 

doing. You back-benchers should be speaking up for the people 

you represent, especially the rural ridings. And what . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I would 

ask, I would ask the hon. members to come to order. The hon. 

member from Saltcoats has the floor. And while I’m on my feet 

I will remind the hon. member from Saltcoats that all debate 

must be addressed through the Chair and not directly to 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t 

need their assistance. 

 

I’m talking about local governments. What are local 

governments? Local governments are local people elected by 

their neighbours to handle their money efficiently. And they’ve 

done that. They’re not allowed to deficit finance, so they can  

get their house in order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I can stand here till the 

close of this debate if you like, but the hon. member has some 

points to make and I think that we owe him the courtesy to 

allow him to make them. I will ask the government members to 

come to order and to remain to order. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to go 

back to what I was talking about in local people being hired by 

their neighbours and being elected by their neighbours and 

friends to represent them. And they’ve done a great job. They 

haven’t ran deficits; they’ve kept the books balanced; they’ve 

made every cut possible to be as efficient as they could. 

 

And then what happened? Your government got elected in ’91 

and dumped all over them because they were efficient and kept 

their house in order. That can’t continue. We can’t survive if 

you keep dumping on them. 

 

That’s just some of the examples I’d like to give for RMs out 

there, the programs that you have discontinued. And one of the 

most ridiculous cuts you’ve made on that side of the House — 

and the minister made — was the one to the futures program. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was cut without any consultation with 

RMs. 

 

And what was the futures program? It was a program where 

local government financed your share four years in advance, 

were happy to do it, so they could build at least five, six miles 

of road at one time, carry your share of the load, and you would 

reimburse them over the four-year period. 

 

But no, because it was shown as a debt, your government saw 

fit to cut the program, a very good program which helped rural 

people, and once again you came along and slashed. 

 

Main farm access. You completely cut all the funding for main 

farm access roads. Now many of your constituents live on these 

same roads. They pay gas tax. In fact a high dollar in gas tax, 

and yet are receiving no benefit when it comes to, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, building the road, maintaining the road, grading the 

road. You people should be ashamed of yourself. 

 

And we see all our roads in our province that are falling apart, 

disintegrating under the heavy traffic, and what are you doing 

about it? Well we’ve got successor rights. We need short-line 

rails to start up and take over for rail line abandonment. But in 

many cases it isn’t going to happen because of successor rights, 

which your government refuses to remove as a roadblock to this 

happening. 

 

We see a great number of traffic, Mr. Speaker, diverting from 

our highway system to our rural road system, because for one 

reason, it’s too rough to drive on the highway system in this 

province. And the RMs have kept their roads in shape with no 

help from you, so it’s smoother to drive in the RMs. But what 

it’s doing is disintegrating and deteriorating our rural road 

system at a greater speed and a faster rate. 

 

Then I remember, I think, believe it was the last election, that 

there was a promise of 10 per cent of the VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenue going to municipalities. But shortly after the  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

election, I’m sure on the other side, we had to decide very 

quickly how we were going to break this promise but not look 

bad doing it. 

 

So what we did, the minister decided we would take SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SAHO, and 

the education people, throw it in a hat and say here, divvy up 

this money. But that wasn’t the promise. The promise, Mr. 

Speaker, was 10 per cent of the VLT money for municipalities. 

 

You did that knowingly that they could not agree and would 

never agree on how it should be spent. It’s time to honour that 

agreement. What, $130 million last year; $130 million in 

gambling revenue this year? That’s $13 million that 

municipalities have been robbed of that they need to offset to 

some degree what you’ve done to community organizations that 

are having a hard time functioning in our communities because 

of another tax grab your government has brought in through 

your gambling policy. I believe the addiction is on that side 

with money, not with the people of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, this government treats all local 

governments with complete, outright arrogance. It did not get 

its way on forcing amalgamation so now it’s trying to do it by 

starving them of funds. Well it won’t work. It didn’t work last 

session when you tried to force amalgamation through and it 

will not happen now. 

 

You know, I find it amazing. We’ve got $31 million, Mr. 

Speaker, to go over to Guyana, and really look shaky this 

morning spending it on a power company over there. We forced 

and helped force them to privatize theirs when at home we 

won’t even look at that here. We wouldn’t even consider it. But 

it’s good enough to happen to somewhere else so we can buy in 

with taxpayers’ money from here that we could use here for 

health, school, roads. The list goes on and on. 

 

But we want to go over there and take such people as Jack 

Messer, Carole Bryant, Don Ching, and make big shots out of 

them with our money. No mandate to do it; run around the 

world and be big shots. And no one in this province has said, do 

it. And at the same time what are we doing? We’re raising 

telephone rates, SaskEnergy rates, SaskPower rates, all SGI 

rates. The list just doesn’t quit. It goes on and on and on. Well 

in ’99 we’re going to see how the public of Saskatchewan is 

happy about all these deals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would say is, let’s finally . . . let’s take this 

money, invest in Saskatchewan. Let’s keep our money at home. 

Put into such things like the RUD (rural underground 

distribution) program. That was the program where you added a 

reconstruction fee, took 14 more million dollars into the kitty. 

Didn’t want to show it anywhere, actually, was it? They didn’t 

want to put it anywhere, and at the same time cancelled the 

reconstruction in the province. 

 

A little bit hypocritical, wouldn’t you say? On one hand we’re 

charging and on the other hand we’re taking it away. Amazing. 

Really amazing. That money could be well spent at home on 

our road system, our highways, our hospitals, and our schools. 

Mr. Speaker, as you can tell probably by now, I support this 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

also happy today to talk about this resolution, which I support 

wholeheartedly. 

 

I recognize the offloading this government has done in 

Saskatchewan, but nowhere have we seen the effects of it as 

badly as we have in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The members opposite have forsaken rural Saskatchewan. Even 

the members who come from the rural constituencies sit by and 

watch the government totally devastate their areas. And 

members in the opposition, I can’t tell you how many phone 

calls I get every week from constituents of yours who are very 

upset over the fact that they aren’t being listened to by the 

government they supposedly elected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as part of this government’s scheme of 

offloading, rural areas have borne most of the brunt. It’s a sign 

of a government with mixed priorities that slashes and cuts 

away at rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Let’s look at the money that they brought in from Liquor and 

Gaming. There were $476 million in Liquor and Gaming 

revenues and there hasn’t been any dividends given back to the 

province directly from this fund. There are over $270 million 

more in taxes from the sale of oil and gas as in the same period 

last year, and yet the local governments are forced to maintain 

the services and absorb third-party funding cuts. 

 

When this government came to office they paid 60 per cent of 

the education costs and taxpayers paid 40. In the latest 

Saskatchewan indicators, we see that this trend has been 

reversed and that the education funding has dropped from 19 to 

17 per cent of your budget. 

 

As a result of the reduction of education funding, rural 

Saskatchewan has gained a closure of schools and a reduction 

since 1992 of more than 100 educators, and an increase in 

multiple grades. Our educators and our administrators and our 

boards of education are forced to meet the challenges of 

providing quality education with less money. 

 

This government has lost $16 million in the failed SaskTel 

venture in NST (Network Services of Chicago). They’ve made 

a dozen trips to Guyana to ensure that we can gamble $31 

million of our money in Guyana. They’ve hired 200 people, at 

the cost of $7 million, to communicate all their policies, and 

they’ve chosen to spend $3.9 million on a new executive airline 

rather than invest it in the future of our province. 

 

Agriculture producers are the drivers of the economic engine of 

this province and yet they’ve been extremely hard hit in the past 

decade. Statistics Canada released numbers the other day to . . . 

shows for every one dollar’s worth of grain sold at the 

elevators, the farmer pockets less than a dime. 

 

(1230) 



2078  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

Current profit margins are now down at 9 per cent from 36 per 

cent in the mid-’70s. Yet this government, through its new 

assessment which raised some farmers’ tax bills by as much as 

$100 a quarter . . . and expecting the farmers to pick up more on 

education tax. Many in the agricultural industry have been 

forced to pick up this increased cost at a time when input costs 

and transportation costs are rising and grain prices are 

declining. 

 

The government claims there is very little they can do with this 

transportation issue and yet they fail to look at the very severe 

problem of successor rights. They’ve chosen to support 

unionized workers rather than the farmers and the grain 

transportation industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to talk about the 

economic prosperity of this province and the potential for 

growth. But this growth will not be recognized if the 

government continues to ignore rural Saskatchewan. Economic 

prosperity in this province is dependent on maintaining a viable 

infrastructure. Eliminating programs like the future programs, 

which allowed our municipal governments to carry out road 

construction they might not otherwise be able to do, was not a 

step in increasing economic prosperity. 

 

According to a study released by CAA (Canadian Automobile 

Association), the government is putting only 37 per cent of 

what it will collect in fuel tax and motor vehicle registration 

back into our highways. While this government collected the 

highest amount of road-related revenue in more than 10 years, 

in 1996-97, they put back into the highways the lowest 

percentage in the same time frame. 

 

Do you realize that in 1991 when this government came into 

power they were spending $212 million on highways? This year 

the spending is less than that. My office continues to receive 

calls from constituents about the condition of the highways. 

 

This spring I received a call from a school bus driver in the 

Saint Front area concerned about Highway No. 349 to Saint 

Front. This bus driver was concerned about the condition of the 

road and told me that there were portions of the road where he 

had to drive the bus on the wrong side of the road just to make 

it down the road. We’ve got school buses with children driving 

in them that are having to ride on the wrong side of the road just 

to have to make it down the highway. This is a safety concern. 

 

This government did choose to increase health care funding by 

$18 million. The impact of the closure of hospitals, especially 

in rural Saskatchewan, and reduction of health services are 

continuing to have a major impact on rural Saskatchewan. We 

are continuing to hear about the increasing waiting-list for 

surgery, for tests, and for placements in homes. 

 

Just this week there was an article in the Star-Phoenix about a 

Weyburn peewee coach who shattered his kneecap in a Tuesday 

night hockey practice and didn’t have surgery until . . . in 

Regina until Friday. 

 

Our health care professionals are not to blame for the lack of the 

health services. They are working very hard; it’s the 

government that must bear the blame for the state of our health 

system. The government prefers to focus on the dollars,  

forgetting that the added stress of the crumbling health centre 

does not support the wellness model that they supposedly built. 

It’s a well-known fact that stress actually causes many of our 

health problems. 

 

This summer I watched my constituency assistant and her 

family deal with a family problem and the death of a loved one, 

and as they tried to help her through this terrible situation they 

found they had to set up a 24-hour schedule with their family to 

sit with this lady just because the nurses didn’t have the time to 

give her the care that she needed. They tried very hard, but it 

wasn’t possible to spend time with individuals, and the family 

themselves sat by her bed 24 hours a day. 

 

I don’t believe that this is the type of medical care that Tommy 

Douglas envisioned when he introduced medicare into 

Saskatchewan. The mid-term financial report told the people of 

Saskatchewan how great the provincial finances are looking. 

We all know that much of the rosy picture is the result of the 

many taxes and hikes that the people of Saskatchewan have to 

bear. The average Saskatchewan resident has to work 12 more 

days to pay for his or her taxes than any other place in Canada. 

Saskatchewan’s tax freedom day has gone from June 5 in 1990 

to July 12 in 1997. That’s another increase. 

 

SaskTel, SGI, and SaskEnergy are making a combined profit of 

$180 million and yet now they need an additional rate increase. 

The latest proposed SaskTel rate increase could amount to a 47 

per cent increase in local charges over two years even though 

last year SaskTel had a profit of $84 million. SaskTel expects 

rural Saskatchewan local rates to increase as much as 49 per 

cent yet rural residents enjoy very small regional telephone 

exchanges compared to their city counterparts. 

 

Many business owners have approached my office concerned 

about the small regional exchanges and the cost to their 

company for long-distance calls, for directory information, and 

now for local rate changes. Businesses in rural Saskatchewan 

are at a distinct disadvantage in telephone services when 

compared to those in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

Why is SaskTel proposing to increase local charges by as much 

as 49 per cent if they can afford to invest $63 million of the 

taxpayers’ money in New Zealand in a project where they’re 

putting up almost half the funding but only earning 35 per cent 

of the equity? 

 

SaskTel recently announced that they’re looking to invest 150 

to $200 million in foreign equity in Europe, Australia, and in 

the Caribbean over the new three to five years. Instead of 

investing this money out of country, why isn’t SaskTel 

increasing SaskTel mobile coverage so that the residents of 

rural Saskatchewan can be assured of coverage if they’re forced 

to travel along these terrible roads? 

 

Instead of investing outside of Canada, why isn’t our Crown 

Corporation providing services which would keep businesses in 

rural Saskatchewan competitive with those in the city? 

 

If government isn’t willing to invest in a province, why in the 

world do they travel around the globe trying to find foreign 

investors to come into this province? If they don’t believe in 

Saskatchewan, if the government doesn’t believe in  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

Saskatchewan, why would anybody else? 

 

Similarly, SaskPower hiked commercial electrical rates by 12 

per cent in January of ’96 while it lost $8 million on a natural 

gas company out of Canada. Will they lose this money in 

Guyana as well? 

 

SaskEnergy boosted gas rates by 2.5 per cent in June of ’96 and 

now we have another rate increase. And yet last week they 

confirmed that they will invest in Chile anywhere from 3 to $5 

million. Once again instead of investing in Saskatchewan, 

SaskEnergy chooses to go outside of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Pursuant to a special 

order passed in this House on December 15, time on this debate 

has now expired and the Chair must put the question directly. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:37 p.m. until 12:38 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 10 

 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 

D’Autremont Draude Gantefoer 

Heppner Osika McPherson 

McLane   

 

Nays — 22 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Shillington 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 

Teichrob Pringle Renaud 

Lorje Bradley Nilson 

Hamilton Sonntag Wall 

Kasperski Ward Langford 

Murrell   

 

Mr. McPherson: — With leave, to introduce a series of 

motions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the House Leader to advise the House as 

to the nature of the motions that you wish to have leave to 

introduce. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 

motions in regards to changing of members on standing 

committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Members on Legislative Committees 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Gerard Aldridge be substituted for that of 

Mr. Jack Hillson on the list of members of the Standing 

Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Gerard Aldridge be added to the list 

of members composing the Standing Committee on 

Estimates. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Gerard Aldridge be deleted from the 

list of members of the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Jack Hillson be substituted for that of 

Mr. Gerard Aldridge on the list of members of the 

Standing Committee of Public Accounts. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Glen McPherson be deleted from the 

list of members of the Standing Committee on Agriculture. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Glen McPherson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Harvey McLane on the list of members of the 

Standing Committee of Crown Corporations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, with the leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Gerard Aldridge be deleted from the 

list of members of the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs. 



2080  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the leave 

given, I move, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

That the name of Mr. Ron Osika be substituted for that of 

Mr. Glen McPherson on the list of members of the 

Standing Committee on Communications. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 

move a motion which would substitute names of members on 

standing committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my brief 

comments, I will move a motion rescinding some appointments 

this morning. Earlier this morning, the Government House 

Leader appointed the member from Saskatoon Northwest, the 

member from Regina Dewdney, and the member from Cypress 

Hills to a committee. I’m informed that they have served 

brilliantly and at least they’ve made no mistakes and . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . As the member from Rosetown says, 

the time has come to end their appointments, and therefore 

without an elaborate explanation as to what went wrong, I will 

move — and I know the member from Prince Albert Carlton is 

proud to second this — I will move that, the following motion: 

 

That the names of Mr. Grant Whitmore, Mr. Ed 

Tchorzewski, Mr. Jack Goohsen, be substituted for that of 

Mr. Bob Pringle, Mr. Maynard Sonntag, and Ms. Lynda 

Haverstock on the list of members composing the Standing 

Committee on Privileges and Elections — which was 

adopted earlier this day, be rescinded. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 

move another, complementary motion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — All is not lost, though. In spite of the 

brevity of their service on the former committee, we’re going to 

give these folks another chance. The member from Prince 

Albert Carlton will be seconding the following motion: 

 

That the names of Grant Whitmore, Mr. Ed Tchorzewski, 

Mr. Jack Goohsen, be substituted for that of Mr. Bob 

Pringle, Mr. Maynard Sonntag, and Ms. Lynda Haverstock 

on the list of standing committees composing the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, we’ll all wish them well in these new 

appointments. 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

THIRD PARTY MOTION 

 

Social Effects of Gambling 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start off 

by saying that I am pleased to have the opportunity to be able to 

put forward some of my thoughts on today’s resolution, at the 

end of which I will be proposing a motion. 

 

I’ve put a lot of thought into this matter, and the more I think 

about this NDP government’s lack of social conscience when it 

comes to gambling expansion, Mr. Speaker, the angrier I get. 

During the spring session of this House I introduced a private 

member’s Bill, 211, entitled An Act respecting the 

Accountability for Costs Associated with Gambling Addiction 

Rehabilitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a long title with legislation for a very simple 

concept, and that is to ensure that the costs associated with the 

rehabilitation of addicted gamblers in Saskatchewan are shown 

separately in Public Accounts of the province as an expense of 

the Liquor and Gaming Authority rather than an 

indistinguishable expense of our Health department. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, after several years of 

reaping in the fiscal rewards of gambling expansion, the 

province cannot even answer a simple information request 

about what exactly it costs to treat those Saskatchewan people 

who have become addicted to gambling. 

 

After submitting a few written questions on what it costs the 

Department of Health, or perhaps the health districts, to treat an 

average addicted gambler, the response I continue to get from 

the Health department was and is, and I quote, “health districts 

do not provide statistics to Saskatchewan Health on the average 

cost of problem gambling treatment services per client.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government, which often boasts 

about its social conscience, is raking in, raking in hundreds of 

millions of dollars from Saskatchewan gamblers but simply 

does not feel the need to keep track of the social costs this 

expansion is having on our Saskatchewan society. This NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker, is making abdication of 

responsibility some sort of an art form. We have seen 

multimillion dollar gambling expansion in communities across 

Saskatchewan. But the government does not see the need to 

examine the effects of this provincially sponsored gambling 

expansion on Saskatchewan society. The theme of the two 

ministers of gambling seems to be, act now then we’ll think 

about the consequences later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a former RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) officer, I cannot even begin to tell you about the number 

of people I have encountered during my career who got into a 

whole heck of a lot of trouble for acting before thinking of what 

the consequences would be or may be. But really when we look 

at this government’s record we should not be surprised. This is 

a government who slashed budget at the expense of 

Saskatchewan people. 



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

Shortly after coming into power in 1991 they saw the need to 

criss-cross Saskatchewan, slamming the doors shut on 52 

hospitals. Now their so-called wellness model is causing 

nothing but pain for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s right, 

Mr. Speaker, people from neighbouring communities are being 

pitted against each other just to retain the right to access very 

necessary health services. 

 

In just one year we will see the doors close for what was 

intended to be the major trauma centre for southern 

Saskatchewan, a centre of excellence — which it has proven 

itself to be — a health centre renowned for specialized care. A 

centre where miracles happen, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 

government plans to board up the Plains Health Centre even 

though complaints continue to pour in about the lack of beds in 

the Regina Health District. 

 

We see this government’s commitment to needs-based funding 

is turning out to be nothing more than a farce. And despite all 

the evidence that the NDP’s wellness model is making people 

sick, the government still does not see the need for reviewing 

the true effects health reform is having on this province. Why 

should gambling expansion then be any different? 

 

Now let’s look at how this government has slashed over $326 

million in net funding from Saskatchewan education since it 

was first elected back in 1991. Mr. Speaker, that is $326 million 

less for Saskatchewan classrooms, $326 million less for 

cultivating quality education for our Saskatchewan students. 

 

That means that school divisions are being pitted against each 

other to fight for the same paltry funding. This chronic 

underfunding of education means that Saskatchewan teachers 

are embroiled in tense contract negotiations because they are 

the second lowest paid in all of Canada. 

 

The chopping of $326 million in net education funding means 

that now taxpayers are overburdened with funding at least 60 

per cent of this province’s education funding costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are just finding out exactly what impact these 

cuts are having on Saskatchewan students. But once again, the 

NDP government boasts about making high quality education 

for our children a priority, then at the same time takes away the 

money that would provide adequate resources in our 

classrooms. Why should gambling expansion be any different? 

 

We also cannot forget that the government’s bottom line has 

meant the bottoming out for many rural Saskatchewan 

residents. When gambling expansion was first being promoted 

by this NDP government, there was a promise to return 10 per 

cent of profits to Saskatchewan communities — fair enough. 

What happened to that commitment and to that promise? Mr. 

Speaker, I can answer that question. 

 

The promise to return 10 per cent of VLT was blatantly broken 

and then conveniently forgotten by the NDP government. But 

no, they did not stop there. Just to make sure they were properly 

wreaking destruction on rural Saskatchewan’s way of life, the 

minister of municipal gaming has employed methodical axing 

of funding to municipalities. After axing tens of millions of 

dollars from local governments, the minister is hoping she will 

starve them into submission so they will amalgamate. 

Let them pool their resources, she says. So now what we see, 

Mr. Speaker, is four RMs getting together to pool their paltry 

financial resources just so they can maintain a few kilometres of 

grid roads. 

 

These savage municipal funding cuts are having a devastating 

impact on the people who live in rural areas. And sadly enough 

we won’t know just how harsh these consequences will be for 

years to come. 

 

So once again we see this NDP government acting on behalf of 

their bottom line and ignoring the consequences their actions 

are having on Saskatchewan families. Why should gambling 

expansion be any different? In fact, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is taking gambling expansion to new levels. 

 

Every month that passes by, we learn just how passionately the 

minister responsible for CIC feels about gambling. He’s a 

high-flying, high roller. Despite having seen millions of dollars 

lost at the table on the NST deal, he continues to feel the need 

to wager tens of millions of dollars at taxpayers’ expense. 

 

We’ve all figured out this strategy for making the wager. The 

riskier the venture, the higher the stakes, the more exciting, and 

the more he wants to play. Right now he’s involved in what one 

may call a high-stakes poker game in Guyana. But hey, what’s 

$31 million here and there. After all, Mr. Speaker, it only comes 

out of the pockets of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. Who cares. 

 

Now he’s placing bets on SaskEnergy’s ventures in Chile, and 

SaskTel admits that it will also likely invest hundreds of 

millions of dollars in foreign ventures during the next couple of 

years. 

 

But do you know what? The minister is not concerned. He’s got 

a heavy bankroll behind him. And even if the chips do get a 

little low, not to worry. He just announces another back-door 

tax increase — SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel, and even 

SGI. After all, he’s got to feed his habit. 

 

But are the minister and his NDP colleagues evenly remotely 

concerned — even remotely concerned — about what impact 

these risky ventures and constant rate hikes are having on 

Saskatchewan people? No sir, none at all. Why should 

gambling expansion be any different? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Pursuant to rule 3(1), and a 

special order of the House passed on December 15, the debate 

on this motion has now expired and I will require the hon. 

member, the Leader of the Third Party, to propose his motion 

directly. 

 

(1300) 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You really missed a 

good speech. I thank you. I would like to present the following 

motion, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the government to launch an 

independent inquiry into the effects of provincially 

sponsored gambling on the people of Saskatchewan; with 

particular attention paid to the social consequences of 

gambling, including the problem of gambling addiction,  



2082  Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1997 

the impact on the family structure, the decreased 

availability of discretionary monies formerly available to 

charities and service groups and communities, and the 

impact on crime rates and on utilization of health care 

services within Saskatchewan. 

 

Seconded by the member from Wood River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 1:02 p.m. until 1:03 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 7 

 

Krawetz Toth Osika 

Hillson McPherson Belanger 

McLane   

 

Nays — 28 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 

Shillington Tchorzewski Johnson 

Whitmore Goulet Lautermilch 

Upshall Kowalsky Teichrob 

Pringle Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Bradley Scott 

Nilson Hamilton Stanger 

Sonntag Wall Kasperski 

Ward Langford Murrell 

Thomson   

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would ask for leave to move a motion with respect to the 

resumption of sittings on adjournment. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

At the conclusion of my comments I will move the usual 

motion. Before doing so, I have a couple of comments I want to 

make, one about the session I think. 

 

We experienced in this session a degree of unanimity on the 

unity motion which, if not unique in my 22 years here, is very 

close to it. I think all but one member voted for it. In so doing I 

think we all hope that we might do something positive for 

Canada and let us hope we . . . at the end of the day we will 

have. 

 

The rest of the session was marked by good debate, sharp 

divisions. But in all cases I think the rules of engagement were 

respected by all members. And I think this session has perhaps 

taken another small step towards the re-establishment of the 

reputation of this institution, which it so badly needs and which 

I think this province so badly needs.  

 

So I congratulate all members on what I think has been a  

session which has reflected well on all of us. 

 

Before moving the motion, I want to wish all members Merry 

Christmas. And in a personal way, if not a political way, I want 

to wish you all a good New Year. And we will look forward to 

seeing you again when the session resumes in a few weeks for 

the spring session. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 

possible, of such date and time. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments 

before we take a moment to vote on this motion brought 

forward by the House Leader. 

 

I would like to certainly indicate, on behalf of the Official 

Opposition, that we were more than pleased to have been 

invited to a fall session, that we’ve certainly recognized the 

importance of Canada. I think we all feel strongly about our 

nation, and the debate that took place in this Assembly and 

certainly over the past number of months regarding our country 

and about its unity, I think was certainly important and 

significant. And we were pleased to have been a part of that. 

 

And we trust that certainly our words have . . . will not go 

unanswered, that they’ll just fall on deaf ears; that indeed all 

Canadians will recognize that we do live in a great country. 

 

I would also like to thank the government members for the fact 

that they have called us in the fall and brought us together and 

recognize that a fall session has a part. And we certainly invite 

and open our arms to further fall sessions in the future. And we 

thank the government for recognizing that. 

 

We also want to just say, while it’s been a short session, 

certainly I think it’s been an indication that there are still strong 

divisions amongst all the political parties but we’re able to 

place our views very strongly and have, at the end of the day, 

recognition for those differences but a respect for each one of 

the members in this Assembly. 

 

And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, to you and to all the members 

of this Assembly, and certainly all the staff of this Legislative 

Building, my colleagues and I extend a very hearty Merry 

Christmas and healthy New Year. We trust that this will be a 

special time for each and every one as you get together with 

family and friends. And may you just enjoy this time; best of 

the season, we look forward to gathering together again in the 

spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

add the voice of the third party caucus, the Liberal caucus, to 

those that have already been spoken. I would also like to 

recognize and thank sincerely once again . . . I appreciate the 

opportunity to thank the people in financial services and the  



December 19, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

Legislative Library; those folks that we don’t see here but are 

out there and they’re constantly working on our behalf. And I 

want to express our sincere appreciation to them, and all the 

staff that returned with us for this very, very important week 

and this important session. 

 

I know that this time of year, each and every one of us 

remember friends, family, and we want to be with them. I want 

to acknowledge our staff who are sitting in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Leader of our Liberal Party as well. And on 

behalf of each and every one of us and on behalf of our leader, I 

too would like to express to each and every one of my hon. 

colleagues here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to yourself, to 

all the staff, and to all the people of Saskatchewan, may you 

have a really peaceful Christmas, happy holiday season. Thank 

you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — Before declaring adjournment, the Chair 

would request leave to make a few brief comments. Would 

leave be granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair appreciates the opportunity to 

make a brief comment. 

 

I listened very carefully to the comments made by those who 

spoke to the previous motion, and members may take interest in 

something I learned just a few moments ago, that the CPAC 

(cable public affairs channel) channel is intending to replay in 

its entirety the debate on the unity resolution that took place in 

this House on Tuesday of this week. And the best information I 

have is that it’ll scheduled to play in Saskatchewan on Sunday 

at 12 o’clock noon. So members may want to take note of that 

and pass that information along to your constituents who may 

be interested in seeing that debate. 

 

Hon. members, you may or may not be aware that our pages 

who are assisting us during this second sitting of this session of 

the legislature have been not only serving in this House, they’ve 

also been serving in some of their capacities in other ways in 

this building, and several at the same time have also been 

writing final exams this week. And I know that you would want 

to express your appreciation to Daniel Abramson, Rebecca 

Fiissel, Kristina Potter, Graham Condo, and Aamna Afsar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — As has been said already by members, and I 

would say that I concur, that in the week that we’ve been here 

today, members have conducted themselves with dignity and 

with great respect for this institution and for one another, and 

consistent with the principles of parliamentary democracy. And 

I want to express the appreciation of the Chair for having 

represented your constituents with a love for your province. 

 

I wish also as well, on your behalf, to extend Christmas 

greetings to all the members of the Legislative Assembly Office 

staff throughout the building, some of whom have come on 

short notice and some of whom that are not normally seen — 

have been former staff members — who came back to fill in the  

gaps during this week. And I know that you’ll want to extend 

on the record your best wishes to all of them for the Christmas 

season. 

 

On behalf of the Deputy Speaker and the Deputy Chair, and on 

behalf as well of the Clerks and their office, and on behalf of 

the staff in my office, I want to extend to all hon. members the 

best wishes of the Christmas season. I hope this is a time that 

you’re able to enjoy some quality time with your families and 

your friends, with your constituents, and that it will be a season 

that will find much joy in your homes and much peace in your 

hearts. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, all hon. members, 

having wished to each of you a very Merry Christmas, I now 

declare this House adjourned until the call of the Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:14 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2055 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2055 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2056 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2056 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Health Care Funding 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

 Nelson Lumber Company 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

 Satellite Dialysis Unit 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2057 

 Importance of Aboriginal Role in Saskatchewan 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

 Award for Kitsaki Development Corporation 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2058 

 Liberal Record on Saskatchewan Health Care 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2058 

 Two Economic Surveys 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2058 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskPower’s Investment in Guyana 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2059 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2059 

 Early Release of Sex Offender 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2059 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2059 

 Services for Rural Women 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

 Teacher Contract Negotiations 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2060 

 Reduced Hospital Services 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2061 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2061 

 Health Care Funding 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2062 

 Ranching Operation’s Water Problems 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 239  The Crown Corporations Rate Review Act, 1997 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2064 

 



 

MOTIONS 

 Substitution of Members on Legislative Committees 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2064 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2079 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2080 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 Environmental Problems in the South-west 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2065 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2068 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 

 Provincial Government Offloading 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2070 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2072 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2075 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2076 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2077 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2079 

THIRD PARTY MOTION 

 Social Effects of Gambling 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2080 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2082 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2082 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2082 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2082 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 

 


