



















































Hansard: April 09, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 713 

 April 9, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions on 

behalf of citizens with respect to youth crime: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Balcarres, Lemberg, and Regina. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

present petitions today on behalf of people from the Kelvington, 

Watson, Muenster area. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some of the responsibility for the ill effects of the gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has on our province and the people who 

live here. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 

present from citizens of Regina: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, crimes of violence, 

charge of attempted murder of a police officer; such task 

force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 

municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions from people across the province that are 

concerned about the government’s gaming policy. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

The petitioners are from Middle Lake, Cudworth, Muenster, 

and St. Gregor. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 

petitions today from people throughout Saskatchewan who have 

suffered big game damage. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions, many 

of them are from the Willow Bunch-Assiniboia area, Viceroy, 

Redvers; it seems like all throughout the south half of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Petitions regarding the reversal of the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction; 

 

The establishment of a task force to aid the fight against 

youth crime; and 

 

A request to change the big game damage compensation 

program. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs: (1) how 

many provincial meat inspectors work in and for northern   



714  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Saskatchewan; (2) what are the names and locations of 

these inspectors; (3) has the number of northern provincial 

meat inspectors increased or decreased over the past years; 

(4) has there been any reports of an increase in the number 

of TB cases in northern Saskatchewan; (5) is there any 

evidence that a decrease in provincial meat inspectors is 

related to the increase of TB cases in the North; and (6) 

what is the government doing to address these problems? 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 

I shall on Friday next move first reading of a Bill to enact 

legislation that will establish the short-line railroad facilitation 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the rest of the Assembly, I’ve just spotted a colleague of 

mine in your gallery, Mr. Richard Boxall. I know him as 

president of the Indian Head-Milestone Liberal Association. 

 

I see he is here with a group of grade 12 students from Greenall 

School in Balgonie and I’m sure the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains will be introducing them all more formally here 

shortly, but I would just like everybody here in the House to 

recognize and welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As my colleague 

has already said to you, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, 10 Grade 12 

students from Greenall School. Greenall School is an equal 

opportunity school. They’ve had the occasion to have myself, 

the Liberal leader, and the member from Rosthern there at 

Career Night. I’ve been invited to family fun nights and also to 

speak to the students with the Minister of Finance. 

 

My colleague, the member from Qu’Appelle Valley, also was 

trying to search the faces and see if there were any kindergarten 

students she might recognize and share some tales with me 

before I meet with them; although our eyes are not what they 

used to be. 

 

They are accompanied today by Richard Boxall, as has been 

mentioned, and Carol Mayes, who have through their classes 

introduced the students to how government operates and also to 

the economy and what the budget of Saskatchewan means for 

the future generations. 

 

So I’m pleased to have them here and I’ll be meeting with them 

after question period, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had a tour already. 

I’d ask all members to join with me in giving them a warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a gentleman in the 

east gallery, Robert Lindsay from Regina, who is here to 

discuss some problems with the government, with Workers’ 

Compensation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, please welcome 

Mr. Glen Tait. Glen is a farmer in the Meota area — and Glen 

might want to stand. Glen was the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) candidate in the recent North Battleford by-election. He 

was visiting ag caucus today to discuss short-line railway 

possibilities in the north-west part of the province, with all the 

rail lines that are being abandoned today. So we want to 

welcome Glen to Regina, to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join 

with the Minister of Highways and Transportation in 

welcoming Mr. Tait to the Assembly today. I would like to say 

he was an honourable and worthy opponent. And may I say that 

I hope our respective seats will remain for a long time to come. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure today to introduce to you and to all members a group 

of Saskatchewan public servants who are seated in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. I believe they are all seated in the second pew 

there of your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are individuals who will work in the public 

service of the province of Saskatchewan in a variety of 

government departments. They’re here to spend the afternoon at 

the legislature, not only to tour but to understand and learn of 

some of the processes that surround the legislation and the 

legislative processes. 

 

And so we’re very pleased to welcome these public servants 

who serve the people of our province so very well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Vimy Ridge 80th Anniversary Celebration 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 

pleasure that I rise today to recognize the veterans of World 

War I and II as they celebrate the 80th anniversary of the taking 

of Vimy Ridge. Six Canadian veterans ranging in the age from 

97 to 103 years old and 12 students, one from each of the 

provinces and territories, were in attendance at Vimy Ridge 

celebrations in France. 

 

As the daughter of a World War II veteran, I have a special and 

personal respect for men and women who have laid the   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

foundation of peace for our country and our world. It’s hard for 

young people to realize that older people they see in homes 

today, in wheelchairs, and often not able to look themselves, 

were once bright-eyed, eager, and determined young people — 

young people whose bravery should never be forgotten. We lost 

3,598 Canadians in that battle at Vimy, but, Mr. Speaker, we 

gained our freedom and our future. 

 

On behalf of the Assembly, I thank the veterans for the 

sacrifices they made to ensure that we would continue to live in 

a democratic society. And I thank the veterans for never having 

to know what the world would have been like without them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Buns Master Bakery in Regina South 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later on this 

afternoon I’ll be joining the Minister of Economic Development 

and the Minister of Agriculture and Food at the opening of a 

new small business in my riding. And I want to take this 

opportunity to congratulate Scott Cody on his efforts and 

success in opening a new Buns Master Bakery store and 

production centre in Regina South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this centre will create 20 new jobs and will 

provide better access to commercial and residential customers 

in the growing South Albert business area. 

 

I’ve known Scott Cody for many years, and I want to tell this 

Assembly that he’s exemplary of a new generation of 

small-business people in Saskatchewan. His commitment to this 

province and our community is appreciated and well noted. 

Like many other Saskatchewan people, he is showing his 

confidence in our growing economy with the investment of 

significant time and money in this new facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again want to congratulate Scott on his 

investment in our community. In closing, I can’t resist but note 

that Scott comes by his commitment to Saskatchewan honestly, 

for as many members of this Assembly know, his father, Don 

Cody, is well-known in this province as a former member of 

this Assembly, minister of the Crown, and currently as His 

Worship, the Mayor of Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if Scott demonstrates the commitment to 

Saskatchewan that a new generation of young, entrepreneurial 

business people show, then I have to say that his father 

demonstrates that despite our austere existence here, that after 

politics, even us lowly MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), quite literally, can start rolling in the dough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Love is Blind 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

you know, there has been rumours in the press about an 

insidious plot linking the Tories and the NDP. Both those 

parties made light of our concerns that they were working 

closely together. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have further suggestions that undercover 

work is being done. In fact our evidence suggests that there is 

truth to the old adage, politics makes strange bedfellows. 

 

Not long ago the member from Cypress Hills, against his better 

judgement of course, helped arrange a marriage between his 

daughter and a prominent NDP family. At first we thought this 

was an isolated incident; a mere chance encounter of two young 

hearts. Alas, Mr. Speaker, this is not the case. 

 

This conspiracy has outgrown our provincial boundaries. It has 

now come to our attention that David MacDonald, a former 

federal Tory cabinet minister, is now dating the Leader of the 

federal NDP. And not only is he dating her, he wants to run as a 

federal NDP candidate. Yes, the Leader of the federal NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, Alexa McDonough. 

 

There seems to be a natural romantic attraction between the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative) and the NDP. Yes indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, it can now be said, that as this conspiracy grows and 

grows and as we continue to uncover these relationships of 

political convenience, it just goes to prove the old saying, love 

really is blind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Geography Challenge Winners 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is getting to be 

something of an annual occasion for me and for Weyburn 

students. Last April I announced in the legislature that Brandon 

Swertz and Michael Larson finished first and second in the 

Provincial Canadian Geography Challenge and would be soon 

on their way to Ottawa for the nationals. 

 

Today I’m happy to announce that Brandon repeated his 

first-place finish and will soon be off to Ottawa again. Brandon 

is a grade 9 student at St. Michael’s Junior High, and he knows 

exactly where he is, where he has been, and where he is going, 

as well as what he has to go through to get there. 

 

Joining Michael this year on the trek to Ottawa is second-place 

winner, Shumita Roy, a grade 7 student at Weyburn Junior 

High. There is a third Saskatchewan student going as well, Erin 

Weir, from Campbell Collegiate in Regina. 

 

The three students will participate in the nationals in May, 

hosted by Jeopardy host, Alex Trebek. From there the top two 

Canadian finalists, who we hope are from Saskatchewan, will 

go to Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia) this summer to 

compete in the world Olympiad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was present at the provincial geography 

challenge last Saturday in Weyburn, and the event was very 

well organized. And I can tell you that the knowledge these 

students showed went far beyond our traditional concept of 

geography, of naming a few capitals and rivers. These students 

answered questions on political, economic, historic, and cultural 

geography in addition to knowing that Saskatchewan is the best 

place in the best country in which to live. 

 

  



716  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

My congratulations once again and best wishes to Brandon, 

Shumita, and Erin at the nationals. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

50th Anniversary of the Melfort Credit Union 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I’d like to rise and ask the Assembly in joining me in 

congratulating the Melfort Credit Union organization who today 

are celebrating their 50th anniversary of providing service in the 

Melfort area. The members I’m sure are very well aware of the 

great service that credit unions have provided in the province of 

Saskatchewan over the years and certainly the Melfort Credit 

Union is no exception. They have branches in Gronlid, 

Kinistino, Naicam, Star City, and Weldon. Please join with me 

in offering our congratulations to the Melfort Credit Union on 

their 50th anniversary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Approval for Joint-use Facility in Estevan 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1993 four school 

divisions in the Estevan area believed that a long-term study 

needed to be completed in order to determine the options that 

would improve the education system in their community. 

 

The results of that study showed that the most viable solution 

for the concerns was a multi-faceted approach that involved 

seven facilities. The first phase is already complete — the 

renovations to the Pleasantdale Elementary School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second phase was given approval to proceed 

yesterday by the Minister of Education. This step involves the 

relocation of the Southeast Regional College to the Estevan 

Comprehensive High School at a cost of 2.5 million, to be 

completed by the end of August. The new joint-use facility will 

provide the community with a cost-effective program that 

enhances the educational benefits for the students. Not only will 

facilities be shared, Mr. Speaker, but so too will the equipment, 

the resources, and the expertise that combine to provide 

students with the best education possible. 

 

I want to congratulate the school boards, who have combined 

their efforts and resources in order to help provide the users of 

our education system — the students — with new and exciting 

educational opportunities and facilities in our community. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

William Johnstone Milne 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Eighty years ago 

today William Johnstone Milne, a young man from the Caron 

district of my constituency, joined thousands of other Canadians 

in an attack on the German stronghold of Vimy Ridge. Twice 

that day he saw his fellow Canadians pinned down under heavy 

machine-gun fire and twice he crawled through it alone to 

capture the machine-gun posts, saving the 

lives of many Canadians. 

 

William Johnstone Milne was killed later that day but was 

posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross, our highest military 

honour for bravery beyond the call of duty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the members opposite to reflect on this 

selfless commitment to Canada. Each day in this House they fan 

the flames of regional division through their countless and often 

senseless attacks on the federal government. Their actions lead 

me to believe that they put political gain ahead of the 

well-being of Canada. 

 

William Johnstone Milne was a great Canadian who placed the 

well-being of his fellow Canadians before his own. And if the 

Premier wishes to call himself a great Canadian, I’d ask him to 

show the same selfless commitment in setting an example for 

his NDP government members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battleford Area Teens Enter National Science Fair 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have 

shown time and time again that they have the ability, the 

intellect, and the desire to be the best, to contribute to new 

technologies, new innovations that benefit the entire world. 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, that I am extremely proud of the 

accomplishments of two outstanding young scientists from the 

Battlefords area who have successfully produced what appears 

to be artificial skin. 

 

Zack Belak and Rogan Federko, who are 14- and 15-year-olds, 

first demonstrated their finding at the Battleford Junior High 

science fair. Since then they have won the regionals and will be 

on their way to nationals, and hopefully to the international 

competition. 

 

What is amazing about this discovery, Mr. Speaker, is that it 

has been attempted unsuccessfully by many professional 

scientists. 

 

These two young men from The Battlefords discovered the 

appropriate mixture of human skin cells, special fungus, base 

culture, and selected organic acids that produce inexpensive 

artificial skin. This discovery, Mr. Speaker, will benefit anyone 

suffering from a skin disorder or needs skin grafting. 

 

These efforts and accomplishments are generating interest 

worldwide within the scientific community. I feel that it is 

appropriate for everyone in this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating these young men for their revolutionary 

discovery. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

heard the minister in charge of SaskTel indicate yesterday that 

business is business — sometimes you win, sometimes you lose 

— to explain the Crown company’s $16 million loss because of 

a bad business deal. 

 

The minister indicated, among other things, that in retrospect 

the information we got didn’t have sufficient analysis of the 

kind we should have had. And then she added, the best strategy 

from an investment point of view would’ve been to withdraw 

earlier and save some money. 

 

The minister stated that the reason that her government did not 

withdraw earlier is because it would not have been the 

honourable thing to do. One has to question when honour has 

ever been a consideration of this government. Community 

leaders who were promised a share of the VLT (video lottery 

terminal) profits would certainly question this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments represent a lack of any 

respect for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. This entire issue also 

provides a clear lesson in how not to do business. The question 

Saskatchewan residents have been asking today is what 

mind-altering drug led the minister and her officials into this 

deal in the first place. Why did you enter into a venture like this 

without knowing all the facts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

members opposite should keep their eye on the ball. SaskTel 

has a strategic plan to derive at least 40 per cent of its revenues 

from non-traditional sources by the year 2000. This is a plan 

developed in 1992 when faced with deregulation, by the federal 

government, of the telecommunications industry. We pay 

attention to what the taxpayers of this province and the 

shareholders of our telephone company, the people of 

Saskatchewan, say. 

 

In the public hearings, Mr. Speaker, in the public hearings held 

in conjunction with the Crown review, the people of 

Saskatchewan said loudly and clearly, we want the 

telecommunications company to remain a Crown. We recognize 

that when competition is allowed to come here, that our 

telephone company has to make investments in the global 

environment outside of the province in order to sustain the 

operation in Saskatchewan. 

 

We are listening. We are sensitive to what the people of 

Saskatchewan say. They are the shareholders of that telephone 

company. The people of Saskatchewan built it; they own it; it’s 

theirs. We manage it well on their behalf. And I would suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, that we do listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was just an 

example of just how well you are managing SaskTel, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, media reports today indicate that SaskTel plans to 

review local phone rates over the coming months. And this 

review, which may lead to higher phone rates, comes as 

something of a surprise, given the fact that the minister tried to 

brush aside the $16 million loss by the Crown yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as she put it, business is business; sometimes you 

win, sometimes you lose. Well, Madam Minister, let’s not 

downplay this loss. As Mark Wyatt pointed out in today’s 

Leader-Post, the $16 million business venture gone bad is 

nearly three times the size of the former Conservative 

government’s bad business GigaText fiasco. 

 

Will the minister explain how SaskTel officials can even 

contemplate a possible rate increase at this time. Taxpayers will 

pay for your business fiasco. Why must they also pay in the 

form of higher phone rates to cover up for your 

mismanagement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, as I said 

yesterday, we have two companies — we have the telco, the 

telecommunications company; we have a holding corporation 

which holds all the other investments. We have made in the last 

10 years, strong headway towards that goal of 40 per cent of 

revenue from non-traditional sources — $300 million in the last 

10 years — profits brought into this province from offshore and 

from outside Saskatchewan. 

 

You want to sell it. Your leader says you’d sell it. In the 

analysis of the university budget, he said he’d sell it. That 

would solve the problems, wouldn’t it. 

 

And in terms of the rates, Mr. Speaker, we take our direction 

from the shareholders of SaskTel, people of Saskatchewan, not 

from the scribes who write for the press. 

 

And we have, Mr. Speaker, a report that one of the SaskTel 

executives spoke to the Kiwanis Club and talked again about 

the need to get revenue other than long-distance sources as 

those rates go down. He talked about keeping local rates down, 

and the amount of subsidy that’s there needs to be replaced 

from other income sources other than long distance as rates go 

down. That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this brings into question 

another area then that I’d like to ask the minister about. We 

have an example of Jack Messer, a patronage appointment, 

running SaskPower, $30 million investment in Guyana. We 

have Don Ching, another patronage appointment, running 

SaskTel. And I’m sure these gentlemen like playing the big 

businessman’s game but they’re playing it with our money — 

the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 

 

Would you agree, Madam Minister, that it’s time to reconsider 

these appointments and time to hire people with the 

qualifications and business background that could run these 

Crowns efficiently and like they were originally designed to be 

run? 

 

  



718  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, if the $16 million is 

taxpayers’ money, what about the $140 million of profit in 

Leicester? That accrued to the taxpayers. What about the sale of 

the hospitality network that was developed here in 

Saskatchewan, to Hong Kong and other international markets? 

That’s money brought into Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the needs of the Saskatchewan people, the Bill that 

your party, that you introduced as a member into this House, to 

use the REDAs’ (regional economic development authority) 

boundaries for toll-free calling, would translate into a $46 

increase for every local telephone in Saskatchewan. That’s what 

you would do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Workers’ Compensation System 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A rather disturbing 

story has come to the attention of us and I’d like to bring it to 

the attention of the government. A Regina man, Robert 

Lindsay, suffered a lung injury while working in a mine in 

northern Saskatchewan. He underwent exploratory surgery and 

during the course of the operation, Lindsay said a mistake was 

made leaving him in chronic pain. 

 

Lindsay has tried to sue the doctors but he has hit a brick wall, 

Mr. Speaker. That wall is workmen’s compensation, which 

granted the doctor’s request to be designated as an employer. 

This doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. Robert Lindsay’s 

current condition did not happen on the job, it happened in the 

operating room. 

 

Lindsay did not have an employee-employer relationship with 

his physician. He had a doctor-patient relationship. But the 

doctors involved in this case are using WCB (Workers’ 

Compensation Board) to avoid a malpractice suit. Can the 

minister of WCB . . . how can you allow this to happen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I would advise the House that 

Mr. Lindsay is taking the matter of the question that the 

member raises to the Court of Queen’s Bench and I believe 

challenging the decision that the Workers’ Compensation Board 

made. Therefore a decision will be made in due course by the 

courts. They are the appropriate place for this matter to be dealt 

with. And I’m sure that the courts will insure that the matter is 

dealt with in an appropriate manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, in February of this year the 

government was presented with a review of workmen’s 

compensation. It included a recommendation to amend the Act 

to allow an injured worker the right to sue health care 

professionals in the cases of negligence. At that time Labour 

Minister Bob Mitchell said, and I quote, “Because their 

recommendations are based on . . . 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I want to remind the member 

that when making reference to members of the House, unless it 

is included in the direct quote that is used, must not use proper 

names. And I’ll ask the hon. member to guide herself 

accordingly. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the time the 

Labour minister said, “Because of their recommendations, and 

they’re based on consensus, they are of great value in pointing 

the way to improvements in the workers’ compensation 

system.” 

 

But after three months the government appears no closer to 

making a decision. This does not help people such as Robert 

Lindsay, who is suffering from a chronic pain and has no 

recourse, as doctors are hiding behind WCB in hopes of 

avoiding lawsuits. 

 

When will this government act on the recommendation given to 

the government and give people some recourse under the law, 

giving them back their rights and their dignity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as to Mr. Lindsay’s case, that 

matter is, as I said, before the courts and it will be resolved in 

that fashion. 

 

As to the rest of the member’s question in terms of the 

recommendations of the review panel, those recommendations 

are under active review by the Minister of Labour. He will be 

consulting with various groups about those recommendations 

and responding to them in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are also to the minister of SaskTel. Madam 

Minister, you got a big problem on your hands, a very big 

problem in fact, and you’re having a pretty hard time explaining 

it. 

 

Now first you say that the NST deal looked like an attractive 

business opportunity, that is until there were competitors. Are 

you saying that you didn’t expect competitors, Madam Minister 

— in the United States of America you didn’t expect 

competitors? 

 

Next you say the reason you didn’t pull out of the NST deal 

sooner was because you weren’t privy to the company’s 

complete financial records. But you were a 50/50 partner, 

Madam Minister, a 50/50 shareholder. Madam Minister, that is 

not a minority shareholdership. 

 

Next you say you had access to the financial information but 

you didn’t bother to have SaskTel’s chief financial officers 

examine them. Excuse me, Madam Minister, that must have 

been a typographical error, I’m sure. 

 

  



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

Madam Minister, here is your chance to make some sense. Do 

you or do you not have a real explanation for how you 

squandered $16 million of the taxpayers’ money? What really 

happened, Madam Minister, in the United States? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, I would like 

ask the hon. member opposite to refrain from putting words in 

my mouth. I also would like to say that this . . . we are on a 

target to get 40 per cent of our revenue from sources other than 

telephone . . . long-distance and telephone sources. We have 

made considerable progress. We’re more than ahead of our 

target to reach that goal by the year 2000. 

 

And we have brought in 300 million . . . Yes, this is a set-back. 

It is a set-back. But we’re well ahead of our target. And in a 

portfolio of diversified investments, some will materialize to a 

better extent than others. But on the whole, that portfolio of 

investments has been very successful and has helped to keep the 

local telephone rates in Saskatchewan at the second lowest in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question 

to the minister responsible for SaskTel. You are personally 

responsible for Saskatchewan’s version of Bre-X, Madam 

Minister. Business is business, so you say. Well I’m afraid 

that’s not good enough. The bottom has just dropped out of 

your gold mine, Madam Minister. 

 

Yesterday you admitted that you didn’t do your homework. 

You didn’t have the financial records analysed properly. The 

bottom line, Madam Minister, is that you didn’t do your job. 

You’re the minister responsible for SaskTel, you’re on the 

board of directors, and you didn’t do your homework. 

 

Sixteen million dollars gone, Madam Minister. And nobody has 

to be accountable for it, so you say. Well we say you have to be 

accountable. Heads have rolled for a lot less than this, Mr. 

Premier. Mr. Premier, if this lady worked for me, I would be 

saying right now, you’re fired. 

 

Madam Minister, will you do the honourable thing? Will you 

take responsibility for your incompetent actions? Will you 

resign today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, for the information of 

the hon. member, I have no intention whatsoever of heading for 

the hills even if there’s gold in them. And, Mr. Speaker, as I 

said yesterday . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order! Order, order. The 

Chair is having difficulty being able to hear the minister 

provide her response. And I will particularly ask . . . Order. I 

will particularly ask the sources of the question to pay attention 

to the answer and to allow it to be heard. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member:  If we hear something intelligent, we’ll 

listen. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  If you wait a minute, maybe you will. 

Mr. Speaker, I think that . . . The members opposite know, 

having been business people themselves, that every time things 

take a little turn, you don’t run for the hills. I remember being in 

retail when the Conservatives brought in the GST (goods and 

services tax) and I remember the parking lot in the shopping 

mall looking like there was a bomb scare in it. You don’t lock 

up and throw away the keys. Stick it out — that’s what you do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are paying $17 million a week on the debt that 

was racked up by those people right there. And they’re talking 

as if this set-back of 16 million on profits of 300 million is a 

huge factor when we’re spending more than that every week 

paying for their mistakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential SaskTel Rate Increase 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is also for the minister responsible for SaskTel. We 

didn’t like those answers much so we’re going to dial that 

number again. 

 

The day after learning about the $16 million NDP 

Saskatchewan’s touch tone Bre-X fiasco, I’m told you’re going 

to increase SaskTel rates. Coincidence? I rather doubt it. 

 

Your own officials say that SaskTel lost less than 10 per cent of 

the long-distance market to competitors, which is much less 

than you predicted, yet you’re coming to ratepayers and telling 

them you need another rate increase because of the 

long-distance revenue. It doesn’t make any sense. 

 

How much revenue has SaskTel lost to competitors, Madam 

Minister, and why are you once again gouging Saskatchewan 

people by your utility rate increases with no meaningful review 

process? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I can assure the House 

today that there are no local rate increases contemplated for 

SaskTel. We have not announced any. We have not said 

anything. There was a press report that misconstrued what one 

of our executives said in an address to a Kiwanis Club meeting. 

We are not contemplating local rate increases. 

 

But I would like to remind the member again that any additional 

revenue from any of the Crowns wouldn’t cover off for one 

minute that $17 million a week that we’re paying on the debt 

that you racked up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, I think we’ll just press that 

redial button again on the same topic. 

 

The writing seems to be on the wall. One day we hear that 

you’re losing 16 million through SaskTel, the next you want 

each and every SaskTel customer to ante up. Madam Minister, 

how are Saskatchewan taxpayers supposed to swallow a rate 

increase from SaskTel after you’ve just dumped 16 million of 

their money down the drain? 

  



720  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Is this the real reason you’re going to increase the SaskTel 

rates, Madam Minister — because you lost millions in your 

Saskatchewan version of Bre-X and taxpayers are going to bail 

you out? Why don’t you admit it, Madam Minister, that you are 

increasing the SaskTel rates because you blew the 16 million 

and you’re scrambling to cover your own losses? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, SaskTel had last year 

one of the most profitable years on record in their 

telecommunications company. Their investment portfolio is 

held separately and has no affect upon the local rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I hang up on the member opposite, I’d just 

like to remind him again to try to manage his messages and try 

to remember that we are paying $17 million a week on their 

debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Political Patronage 

 

Mr. Heppner:  After all that static on what might have been 

an answer, we’ll just switch to a different line, I think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Mr. Minister, you 

know your government and we know that you’re committed to 

recycling. You are now in the process of recycling your NDP 

patronage appointments. You recently recycled Gord Nystuen 

and now you’ve former NDP candidate Dickson Bailey. He’s 

been given a brand-new position called provincial coordinator, 

local government election office — working out of the 

Premier’s office at 80,000 a year. Mr. Minister, we’ve just 

broken the code. Provincial coordinator, local government 

election officer, really means make-work project. 

 

Mr. Minister, as a former mayor, I know Saskatchewan 

communities have been running local elections for just about 

100 years without Dickson Bailey’s help. Why is this position 

necessary? Why is it run out of the Premier’s office instead of 

Municipal Government? And will you admit this is nothing 

more than a made-up position to give a high paying job to 

another NDP patronage appointment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that very clearly the civil service in 

Saskatchewan have been very instrumental in helping to clean 

up the mess left by that crew over there that you represent now. 

They’ve done a wonderful job. 

 

I say to the member opposite, one of the people that you’re 

always complaining about, always complaining about — 

always complaining about — Mr. Don Ching, now I want to 

make one comparison with Mr. Ching with your buddies over in 

Alberta on the heavy oil upgrader deal. Do you remember that 

deal, where your Tory friends in Alberta lost for the people of 

Alberta a couple of hundred million dollars, and the deal was 

made and recommended by Mr. Ching to keep our position and 

buy up those 7 cent on a dollar positions of Alberta Tories? And 

we made good money on it. 

 

I think you not only owe an apology, but should send a little 

letter of thanks to Mr. Ching for the good work that he’s done 

for the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prosecutions Review Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the good things I noted . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. 

Order. All members will come to order and I’ll ask all hon. 

members to allow the question to be put and the answer to be 

heard without shouting across the hall. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the good 

things to come out of the Martin report released this week was 

that there was a flat and clear finding that there had been . . . 

there was absolutely no evidence of political interference in the 

prosecution of former politicians and former members of this 

House. And of course the report called upon all members of this 

House to refrain from making any such suggestions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see that conclusion; however I 

think we all recognize that adequate resources must be given to 

this investigation to make sure that this unseemly chapter in the 

history of our province can be brought to a speedy conclusion. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice explain what his department is 

doing to ensure that all necessary resources are provided so this 

investigation can be concluded in a timely manner? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are 

examining that recommendation very carefully and we will 

report in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, a few years ago a criminal 

investigation in this province got so seriously off the rails that 

we had many people in this province and indeed throughout 

Canada believing that satanic child abuse was rampant in this 

province. How and why this happened was not part of the Court 

of Appeal case considered by our Court of Appeal, nor is it the 

focus of the present cases for malicious prosecution against our 

prosecutors. And of course the Martin inquiry was forbidden to 

look into this area. 

 

Does the minister believe it is important to get to the bottom of 

the Martensville investigation, to find out how and why it 

happened and how similar problems can be avoided in the 

future, or does he simply hope that this matter will quietly go 

away? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 

that question. As was set out in the Leader-Post today in their 

editorial, they concluded with this paragraph which I think is 

very appropriate. It says: 

 

  



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

While these actions (referring to all these public actions 

and the report) should help deal with some specific 

problems, it will be up to the politicians (both sides of the 

House) to help rebuild public confidence in the system by 

making sure any comments are based on fact and are not 

attempts to make political points. 

 

There are many circumstances relating to this matter in 

Martensville that are a matter of public record, and it’s a fact 

that the allegations of sexual abuse against children were 

brought forward to the police. Those allegations were 

investigated and charges were laid — more than 160 charges 

against 9 individuals. 

 

This attracted significant public attention and concern. 

Speculative comments were made in relation to possible ritual 

or satanic abuse from a number of different people called upon 

to comment. I don’t believe the Crown prosecutors ever 

characterized the abuse in this fashion, and no charges which 

supported so-called ritual or satanic activity were taken forward 

by the Crown. I ask that the members of this House be very 

careful in the facts that they state publicly before national 

television or anywhere else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Surgery Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health is 

continually telling us we have the best system of health in the 

world, and I can only say if this is still true since wellness, I 

pity the rest of the world. I wish to bring his attention again to 

the case of Shawna Prebushewski of North Battleford who was 

diagnosed as having endometriosis in September of last year. 

She is in severe pain. She is a young mother of three. She has 

been told it will be at least nine months before her surgery is 

even scheduled, and in the meantime she will simply have to 

endure the pain. 

 

She has been told that her case can be bumped up and she can 

be put on emergency basis if she takes narcotic painkillers. She 

is reluctant to do that as a mother of young children. She has 

tried contacting the doctor and been told to talk to the Minister 

of Health. The Minister of Health tells her to talk to the doctor. 

What can she do to enjoy the benefits of this best health system 

in the world? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, the 

matter of waiting times for surgery depends upon whether a 

person is classified as urgent, emergency, or elective. And 

urgent cases are usually dealt with in a number of days if not 

immediately, emergency in a matter of weeks. 

 

I am not going to comment on the specific case the member 

raises because it would be improper for me to do so, but I do 

want to say that if the person that the member is talking about 

feels that the categorization of her case is not correct, she 

should be consulting with her physician. She also could give a 

call to the quality of care coordinator for the health district in 

which she resides. 

 

And having answered the question, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

this to the member. It’s fine for the member to get up, and 

members of the Liberal Party to get up, and criticize our health 

care system, the public medicare system. But I’ve issued a 

challenge to the member to say this — if he says there is a place 

in the world that has a better health care system than the 

province of Saskatchewan, tell us where it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 220  The Shortline Railway 

Successor Rights Suspension Act 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 220, An Act respecting the Suspension of Successor Rights 

in relation to the Acquisition of Shortline Railroads and to 

amend The Trade Union Act in consequence thereof, be 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to table the 

annual report of the Children’s Advocate and the Provincial 

Ombudsman. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that 

question 38 be converted to notice of motions for return 

(debatable). And with leave, Mr. Speaker, I hereby table the 

responses to questions 39 and 40. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. l is converted to motions for return 

(debatable); items no. 2 and 3, the answer is provided. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14  The Water Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading 

of The Water Corporation Act. There are three basic things 

which can be found in this Act, Mr. Speaker — clarity, 

consistency, efficiency. This government is committed to 

streamlining the regulatory process. 

 

This legislation will reduce the regulatory burden on many 

Saskatchewan urban municipalities and has the potential to   



722  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

reduce that burden for thousands of Saskatchewan landowners. 

And by doing so, Mr. Speaker, it will reduce the overall 

regulatory costs to the government without compromising the 

public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will remove Sask Water’s regulatory 

involvement in the approval process for internal municipal 

sewage collection and water distribution pipeline works which 

are completely within an urban municipality. 

 

This legislation eliminates the need for municipalities to submit 

detailed plans of their pipeline system to government for 

review, thereby reducing the total regulatory cost. Treatment 

works, internal storage reservoirs, and pump house facilities 

that are connected by the pipelines within an urban municipality 

will still be reviewed by Sask Water and by SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management).This 

Bill reduces the red tape for municipalities and gives them more 

local autonomy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Water normally has to review between 75 

and 100 subdivision proposals each year involving pipeline 

distribution system, and this will free up more staff resources to 

work on other more pressing water management problems. 

Priority, consistency, and efficiency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The new Sask Water Act also has the potential to reduce 

regulatory burden on more than 6,000 Saskatchewan 

landowners who operate their own dams for domestic use to 

water their stock. Currently when land is sold, provincial 

approval to operate the dam under The Water Rights Act must 

be transferred to the new owner. That means that the new owner 

has to file an application to Sask Water and has to do an 

inspection. This has resulted in significant regulatory backlog 

and is usually unnecessary as the new owner generally puts the 

dam to the same use as did the previous owner. 

 

In addition, many new landowners may not have applied to 

have other works transferred and could, within the letter of the 

law, be operating illegal works under the Act. Certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, that is not a situation that we want to continue. 

 

Including these domestic projects under The Water Corporation 

Act will remove the need to reissue an approval if the land is 

sold. The new owner will, however, be required to operate the 

dam under the terms and conditions of The Water Corporation 

Act. 

 

This change will reduce red tape for landowners who buy lands 

which have domestic dams and it will reduce the regulatory 

burden of Sask Water. Clarity, consistency, and efficiency, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Water is currently the only utility Crown 

corporation which requires the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to expropriate easements for its projects. 

Sask Water strives, usually successfully, to obtain easements 

voluntarily. It isn’t always possible, however, and the time 

required to obtain the order in council can add costs to the 

project for both Sask Water and its clients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will ensure that Sask Water obtains 

all required approvals before issuing expropriation orders while 

not having to go to the level of order in council. As I said, Mr. 

Speaker, consistency, clarity, and efficiency is what this Bill is 

about. 

 

Finally, the new Water Corporation Act will ensure uniformity 

of the sale of the beds and shores of water bodies where first 

nations are involved. Currently the beds and shores of water 

bodies can be sold to the first nations under treaty land 

entitlement claims. This legislation allows for such sales under 

specific land entitlement claims as well. It provides uniformity 

and helps the province continue to work with Saskatchewan’s 

first nations on land claim issues. 

 

These four changes to The Water Corporation Act all, in one 

way or another, bring clarity, consistency, and efficiency to the 

Act and to the government’s relationship with many of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct privilege and honour today to 

move second reading of The Water Corporation Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

minister for his words on Bill No. 25. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation is not the 

highest profile of our Crown corporations. But as we’ve seen in 

the past few weeks, it can be one of our more important 

Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll only take a few minutes to talk about the Bill 

today, as we are still talking with those who will be affected by 

the changes this legislation will implement. But before moving 

for adjournment there are a few general comments I’d like to 

make about the Bill and about Sask Water, for the very reason 

of how important the whole issue of water is to the people of 

this province. 

 

I don’t think there are many places in Canada where the subject 

of water is of greater concern. In the years when we have too 

little water, our farmers are hurt with crop failures and our 

economy suffers. In the years like this one and last year too, too 

much water had the same effect. 

 

We’ve heard that once again this year there are farmers who 

will not be able to get onto their land due to excess water. 

Others will have to seed very late, and making the risk of frost 

all the greater. In fact there are farmers who have land that will 

be under water throughout the whole of the year. Now with this 

year’s flooding, these problems will be compounded. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t take the opportunity 

to recognize the many residents of our province who have 

rolled up their sleeves in the past few weeks to sandbag and do 

what was needed in order to protect their property and their 

family from flood waters we have unfortunately experienced 

this year. 

 

  



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

Clearly in many of the cases there’s only so much that can be 

done by Sask Water in terms of the flood waters that move into 

our province after the winters we’ve had. However, we must 

also be concerned with doing everything we can to best control 

floods and we must give the people of Saskatchewan every 

assurance that everything is being done. 

 

That is always a concern when I see headlines such as the one 

that appeared in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald on March 21 that 

said, “Flood control answers demanded.” That article told of the 

frustration of many river valley residents who are demanding to 

know why the recommendations they have made to the 

government in the past for controlling floods were ignored until 

this past spring. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it is absolutely imperative that Sask 

Water not only listen to the concerns of the people affected by 

their decision but the corporation must always be in the position 

where they have to explain the decisions that are eventually 

made. 

 

Who can blame people for getting angry when they see their 

worldly possessions endangered by rising flood waters? And 

who can blame people for getting angry when flood waters 

sweep away bridges and wash away roads? 

 

Like I say, there are cases where nature is going to take its 

course. But I think the question we have to continue to ask 

ourselves is whether the provincial government through Sask 

Water is doing all it can to tell people what decisions are being 

made and why these decisions are being made. There’s simply 

got to be more communication with the people of 

Saskatchewan, not only with Sask Water but with this entire 

government. 

 

And this story is far from complete this year. The people in the 

Qu’Appelle Valley and around Weyburn are just getting their 

first taste of this year’s flooding and there no doubt will be 

many complaints about Sask Water coming from those areas. I 

urge the corporation and the minister responsible for Sask 

Water to please listen to these concerns. Perhaps some of the 

criticism will not be warranted, but some of it could be, Mr. 

Speaker, and the minister and the government opposite have got 

to listen to these serious concerns and criticisms very carefully 

and very thoughtfully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it only takes a spring like this one to tell us what 

Sask Water’s main function should be in this province. The 

mandate of the Water Corporation is, according to the latest 

annual report, “to manage, administer, develop, control, and 

protect the water and related land resources of Saskatchewan.” 

That seems pretty clear to me. However, I feel the corporation 

might be straying just slightly from its mandate with ventures 

like SPUDCO, the provincial government’s attempt to get in on 

the potato growing industry. 

 

Is this really what Sask Water should be doing? I don’t think so. 

And neither do other people in the province, farmers who are 

involved in the industry. These are producers that will now 

have to compete with the provincial treasury. And I’m sure 

that’s a debate we’ll continue to have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again my main point is this: what in the world is Sask 

Water doing getting involved in business? Is this the best use of 

this corporation’s resources at a time when flooding is 

devastating so many and in a province where soon enough we’ll 

have a year when there isn’t enough water? We all remember 

the impact of the 1980s drought. That is where this corporation 

should be concentrating its efforts, Mr. Speaker. And as I’ve 

said, we’re still in the process of thoroughly reviewing this Bill 

with municipal leaders and many others who will be affected by 

it. 

 

But I would like to make some preliminary comments today. 

The first major clause of this Bill will give much authority to 

Sask Water. Namely, it will allow the corporation to begin 

expropriating land easements without seeking cabinet approval 

first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m well aware of sometimes onerous procedures 

involved in land expropriation, and these procedures can be 

great. I think we all remember the great controversy 

surrounding the dam projects in the south-east part of our 

province where land expropriation was used. And of course it’s 

used in much lower profile situations. 

 

But the word itself is a scary one for many people, who see it as 

taking away some of their rights. Expropriation should always, 

always be used as a last resort. And that’s why Sask Water has 

got to keep in mind the people who are affected by its decisions. 

And that’s why I’m concerned that cabinet will no longer have 

final approval over these decisions, because at least to the 

people who are having their land taken away this is a major 

issue. 

 

While the cabinet certainly does not have a great track record 

when it comes to listening to the concerns of the people, it 

remains the only link between the corporation and the people of 

Saskatchewan in matters of expropriation. And to lose this last 

link when it comes to people’s personal property causes 

concern to me. And I’ll certainly be asking the minister to give 

the people of Saskatchewan some reassurance in this regard. 

Yes, it is always good to speed up the process, but giving the 

corporation a power of expropriation without some input from 

an elected official raises very many questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also talks about reducing the regulatory 

process for urban municipalities which are undertaking sewage 

or waterworks projects that are completely confined to their 

jurisdiction. This seems to make sense because it appears Sask 

Water and SaskEnergy and Resource Management were 

regulating pretty much the same thing when it came to those 

projects. So while the burden on municipalities will be reduced, 

controls will still be in place to ensure safe drinking water and 

effective sewage disposal. 

 

We’ll of course have many questions on this in Committee of 

the Whole and in estimates as well. But on that same matter, 

I’ve spoken many times on the need to reduce the regulatory 

burden in Saskatchewan, and this government has as well. 

  



724  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

I think we all remember last year’s throne speech when the 

government committed itself to reducing the number of 

regulations in place in Saskatchewan. You’ll remember that 

promise, Mr. Speaker. It came just before the government 

opposite introduced another 120 bills into this legislature all 

with pages and pages of their own regulations. 

 

So let me just say while it’s heartening to know this Bill will in 

fact reduce some of the red tape for municipalities, I’m not 

convinced the government is truly committed to its regulatory 

reduction as an overall goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final section of this legislation deals with lands 

to be sold to the first nations people for the purpose of settling 

specific land claims. These are claims that are long outstanding 

and must be made good. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, again I want to urge the government 

that it must continue to consult with the residents of 

Saskatchewan regarding this issue before sales are made. The 

whole issue of land claims settlement is greatly misunderstood 

by many, and the government will only be doing more harm if it 

fails to properly explain to people in these areas where claims 

are going to be settled and what the process is going to be. 

 

I’ve heard from many who have been affected by treaty land 

entitlement settlements. And while very few take issue with 

settling these claims — and certainly I don’t — there is at times 

major concerns that neither the provincial or the federal 

government have done enough to consult with the nearby 

residents, or at least to explain the process that is taking place. 

That’s the situation that we must avoid whenever and wherever 

possible, Mr. Speaker, and I urge the government to keep this 

mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are a few of the preliminary comments I 

want to make about Bill 25. We will have more to say on this 

piece of legislation in the later debate. For now I move that 

debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997. 

The Residential Tenancies Act deals with the rights and 

responsibilities of tenants and landlords in the rental market. 

 

The challenge with respect to this legislation has always been to 

create a balance between the rights and responsibilities of both 

the landlord and the tenant. In developing the amendments I am 

proposing today, Mr. Speaker, we have tried to achieve the 

necessary balance between the interests of the tenants and of 

landlords and to establish policies that are fair to both parties. 

 

We recognize, Mr. Speaker, that in the vast majority of tenancy 

agreements, both the landlord and the tenant act with fairness 

and integrity. In most residential tenancies, landlord and tenant 

relationships are positive. However, when disputes about 

security deposits occur, we hear concerns about the system for 

dealing with those disputes. For those situations where a 

problem does develop, we have improved the system to deal 

with disputes. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the new Bill 

ensures fair treatment of both parties by requiring the landlord 

to return the security deposit to the tenant within a short period 

of time; and if there is a dispute, to resolve it as quickly as 

possible. 

 

In addition, this Bill will reverse the onus so that a landlord has 

to make a claim to the Rentalsman for an order to retain any or 

all of the security deposit. I believe that we have achieved this 

balance in these amendments. 

 

The current maximum security deposit provided for in the Act 

has generated a great deal of attention in recent years. Mr. 

Speaker, we realize that our policies must keep pace with 

current issues of concern to both landlords and tenants. We 

believe that this Act will address these issues that affect the 

quality and quantity of rental housing in a fair and balanced 

way. 

 

This Bill provides for a maximum security deposit of up to a 

full month’s rent, to take effect on October 1, 1997. However 

this new maximum will not apply to existing rental 

arrangements where the tenant already occupies the premises as 

of October 1, 1997. The new amount will only apply to new 

tenancy arrangements entered into after October 1, 1997. 

 

You should know as well, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill makes it 

an offence to terminate an existing tenancy agreement for the 

purpose of obtaining an increased security deposit. In other 

words, a tenant cannot be evicted on October 2, 1997, so that an 

unscrupulous landlord can enter into a new tenancy agreement 

and thereby obtain the higher security deposit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that most tenants are very responsible in 

their tenancy agreements with landlords. However, landlords 

can face high costs when damage does occur to their rental 

premises or a tenant leaves without paying rent. 

 

The $125 maximum security deposit has been in effect since 

1981. This was reasonable at that time. But now, 16 years later 

in 1997, this maximum is no longer sufficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recognize that this new maximum security 

deposit may be difficult for some tenants. Therefore several 

measures are being introduced to moderate the impact upon the 

tenants. These provisions include allowing a tenant to pay the 

full amount of the new security deposit, allowing them time to 

pay the full amount, implementing provisions to ensure that the 

tenant receives the security deposit refund to which he or she is 

entitled in a timely way, and reversing the onus from the tenant 

to the landlord to apply to the Rentalsman if there is a dispute 

about a security deposit. At present such disputes go to the 

Office of the Rentalsman only on the application by the tenant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like now to address the provisions for the 

tenant to pay the security deposit in instalments. Under this Bill 

a landlord may require no more than 50 per cent of the security 

deposit at the beginning of a tenancy. The remainder of the   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

security deposit is not required to be paid for two more months. 

This will reduce the impact on the tenant of having to pay the 

full amount of the security deposit upon entering into a new 

tenancy agreement after moving to a new rental location. It 

provides the tenant with time to pay the second instalment after 

the tenant has received any refund to which the tenant is entitled 

from the previous landlord. 

 

The Act currently requires a tenant to apply to the Rentalsman 

if the landlord has not refunded the security deposit within 10 

days of the end of a tenancy. Tenants may not be aware that 

they are required to apply for a refund and some may not know 

how the process works. The onus has been on the tenant to 

pursue the landlord for the security deposit. 

 

It is important to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have made 

amendments in the Act to ensure that a tenant now receives the 

refund within five days after ending their tenancy. These new 

provisions require the landlord to return the security deposit to 

the tenant within five days after the termination of a tenancy. I 

would like to stress that in many instances this is exactly what 

landlords already do. 

 

However under the present Act, in those circumstances where 

landlords do not refund the security deposit to the tenant in a 

timely fashion, it is the tenant who has to take steps to have 

their security deposit returned. This is inconvenient and unfair 

to the tenants. This Bill will reverse the onus from the tenant to 

the landlord and make the landlord show why they should keep 

all or part of the security deposit. 

 

In addition, the process of handling disputes about the security 

deposit has also changed. It is now up to the landlord to make a 

claim against the security deposit where the landlord alleges 

that there has been damage to the rental property and the tenant 

does not agree that the landlord has a claim or does not agree 

with the amount of the claim. In this situation the landlord will 

have to apply to the Rentalsman for a hearing to resolve the 

matter. The landlord will also, in these instances, be required to 

pay into the Office of the Rentalsman the application fee, the 

security deposit, and interest on the security deposit until the 

dispute is resolved. 

 

(1445) 

 

There are also new provisions, Mr. Speaker, to address the 

situation where the landlord has not refunded the security 

deposit within these five days and the tenant has not agreed to 

the landlord keeping all or part of the deposit. In this case, the 

tenant may apply to the Rentalsman for an order with respect to 

a refund without paying the application fee. In these situations, 

the Rentalsman will make an order requiring the landlord to 

refund the security deposit to the tenant. The landlord must 

comply with that order. 

 

In cases where the landlord has a claim against the security 

deposit for damages for unpaid rent, the landlord may still make 

an application to the Rentalsman for an order against the tenant. 

This application can be made after the landlord has provided the 

refund to the tenant. 

 

The Bill recognizes that a landlord may, in exceptional 

circumstances, fail to comply with the five-day time limit in 

which to return the security deposit to the tenant. In some cases, 

it may be unfair for an order to be made against the landlord for 

failing to comply. Provision is made in the Bill for the 

Rentalsman to take this into account. 

 

The Bill contains provisions with respect to these exceptional 

circumstances. It states that such circumstances may exist 

where renting residential premises is not the primary business 

or activity of the landlord, this is the first such application 

involving this landlord, and the landlord unintentionally failed 

to comply. 

 

Furthermore, the Office of the Rentalsman will render decisions 

regarding entitlement to the security deposit within 60 days of 

the termination of the tenancy. This will ensure tenants have 

whatever refund they may be entitled to by the time they are 

required to pay the second instalment to their new landlord. 

 

A further enhancement in this Bill will enable the Rentalsman, 

with respect to a security deposit, to make an administrative 

order in favour of a landlord. Such orders may be made in cases 

where the landlord is unable to find the tenant to serve the 

tenant with a notice of the hearing before the Rentalsman 

respecting a security deposit. 

 

The landlord will have to show that he or she is entitled to 

retain all or part of the security deposit and that reasonable 

efforts to locate the tenant have been made. These orders will 

become final after 120 days unless the tenant makes an 

application for a refund. 

 

In addition, I am pleased to advise you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

changes we are introducing in this Bill will be sensitive to the 

cost of the Social Services budget. The amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act provide for the Minister of Social 

Services to pay security deposits for people on social assistance 

at a future date, rather than paying the deposits at the time of a 

new tenancy arrangement. 

 

This change has been recommended by many landlords and 

others for some years. It offers the protection the landlord needs 

while ensuring that security deposits paid by Social Services 

will be limited to instances where the landlord has a claim 

against a tenant who is on assistance. Unless exceptional 

circumstances exist, Social Services will collect back as an 

overpayment any money it pays out as a security deposit. 

Exceptional circumstances will be spelled out in the regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe these new measures address landlord 

concerns with respect to the inadequacy of the current security 

deposit. At the same time these measures offer fairness for 

tenants with respect to their security deposits. Where tenants 

comply with the agreement they had with the landlord and are 

entitled to a refund of their security deposits they will receive it 

quickly. Also if there is a dispute about a security deposit the 

onus will now be on the landlord to make the application to the 

Rentalsman. 

 

  



726  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

These are the major policy changes in this Bill. I believe these 

new approaches successfully address long-standing concerns 

with respect to security deposits. I believe the amendments 

offer fairness for all, and the amendments improve access to 

justice for tenants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Residential Tenancies Act and to consequentially amend The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to be able to speak to the second reading of Bill No. 29 

— The Residential Tenancies Act, and the consequential 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. 

 

I would like to congratulate this government for making the 

improvements to this Act. The landlords and others in this 

province surely feel that these changes have been long overdue. 

While I feel that the Bill has its merit, there are some concerns 

that I would like to mention that have been brought to my 

attention by residents of this province. 

 

I’d like to begin by clearing up some of the myths about rental 

properties, tenants, and landlords in this province. In spite of all 

that has been said, we must recognize that not all tenants are 

irresponsible and that not all property owners are slum lords 

and that not all properties are left in disrepair and require large 

amounts of money to clean up before they can be rented again. 

 

It should be noted that according to the Rentalsman of 

Saskatchewan, only 20 per cent of all tenant-landlord 

relationships experience problems that require settling by 

mediation processes involving the Rentalsman. These disputes 

generally come from both sides and are not just attributable to 

irresponsible tenants, though the majority of complaints do 

come from landlords. Disputes also revolve around rent in 

arrears and claims of damaged property. 

 

I am pleased to see that The Residential Tenancies Act will now 

give landlords and tenants some much-needed assurance when 

renting properties. First, landlords will now be able to charge up 

to one month’s rent for a security deposit, although it has taken 

years for this government to realize that there was a serious 

problem. 

 

A little persuasion, Mr. Speaker, does go a long way. Maybe 

having one Saskatoon landlord dump a truckload of one 

tenant’s abandoned belongings at the Premier’s constituency 

office helped to make the point. Or possibly it was the 

landlords’ decision to pull vacant housing off the market to 

protest the government’s lack of action on this issue last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act also provides a provision to ensure that 

landlords will not be able to evict a tenant for the purpose of 

increasing the security deposit. While I am sure that there will 

be few landlords who will try to evict present tenants so that 

they can take advantage of the new agreement, when the case 

does arise, it needs to be investigated. I would like the 

government’s assurance that they will monitor these situations 

carefully as October 1, the date of enactment of this Act, 

approaches quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have some concerns . . . or a few more 

concerns with this legislation in the form of questions again 

brought to my attention. How does this Act affect low income 

families and seniors on fixed incomes? Can the government 

ensure that these cases will be looked at as they arise? The Act 

shouldn’t bar people from moving to a better environment and 

trying to make a better life for themselves. 

 

The new Act goes on to ensure that tenants will receive their 

damage deposit back from their former landlord quicker than 

before — in five days rather than the previous ten — as long as 

there are no charges against the tenant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act puts an extra burden on the Rentalsman, 

who must handle the possible increase in the number of 

complaints. For when a grievance is filed, the turnaround time 

for the return of their damage deposit from the former landlord 

will now be 60 days. This ensures that the tenant will be able to 

make the second payment of the new security on time. But 

again this is an added time commitment for the Rentalsman. 

 

For many lower income individuals and families, this is an 

important addition to this Act because it ensures that when a 

conflict arises before the landlord and tenant the hearing 

process is sped up and speeding up the bureaucracy is 

something we would all like to see, at least on this side of the 

House. But I also have to ask what will be done to ensure that 

the Rentalsman is not overburdened with added cases and that 

the system does not slow down. 

 

But regardless, this new and improved Act will undoubtedly 

make both landlords and tenants more responsible. Many of the 

complaints that were expressed by landlords over the past year 

were that low income tenants who had their rent subsidized 

through social assistance were leaving their rental units in 

unacceptable condition. At least on one occasion it was reported 

that a landlord would have to sell the property to recoup some 

of the costs of the damage that had been done. 

 

The fact that landlords will not be receiving a damage deposit 

from either the tenants in this case, nor the Department of 

Social Services, is disturbing. The new Act allows for damages 

to be paid directly to the landlord when damage is reported, and 

then damages may be deducted from the welfare recipients’ 

benefits in instalments. Hopefully this will put more onus on all 

tenants to leave their residence in good condition. 

 

Some other concerns brought to my attention are that landlords 

will refuse to rent to welfare recipients in order to ensure that 

they, the landlords, receive a security deposit rather than trying 

to deal with a government bureaucracy and that landlords may 

charge the government for frivolous expenses and take 

advantage of the system. For example, one case reported this 

year where a student was charged $15 for forgetting to clean 

behind the stove and $25 for not cleaning out the patio door 

rails. 

 

We must keep in mind that the purpose behind this new Act is   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

to make both the tenants and the landlords more responsible. 

Some possible suggestions I have is to have Social Services 

inspect the housing prior to recipients taking up residence, or 

possibly have the recipient or the landlord submit a report on 

the present condition of the property. This would ensure that 

damage that existed prior to the tenant’s departure isn’t 

unnecessarily charged to the social service recipient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a concern regarding housing that is not 

fit for people to live in. The past year has seen a number of 

people being evicted from their rented properties — because the 

properties were found to be not up to public health standards — 

many of whom are on social assistance. This is something that 

you would expect only in much larger cities, but it is happening 

here. 

 

At present, properties that do not meet public health standards 

are not reported to the Rentalsman by the public health district 

in Saskatoon nor in Regina. The Rentalsman in Regina receives 

a letter regarding any property that has been condemned, but 

not if the property does not meet public health standards. 

Furthermore, the list of housing that does not meet health 

standards cannot be publicly published. People may inquire as 

to whether a property is on the list, but few do. 

 

What good is it to have a list of unfit housing when no one 

knows the list is available? Presently in Saskatoon and Regina 

there are about 30 properties in each city that are on this list. 

While the list is fluid and always changing, a simple fax would 

be all that is needed to inform the Rentalsman, Social Services, 

and other agencies in these cities to ensure that the public is 

aware of housing that is not fit to live in. In fact in Saskatoon 

this kind of system has been implemented. Even a phone 

recording system, which has been one suggestion, would be a 

step in the right direction. 

 

The one drawback of the present system too is that the health 

boards are not the only ones who contribute to the list. There 

are other agencies that have a list of condemned properties. This 

is where the government may need to step in to take a 

leadership role and coordinate a compilation of these lists. It’s 

in government’s own interest and best interest to ensure that 

people are not living in substandard housing. 

 

A final point is that both Saskatoon and Regina have vacancy 

rates in the 1 per cent range; Saskatoon actually even lower than 

that. With housing rents rising, and predictions are that they 

will continue to rise in the future, what is the government doing 

to ensure that there is enough housing in the market-place to 

keep rents at an affordable rate? 

 

While the province continues to become more urbanized and 

new people are migrating to the province, there will continue to 

be a shortage of low cost, multi-unit dwelling. According to 

Earl Mireau, spokesperson for Equal Justice for All, the housing 

market in Saskatoon is in a crisis state, with vacancy rates 

below 1 per cent. It is obvious there is not enough affordable 

housing in the city. 

 

So does the province have any plans to provide much-needed 

incentives to contractors to encourage much-needed multi-unit 

residential building construction? As I recall, the feds in the 

early ’80s provided a 10 per cent write-off on these buildings. 

That move encouraged some companies to construct over 1,200 

units in Saskatoon at that time, which coincided with the time 

of increased growth in the city. 

 

Saskatoon is now experiencing the same situation. Maybe it’s 

time for this government to step in and provide these kind of 

incentives as an indirect form of rent control. The spin-offs 

could contribute much to job growth in the construction 

industry, that is as long as none of the Crown corps are 

involved. 

 

In conclusion I am glad to see that the government has finally 

taken a step in the right direction; although it has been a long 

time coming. But, Mr. Speaker, we would like to scrutinize the 

Bill even closer and so I move to adjourn debate on this issue. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act 

Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

second reading of The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Act. This Bill is based on a Bill prepared by the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada for introduction in each of the provinces 

and territories of Canada. The Bill is intended to provide for 

standard rules throughout Canada for the recognition and 

enforcement of out-of-province judgements. 

 

This is the process whereby, for example, a judgement from a 

superior court in Nova Scotia could be enforced in 

Saskatchewan. Conversely, it would allow a Saskatchewan 

judgement to be enforced in Nova Scotia. The goal of course, is 

to avoid the expense and delay of having to retry a matter in its 

entirety in a new jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the central element of this Bill is, to use the words 

of the Supreme Court of Canada, to provide, quote, “full faith 

and credit” in the recognition and enforcement of judgements 

between provinces and territories in Canada. This Bill 

implements a process whereby a judgement creditor will be able 

to register an out-of-province judgement in Saskatchewan and 

have it enforced in Saskatchewan as if it were a judgement of a 

Saskatchewan court. 

 

Previously, under The Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments 

Act, enforcement in the new jurisdiction could be challenged on 

a number of grounds. Under the new uniform Bill, the grounds 

on which a court could refuse enforcement of a registered 

judgement are limited to: first, the grounds on which the court 

would refuse to enforce a similar judgement made in 

Saskatchewan; second, where the debtor is taking steps to set 

aside the judgement in the original jurisdiction; third, where an 

order staying or limiting the effect of that judgement has been 

made in the original jurisdiction; or fourth, public policy 

reasons. 

 

  



728  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

It should be noted that the Bill applies to the enforcement of 

money judgements only. It does not apply to out-of-province 

judgements regarding property. It also will not apply to family 

maintenance and support payments or to Criminal Code fines. 

Interprovincial enforcement in those areas are already the 

subject of separate legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill seeks to streamline the enforcement of 

judgements between jurisdictions. It will minimize the need for 

expensive enforcement and judicial proceedings to be repeated 

between provinces or territories. Once the uniform Bill is in 

place throughout Canada, a Saskatchewan resident who has 

taken a matter to court in Saskatchewan and received a 

judgement in his or her favour will not have to start the 

litigation process all over again when the debtor moves to 

another province or territory. This is an unnecessary expense 

and one which is inconsistent with the legal principle of full 

faith and credit. 

 

Saskatchewan will be joining with British Columbia and Prince 

Edward Island in passing this uniform legislation. Once a 

sufficient number of other provinces and territories follow suit, 

these Acts will be proclaimed. Then the benefits of a uniform 

procedure for the enforcement of out-of-province judgements 

will be in place throughout Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting the 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to just 

stand in the House today and make some comments about The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act. And it appears to us 

that in fact this seems to be relatively non-controversial 

legislation and must be considered in its entire, proper context, 

Mr. Speaker. And although there may be some aspects of this 

legislation that needs to be a little . . . with a little more review 

to closer scrutinize some aspects of the legislation, I would ask 

that we adjourn debate on this particular Bill at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act/Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le 

renvoi des instances 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

the second reading of The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act. This Bill is also based on a Bill prepared by the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada for introduction in each of 

the provinces and territories of Canada. 

 

This Bill has four main purposes. First, to introduce standard 

rules in Canadian courts for determining jurisdiction over a 

matter; second, to coordinate Canadian jurisdictional rules with 

the principle set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in the 

Morguard case; third, to complement The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Act by providing uniform jurisdictional 

standards; and finally, to introduce for the first time a 

mechanism by which superior courts of Canada may transfer 

litigation to a court in another jurisdiction when the receiving 

court accepts such a transfer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in an increasingly mobile society. The 

existing process by which superior courts in Canada determine 

jurisdiction and transfer proceedings between provinces is 

certainly inadequate. Currently, where a complex, 

interprovincial matter is brought before a superior court and that 

court is asked to determine if it is the proper jurisdiction in 

which to hear the matter, the parties to that matter may simply 

be told that they have to start the lawsuit all over again in 

another province because that court lacks jurisdiction. 

 

This uniform Bill will address this expensive and 

time-consuming problem by making the rules by which a court 

determines jurisdiction clear and uniform throughout Canada. 

The Bill will also introduce a process whereby a matter may be 

transferred between superior court jurisdictions without 

requiring the parties in that litigation to recommence the 

litigation. 

 

Jurisdiction for a court would be determined by such factors as 

whether the person has submitted to the court’s jurisdiction, 

whether there is agreement between the parties that the court 

has jurisdiction for that litigation, whether the party is 

ordinarily resident in that jurisdiction at the time of the 

commencement of the proceeding, and whether there is a real 

and substantial connection between the jurisdiction and the 

facts on which the proceeding against that person is based. 

 

Transfers between courts in different jurisdictions would be 

allowed when the receiving court has the necessary jurisdiction 

as outlined above and it agrees to hear the matter. The factors to 

be considered include the comparative convenience and 

expense to the parties and their witnesses in litigating in that 

court, the law to be applied to the issues in the proceeding, the 

desirability of avoiding a multiplicity of legal proceedings, the 

desirability of avoiding conflicting decisions in different courts, 

the enforcement of any eventual judgement, and the fair and 

efficient working of the Canadian legal system as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in essence this Bill will introduce a process by 

which Canadian superior courts may communicate with each 

other to ensure that a matter is heard in the appropriate 

jurisdiction. Rather than requiring the parties to start over in 

another province or territory, the court may ask the receiving 

court in the appropriate jurisdiction to accept the transfer of the 

proceedings and to proceed from that point. This avoids 

duplication of effort and saves time and expenses, both for the 

parties to the litigation and for the court system itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government and this Assembly have long 

been supporters of uniform Bills such as this which seek to 

provide consistent, reasonable, and uniform rules and 

procedures throughout the Canadian provinces and territories. 

 

In our view, Canadian courts should be able to communicate 

with each other in this manner, based on uniform rules and 

procedures. 

 

I would invite this Assembly to join me in supporting the   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

Unified Law Conference of Canada in their effort to simplify 

and streamline the litigation process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting Court 

Jurisdiction and the Transfer of Court Proceedings. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be able 

to make some remarks and some comments with respect to Bill 

24. And I appreciate the Minister’s comments and efforts with 

respect to making an attempt to ensure that there is parity, there 

is accessibility, for people who find themselves in the justice 

system, and having to use the facilities of the justice system to 

take care of affairs or matters or issues that affect their lives and 

perhaps may affect other people’s lives. 

 

We have spoken on this side of the House, of the importance of 

ensuring that there’s parity and availability of the judicial 

processes to all people in an equitable and fair manner. It is 

never the intention, I would hope, and I am sure, of laws to be 

made that would hinder, as opposed to allow access . . . 

accessibility and due processes to occur in a meaningful and 

timely manner, and not at any hindrance or expense to the 

people that need to use that system. 

 

I believe what this Bill will do is provide some parity, some 

uniformity, and more easy access to processing some of the 

legal matters that people find themselves involved with. There 

may be some issues of this particular Bill that need to be 

addressed specifically; however I feel that we are quite 

comfortable we will be able to address those in Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

And I just want to make one final comment, Mr. Speaker, that it 

is our intent to ensure that whatever Bills are passed that affect 

the people of Saskatchewan, and in effect if they as well spill 

over to other provinces which may include or involve people 

who have left Saskatchewan and gone to other provinces and 

become involved in some sort of judicial requirements that they 

need to access the availability of these sources without undo 

financial burdens, then we are not opposed. 

 

However as I mentioned, we will be able to look at that Bill 

more closely section by section in Committee of the Whole, and 

therefore I move that the Bill be passed to Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 28 — The Family 

Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last date I 

entered into this debate I spoke about the need of predictability 

and standardization in our legal system. While each case and 

each set of litigants are no doubt individuals and present special 

circumstances to the courts, none the less having conceded that, 

it is important that similar factual situations attract similar 

results. 

 

This has unfortunately been lacking from family maintenance 

and child support awards in our province. And this, I am 

convinced, is one of the reasons for bitter separation and 

divorce and for ongoing battles about access and visits with the 

children. So I am hopeful that with standardization we will see 

other matters which come about as a result of a separation will 

be settled more amicably. I am also satisfied we will se a higher 

rate of settlement as opposed to litigation. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, a generation ago about 80 per cent of child 

support orders were in fact never paid on. This was of course 

primarily a great hardship for the custodial parent — usually the 

mother — and for the children. But it had another problem 

which has now come back on the non-custodial parent, usually 

the father. 

 

Namely this — a lot of child support orders that were totally 

unrealistic and out of the ball park got registered in default; that 

is, without the participation of the father, without the father’s 

income even being known by the court. Consequently, when the 

enforcement was improved, and I’m glad to say it was 

improved, but when it was improved we had the maintenance 

enforcement office of our province chasing some fathers for 

child support orders that were totally and completely 

unrealistic. This is a waste of government resources. 

 

I am happy about the establishment of the maintenance 

enforcement office. Certainly it is a well-needed reform in our 

province. And I am happy that child support orders are being 

honoured in a higher and higher number of cases. None the less, 

the first step in a firm maintenance enforcement system is to 

ensure that the child support order is realistic in the first place. 

To burden the maintenance enforcement office with the 

enforcement of unrealistic orders serves no useful purpose to 

anyone. 

 

Again, by adoption of the family maintenance tables as 

proposed in this legislation and as proposed throughout Canada, 

will hopefully mean that child support orders will in the first 

instance be reasonable. And when they are reasonable, we will 

have standardization. Parents paying and parents receiving child 

support will at least know that other parents in similar situations 

are in the same position as them and receiving or paying the 

same order. They will therefore not have reason to be angry and 

bitter because they are paying or receiving far more or less than 

other parents they know of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed an advance in family law in our 

province. I think it is an important advance and I agree that 

standardization and predictability in the area of child support is 

long overdue. However, there are still other matters in this Bill   



730  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

which I know are of interest and concern to other members of 

this House and I will wait eagerly to hear their comments on the 

same. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure to enter this debate today, albeit a very short one. And 

I would ask that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1530) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you. At the present time I have 

with me: Mr. Dick Till, who is the director of corrections; Betty 

Ann Pottruff, who is the director of policy planning and 

evaluation; Elizabeth Smith, who is the director of 

administration services; Brent Cotter, deputy minister; and 

Tammy Pryznyk, who’s executive assistant to the deputy 

minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all it is my 

pleasure to welcome the minister and his officials this afternoon 

and to thank the officials for their attendance. I would also like 

to take this opportunity to say that I personally, and members of 

the Liberal opposition, are satisfied that those administering 

justice in our province are competent, committed, capable, and 

dedicated individuals who are doing their best under what is 

sometimes trying and difficult circumstances. 

 

I would also like to say that I appreciate some of the initiatives 

that the Minister of Justice has undertaken regarding the 

reconciliation of aboriginal people to the justice system and also 

to make the justice system more relevant to persons of 

non-European backgrounds. 

 

I think that our system of law, of course, has developed over 

many, many centuries and I personally believe that it is 

sufficiently flexible to make allowances and to make 

accommodations for different backgrounds and different 

practices. I personally do not think that sentencing circles are, 

for example, an abrogation of our criminal law, but a 

complement to it. 

 

And I believe that they can in fact be side by side with our 

traditional justice system. And this does not amount to two-tier 

justice, nor does it amount to different rights and obligations for 

different citizens, which would of course be unacceptable in any 

modern, democratic society. 

 

I also appreciate some of the initiatives of the minister in such 

areas as restorative justice. But if I may say, well I am in 

agreement with the minister that simply hauling people into 

court and then from court into jail, oftentimes doesn’t result in 

the rehabilitation and the safer communities we all want. 

 

I must confess that I have a bit of a problem with the term 

“restorative justice” in the sense that it may promise something 

to the people of Saskatchewan which is not delivered. Namely 

that the sad reality is in many, if not most, cases the justice 

system does not restore. The justice system so often is like the 

emergency department which deals with the results of the 

accident after it has occurred. 

 

But to suggest that a person who has suffered a sexual assault, 

or a serious assault, or even their house being rifled and 

personal belongings stolen, to suggest that they can be restored 

is a misnomer, and it may hold out a false promise. The justice 

system must deal with offences as best it can. But the sad reality 

of life is that we are not able to put people back in the same 

position as if the tragic incident did not occur. 

 

The reality is that most offenders too will be, at some point in 

time, reintegrated into the community — we hope as better 

citizens. Jail has not always resulted in these better citizens, as 

we all know. But there is, as I say, a certain danger that if our 

justice system advertises itself as restoring the community to 

where it was before, it may be holding out a promise which in 

the end simply is not fulfilled. 

 

Nonetheless as I said, I look for the flexibility of some of these 

new initiatives. Adult diversion, sentencing circles, and 

restorative justice all hold out alternative measures for dealing 

with offenders which I think we have to explore because we 

know that the traditional means of dealing with offenders has 

not always been successful. We also know that in states of the 

United States where three-strikes-and-you’re-out laws have 

been enacted, it has resulted in certainly a burgeoning industry 

in corrections and penitentiaries and in the justice system, but 

has not in fact resulted in safer communities. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Chairman, I would first of all like to ask 

the Hon. Minister of Justice, we have on our order paper 

legislation regarding youth justice committees, and I would like 

to ask of the minister how many youth justice committees there 

are in the province that the minister has appointed. How many 

appointed youth justice committees do we presently have 

operating under the appointment of the minister? And if he 

could explain how these will be augmented by the legislation 

presently on our order paper? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’ll respond to the question first, then 

make a couple of comments about your comments. The youth 

justice committees — none of them have been formally 

appointed. Part of the reason for that is that the whole area of 

youth justice is a shared responsibility with the Department of 

Social Services and the Minister of Social Services and his staff 

have been working. 

 

We have a number of youth justice committees that are 

operating in informal ways. They haven’t been appointed under   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

the legislation. We also are in the process of developing that 

whole scheme throughout the province. So practically, the 

whole youth justice system, we don’t have the formal ones 

appointed. 

 

While I’m on my feet, I’d just like to comment on your 

comments about restorative justice and say that I agree with the 

thrust of your concern about the word “restorative.” And what I 

will say though is that in this whole area when one talks about 

how one changes the way the justice system deals with people 

. . . And I also confirm your concern that the justice system be 

one justice system that brings in all the things that are necessary 

to include all of the people in our community — therefore the 

sentencing circles and the moves towards family conferencing, 

and things like that. 

 

But when you talk about restorative justice the concept relates 

to how does one work to restore the harmony that may or may 

not have been in the community. Other words are used that 

further clarify how this term is used. A term now being talked 

about is satisfying justice — the community has satisfaction 

that the right thing has been done. 

 

Another term is transformative justice — justice that transforms 

or changes or deals with the problems and the concerns that 

arise where harm has been done. 

 

But I think one of the key points when we use the term 

restorative justice is to recognize that what we are attempting to 

get at is the fact that we are condemning behaviour of 

individuals, not the individuals themselves. And it’s a key 

clarification because it allows for us to recognize that often 

individuals get into trouble, we condemn what they’ve done, 

but we don’t necessarily write them off as individuals. And 

once you have that concept in your mind when you’re dealing 

with issues throughout the justice system, it changes some of 

the perspectives on how you do things. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker — I meant Mr. Chairman — may 

I then in turn comment. It seems to me all of these modern 

phrases and all this terminology that’s being bandied about 

really comes down to the issue of public confidence. That’s 

really what we’re talking about — public confidence. 

 

And of course there are many faces to public confidence. It 

means that those who are victims of crime believe that the 

situation will be dealt with by our justice system. It means that 

offenders by and large accept that their punishment is fair and 

something they have brought on themselves. It means that 

people who have not been involved directly in the justice 

system have confidence that the correct decisions are being 

made and the correct steps taken. 

 

Now of course much has been written that we simply live in a 

less deferential age than we used to. So certainly one of the 

problems the justice system has to deal with is the fact that a 

generation ago there may have a tendency to think that well, if a 

judge or a lawyer or whatever or a police officer said 

something, then that must be right. 

 

We don’t have that same mentality today, but may I 

respectfully suggest to the minister that to try to openly deal . . . 

and discuss in public some of the issues which are clearly of 

public concern in Saskatchewan should not be interpreted and 

advertised as making me a bad member of the law society, 

disloyal to my profession or my province; that one of the 

hallmarks of a democratic society is that we can discuss where 

we think our institutions can be improved while nonetheless 

being loyal to those institutions. And I believe that is the 

principle and the underlying philosophy contained in the phrase, 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. The people attempting to deal 

with some of, some of the problems and what we see as perhaps 

some areas that could be corrected are not traitors. 

 

May I come back however to the question of the youth justice 

committees. 

 

(1545) 

 

When I asked a couple of weeks ago if the youth justice 

committees were a response to the Liberal request for a youth 

justice task force, the response I received at that time from the 

Hon. Minister of Social Services was that I should wake up, that 

in point of fact these youth justice committees are operating all 

over the province. 

 

So I was surprised to hear the minister this afternoon say that, 

well although there are some informal committees, in point of 

fact in the 15 years the Young Offenders Act has been out there, 

none had been appointed pursuant to the Young Offenders Act 

and only now is this section being activated. 

 

And I would ask the minister if he could tell us if this is now 

being moved on because of the petitions from the Liberal 

opposition and members of the public asking for the 

establishment of a youth justice task force. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would like to thank the member for an 

opportunity to respond to his comments about being loyal 

opposition, and I am totally appreciative of the opposition being 

loyal. But I think the point I was trying to make is that when 

you are dealing with issues in an opposite way — if I can put it 

that way — you have to, as the paper said today, make sure any 

comments are based on fact and not attempts to make political 

points. That’s all I was trying to get at. 

 

Now as it relates to the youth justice committees, as you know 

they are possible creations under the Young Offenders Act, 

section 69, which is federal legislation. What we in 

Saskatchewan have done and what my colleague, the Minister 

of Social Services, was referring to are the fact that we have 

local working committees that are involved with our 

Saskatchewan’s action plan for children and with the restorative 

justice strategy. And they involve a broad level of community 

membership — police, community leaders, representatives from 

the Department of Justice, from the Department of Social 

Services, various youth outreach agencies, Metis and first 

nation organizations. 

 

 And through these various organizations throughout the 

province we’re attempting to deal with some of the questions 

that you have raised as opposition. And we are very clearly   



732  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

concerned that we involve the parents, the victims of crime, as 

well as the other members of the community, in attempting to 

deal with these situations so that we make sure that especially 

the young people are accountable for what they have done. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I spoke about sentencing circles 

a moment ago, and I would like to ask the minister if he could 

tell us, at least in approximate numbers, how many sentencing 

circles were held in the province last year and if he could give 

us some indication of where those sentencing circles were held. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you. The sentencing circles are 

predominately held in the North, and the communities that are 

listed for me are Sandy Bay, Dillon, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Stanley 

Mission, Cumberland House. We’ve also been having some 

now more recently in the southern reserve and urban settings — 

Poundmaker, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, Piapot, 

Saulteaux, Kinistin, Day Star, and Ochapowace first nations. So 

those are some of the locations where they have been held. I 

don’t have an exact number for last year. 

 

One of the difficulties in this area has been that the impetus for 

sentencing circles has been at the direction of the Provincial 

Court judges. And early on the Provincial Court judges made it 

clear that they did not want to keep a full record of all the 

sentencing circles. 

 

Over the last number of months we have worked out more of an 

arrangement whereby the chief judge is keeping track of these 

sentencing circles in a much more formal way. We still have, 

obviously, the records of all the cases but they’re not kept in a 

way that can answer questions on a day-to-day basis. The 

number over . . . since we’ve started this process would be 

about 260. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — 260. Over what period of time are we 

speaking? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The first sentencing circles were started, I 

think, late 1992-93, so it’s over the last four years. And 

obviously in the first years there weren’t very many because 

this was something that was new and in the last year, year and a 

half there have been more. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I also said a few minutes ago 

that my own personal view is that sentencing circles are 

complementary and can stand beside our traditional justice 

system, rather than being in conflict with it. As we know, there 

are some people who view sentencing circles as a first step to a 

separate justice system which would see the rights and 

obligations of citizens dependent on racial classification. 

 

I wonder if the Minister of Justice would clarify which of those 

two philosophies he personally adheres to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I’ve said in this House on a 

number of occasions that we have one justice system for 

Saskatchewan, which includes all of our citizens. And that’s the 

position that we have as a government. But what we are doing 

is making sure that those people who feel left out of the system 

have some way of access into the system. 

And I think I should just tell you briefly a bit about the 

visioning process and the strategic plan process that the 

Department of Justice went through a number of years ago. And 

out of that process, which was extensive discussion within the 

department, a vision was set out. 

 

And a vision is set out in this simple sentence: the vision of the 

Department of Justice of the province of Saskatchewan is to 

have a fair and equitable and safe society, supported by a justice 

system that is trusted and understood. Such a system is 

respectful of and responsive to diversity, individual and 

collective rights, and changing public expectations and 

community needs, including the needs of aboriginal people. 

 

And that framework allows us to work as a department and as a 

government to try to make this vision a reality in Saskatchewan, 

and to create a justice system that meets the needs of the people 

of Saskatchewan. But as with any vision or goal, it’s something 

that’s that which we work toward, and there are often things 

which end up pointing out that we haven’t reached or attained 

that goal. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, to switch topics for a moment. 

The victim impact surcharge, I wonder if the minister could 

give us some indication of how much has been collected 

through the surcharge since it was instituted I think about five 

years ago approximately. And also if the minister would be 

good enough to give us some indication of how much of the 

funds have been spent on programing, how much have been 

spent on direct compensation of victims, and how much has 

been retained in trust. We of course have the amendments 

before us at the present session, indicating that the Public 

Trustee will become responsible for funds which continue to be 

held in trust. 

 

So those are the three broad categories. If there are others the 

minister requires in order to answer the question, that’s fine. 

But basically I’m interested in knowing how much was 

collected, what went to victims, what went on programing, and 

how much is still held. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chairman, approximately $1.8 

million was collected on a yearly basis. And on top of that 

there’s interest that’s accumulated on some funds that are I 

suppose accumulated because of the start-up costs or the fact 

that we didn’t spend all the money as soon as it came in. 

 

Of the money that comes in, at this time approximately 90 per 

cent is spent on programs. Out of the . . . You asked a specific 

question about compensation to victims. That works out to 

about $300,000 per year. 

 

The other amounts go into the various victim services 

programs. Some of them are community based. A number of 

them are the victim services programs that operate throughout 

the province and work quite closely with the courts and with the 

police. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’ll get back to that. But the last branch of my 

question was relative to the amendments we have before us 

now, so that the Public Trustee will hold the balance of the   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

funds. I wonder if you could elaborate on that for me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, the amendments to that Bill, 

basically where we are sitting right now is that we have a credit, 

I suppose, within the General Revenue Fund of about 3 point 

. . . or $5 million. Or I guess the credit is actually invested. 

 

And that money we know can accumulate a higher rate of 

interest if we pool it together with the Public Trustee fund. So 

we put the 3.5 million with I think it’s about approximately 

$100 million in the other Public Trustee fund, and therefore the 

money that generated in interest for victims will be increased 

because we have a larger pool of money. 

 

And I think basically the changes to both the pieces of 

legislation that you’ve referred to this year are to allow us to do 

that as an administrative function, and it’s simply that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — While I see the rationale of what the minister is 

proposing, I guess I’m concerned with two things that he has 

said. First of all, it strikes me that basically we allow funds to 

build up surpluses when we are anticipating increased pressure 

in the future. And building up surpluses is a way, of course, of 

eliminating the peaks and troughs. So if we think we are in a 

period of low demand it would make sense, obviously, to build 

up a surplus. When we are in a period of peak demand, then you 

might have to dip into that surplus. 

 

So if I understand you correct, we have built up 3.5 million in 

surplus; we are paying virtually nothing in direct compensation 

to victims. That doesn’t seem to square with me. 

 

And I’d like to also say before I turn it back to the minister, that 

I know our victim impact coordinators are doing good work. 

I’m very pleased that they have been appointed. They are a 

good addition to the justice system. But I’m very disturbed that 

from the figures you have given me, we are paying out you can 

say, nothing, in compensation to victims, and we have built up a 

very substantial fund. 

 

Now my concern isn’t with turning it over to the Public Trustee, 

my concern is what is the rationale for saying we need 3.5 

million in this fund? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay. I appreciate your questions and I’ll 

try to explain it. I think it does all make sense. 

 

What happened is, when this victim surcharge was 

implemented, monies were generated. And as with all of the 

things that this government does, we’re very careful in how we 

start up new things which we know will have long-term costs. 

Part of that relates to the, I think, firm hand of our Minister of 

Finance and the Treasury Board. 

 

And what happened was that new victims’ services programs, 

as you have known and used throughout the province, were 

established in a fairly careful way while in the meantime funds 

were building up. And in actual fact, the surplus in this fund at 

its peak was $6 million. So we’re now down to $3.5 million. 

At the present time if we go through, the documents will show 

that we’re presently expending about $2.5 million a year in this 

area. We have income from the victims’ surcharges of 1.8 

million, interest on our fund of about 300,000 or a little less. 

We’re hoping to work with the changes we’re making this year 

to make sure that stays at the maximum even in times when 

interest rates are quite low. And the net effect of that longer 

term plan is that this budget overage amount will be reduced 

each year over the next number of years. 

 

And the idea, as you said before, is to make sure you’re not in a 

position where your revenues from this victim surcharge are 

substantially less than what you’re expending. But at the 

present time, what we are taking in is less than what we’re 

paying out. And the net effect is that the surplus is being 

reduced. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that 

explanation. However I would still put to the minister and ask 

him that while, as I have said, I am appreciative of the work of 

our victim services coordinators — I think they do good work 

— but does there not come a point where rather than simply 

increasing programing to use up whatever money is available, 

that some direct payment to victims would make a certain 

amount of sense. 

 

And frankly and with all due respect, I think some of the people 

out there listening today will not be entirely happy to know that 

the victim impact surcharge, that practically none of it in fact 

goes to the compensation of victims in a direct sense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well all I can say to that is that the 

compensation is paid out based on claims by victims, and there 

are procedures for that. And that reflects I think your earlier 

comment about having a bit of a fund to deal with fluctuations 

in the claims. But at the present time, this year based on the 

claims that are received, that’s how much is paid out. 

 

And practically, I don’t think that there’s necessarily any kind 

of a cap . . . there is a cap that we have on how much is paid out 

to victims, but it does relate to the kinds of applications that are 

found. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to switch to the 

civil side for a moment if I may, and our Land Titles Offices. I 

understand that big changes are anticipated in our service 

delivery of our land titles system. 

 

However, I would like to ask the minister how much is 

collected in land titles fees in a year and how much the land 

titles registry system costs us to operate. And if I may just add 

this before I sit down, I wonder if he would confirm that land 

titles fees are analogous in a sense, to the victim impact 

surcharge in a sense that they’re not really government money, 

they are simply monies raised for a specific purpose to cover a 

specific purpose, namely the operation of land registration in 

the province. 

 

But anyway, I’d like to know how much is collected by land 

titles fees in a year and how much is expended in the operation 

of our land titles system. 

  



734  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Mr. Chairman, if the minister wishes to take this opportunity to 

explain some of the changes that are coming in our land 

registration system, I’m sure that members of the House would 

be interested in hearing about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. What the member 

is referring to is the LAND project and I think what I can 

basically do is give an update on the LAND project. And this 

LAND stands for Land Titles Automated Network 

Development project, and this project which we began 

September 1, 1995 is expected to be implemented province 

wide from over 1999 to 2001. And it’ll involve sort of 

re-engineering, radically rethinking and redesigning our land 

titles system, as well as automating the functions. 

 

The project at this time is in its second phase, which is the 

preparation of conceptual design. We expect to have this 

conceptual design phase completed by September 30 of this 

year. 

 

At the present time we’re in extensive consultations with other 

government departments, agencies, lawyers and business 

people, the real estate industry, other users, interest groups, oil 

and gas people. And in this whole consultation the law society 

and the Canadian Bar Association have played major roles 

because they are people who have a major interest in how the 

system is developed, but also they have a lot of the skills and 

knowledge that will assist us in designing a system which is the 

best for Saskatchewan. 

 

This system will be designed to accommodate a number of 

service delivery locations. The present locations will stay. It 

may be that we will end up with some other ones. We may also 

look at other modes of access to the system as well. 

 

One of the things that is extremely interesting and important 

and in a sense very far-reaching about what we’re doing is the 

fact that from the knowledge that we gained in developing our 

personal property security registry, we have some of the best 

conceptual ideas about how to set up a public access registry of 

complex information. 

 

And we think that this new system will allow public access to 

information in a simpler way, a more responsive way. In other 

words we’re looking at turnarounds for example on transactions 

within 24 hours on a consistent basis — 24 or 48 hours — 

which is something that we know for sure the real estate 

business has been very concerned about for awhile, and also for 

just many reasons will make it much easier to use as a system. 

 

Another part of this which is being designed now relates to the 

fact that people will, if they have access codes and have access 

— primarily lawyers, realtors, business people, but it could 

include individuals if they are interested — would be able to 

have access to much of the information through their personal 

computer through a modem process. And this means that we’re 

looking at really a 21st century system that we think will be the 

best in Canada. 

 

And the reason I say that is that we know other provinces have 

already developed registry systems that have use of modern 

technology, and they have been very gracious in providing us 

with information about the things they would have done 

differently if they were now working at developing a system. I 

think the other factor is that we have been very firm in deciding 

to do this over a longer term period. We haven’t rushed into this 

and I think that this will allow us to do a job which we could all 

be proud of. 

 

So what I would say is that I will be pleased to provide further 

updates on this as we proceed, but I think the important thing is 

that we’re working towards a system that will provide public 

access and a very good system for all of Saskatchewan people. 

 

You’ve requested information about the revenue and I’ll just 

take this out of the books of the province. Basically in the . . . 

And I’ll do the 1995-96 year because that’s the last complete 

year that I have the actual records for. In that year the revenue 

was $16.371 million. 

 

The actual expenditures in the direct costs only — and I guess 

it’s only salary and sort of the daily costs of administration, not 

the building costs or some of the other parts of the land titles 

system — for that year were $5.642 million. So, you know, I’m 

not sure if I can make a rough estimate on the sort of the 

building cost, which is SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) area. But guess it’s 1.5 to $2 million, 

in that area. 

 

The other factor which I think that especially we as lawyers 

know about is the whole question that we have a Torrens 

system in Saskatchewan which includes a public guarantee of 

title. And one of the factors always taken into account in the 

land titles system is that necessity of paying any claims. 

Fortunately we have a very good system and we don’t have 

many claims; but we also have very large transactions that go 

through the Land Titles Office, and that is clearly another factor 

we have to take into account. 

 

The other thing it doesn’t include is the land project itself, and 

that’s about $1.5 million a year, which is the redevelopment of 

the whole land titles system. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, though, from what you have 

said, in rough figures then only about half of what’s collected in 

land titles fees is in fact required for the operation of the 

system. Now as you say, there is a guarantee of title under our 

system, but in the entire history of Saskatchewan there have 

been, I think it’s safe to say, virtually no pay-outs at all. So 

that’s simply not a big factor. 

 

So if half of the land titles fees are not used for the system, 

where do they go? Is this a hidden tax on young people buying 

their first home? Is this a tax on people buying a farm? I think 

the idea there was, that land titles fees were a fee, and I wonder 

if you could tell us if that’s wrong? That it’s not a fee; it’s a tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Basically what we have in Saskatchewan 

is a contribution to the General Revenue Fund. These funds are 

used, obviously, for health, education, social services and 

interest on the public debt, I suppose are the top four items. 

 

  



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

What I would say is that in comparison to other provinces ours 

is actually not as great a fee as in some other provinces. And so 

on a nation-wide basis this is a practice where there is a cushion 

there, and in this case you’ve identified the amounts is . . . I 

guess based on the figures that I gave you, probably 50 to 60 

per cent goes back directly into that land title system. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the issue though of 

public confidence, would it not be preferable to draw a clear 

distinction between taxes levied to support the general 

operations of government and the services of government we all 

want, and fees which are levied for a specific purpose. And the 

mixing of those two concepts, it seems to me, erodes public 

confidence. When people are told this is a fee for a specific 

purpose, for instance recycling containers, and then we find that 

no, the money isn’t used for recycling, it’s thrown into general 

revenue, I think that erodes public confidence. 

 

And here you’re saying that, well fees levied to run the Land 

Titles Office, half of those go into general revenue. And I’m 

just wondering if there’s an issue of public confidence here, and 

maybe we should call it the land titles tax if in point of fact it’s 

a tax. But I really would like the minister to comment on the 

problem of mixing a fee with a tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think some of the other provinces 

actually set a big fee as a land transfer tax. In Saskatchewan we 

end up operating our system in a prudent manner and make sure 

that we never get into a place where we expend more on the 

system than we take in. 

 

Now what I would say is that the last number of years there’s 

been increased activities, especially in the oil and gas area. And 

that increases dramatically the amounts of the fees that come 

into the system. And we’ve been feeling the pressure as far as 

. . . probably all MLAs know about how long it takes for some 

transactions to be completed when you are on a totally 

paper-based system. 

 

But if we were in a situation where there was a dramatic 

reduction in activity in the land title system and we had fixed 

costs of say $8 million, well we wouldn’t want to be in a 

situation where all of a sudden our revenues were substantially 

less than that either. So we’ve been planning carefully — I hate 

to use this word — but maybe conservatively, but we’re careful 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 

 

But practically, what I’m saying is that we’ve been prudent and 

you’ve identified that this is an area where there are 

contributions that are going to the General Revenue Fund and 

acknowledge that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well the fact that the government has adopted 

Conservative principles certainly comes as absolutely no 

surprise to my colleagues and I. It’s something we’ve known 

for a long time, but it is gratifying none the less to hear the 

minister acknowledge it. 

 

However, coming back to land titles fees being a tax, I 

understand in the province of British Columbia — where there 

is an acknowledgement that there is a tax on land transfers — it 

is therefore placed on the seller as opposed to the buyer. 

 

Now if land titles fees are going to be a tax, does it not make 

sense to levy them against the person who is actually pocketing 

money as opposed to, as I say, the person trying to start a farm, 

the person trying to buy their first home; that the province 

levies a big charge against them, say only half of which is 

required for the service and the rest of which you get . . . 

apparently gets thrown into general revenue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think each province has a different 

way of administrating it. And I know, and I’m sure you know 

from many years of practise, that it was quite often that 

arrangements were made to either split the land titles fees or it 

would be that the vendor would pay for the land titles fees. 

 

So I think practically, that’s an administrative choice we’ve 

made in Saskatchewan. People who are involved in land 

transactions can make whatever arrangements they want as to 

who would pay the fees, and that’s another way of doing that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, many people in 

the Kerrobert area were extremely disturbed when one of the 

historic buildings of this province was closed. And its offices 

were denied even to other government agencies that were 

moved out of the community. And of course the court-house in 

Melville was closed. 

 

We hope that these have nothing to do with the way those 

communities have voted. We trust that’s not the case. But in 

news reports about the closure of Kerrobert and Melville, there 

were media reports to the effect that there could be as many as 

70-plus other court closures contemplated. 

 

Now I see the hon. member for Lloydminster finds that concept 

hilarious, but I know that there are people out there in small 

town Saskatchewan who are very disturbed by these reports. 

They’re wondering if their court is going to be taken away from 

them. And they’re not laughing, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I wonder if the minister could tell us if those are false rumours 

or if that is in fact on the back burner, being contemplated by 

the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well it’s once again one of these 

questions of facts and relying on the researchers that seem to be 

available on that side of the House. But we don’t even have 70 

court-houses in all of Saskatchewan, so I’m not sure where that 

information came from. 

 

We have no closures contemplated at this time. Where 

increasing needs arise, we are actually setting new circuit 

points, for example, for Provincial Court. That’s done by the 

chief judge in consultation with officials in my department. But 

we have no further plans to close court-houses. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — I’d ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

  



736  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature today, a couple of my former counterparts in the RM 

(rural municipality) of Saltcoats — the reeve of the RM of 

Saltcoats and also a director on SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities ), and the administrator — 

Ron Risling and Don Taylor. I would ask the members to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — If I may return to my point about court closures 

. . . and of course we realize that we don’t have 70 old, 

beautiful, historic, heritage buildings like Kerrobert that we’re 

shutting down and doing away with. I realize the minister’s 

point there. 

 

Of course most of our provincial courts are being held in 

Legion halls and places like that. But nonetheless they still 

provide an economic service to our smaller communities. And I 

think it’s those courts that presently meet say once every other 

week in the Legion hall that are considered to be at risk. And if 

the minister could reassure me that that is not the case and that 

our research staff is wrong on that point, I’m sure there’ll be 

many people out there in rural Saskatchewan will be relieved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well at the present time there are 71 

Provincial Court circuit points, which I think maybe then relates 

to your question. And basically those circuit points are set up in 

response to needs in various areas. We’re actually increasing 

the number of circuit points as needs arise. 

 

And there are some situations where, as we move forward in 

our justice system in including all of the people of 

Saskatchewan, where first nations request that court sessions be 

held on the first nation for matters that occur in their area, we 

are actually doing that. But at this point we don’t have any 

plans to close circuit points and it’s the chief judge as the 

administrator of the Provincial Court that is involved with that 

designation. 

 

What I would point out is that in Manitoba, has approximately 

the same population as we do, they only have 48 circuit points. 

And in Alberta, which has two and a half times as many people 

as we do, they have 53 circuit points. 

 

So one of the clear and important concepts that we in the 

Department of Justice have is that we should make sure that 

justice, access to justice, is available as many places as possible 

and what happens then is that we are willing to set up more 

points than what maybe our neighbours on either side of us are 

doing. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well I appreciate that the member from 

Watrous doesn’t think that rural people in Saskatchewan worry 

about losing their court-house. I would remind the Minister of 

Justice that Manitoba, I think 60 per cent of the population lives 

in a single city, so it only stands to reason that they wouldn’t 

have the rural court points that we have. 

 

But I will pass on and ask the minister, in the case of the 

personal property registry, could the minister tell us what is the 

financial situation with the personal property registry. Is that 

similar to Land Titles Office or is that a case where the fees that 

are paid are in fact fees required to run the registry? Or is it in 

point of fact another hidden tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, once again I have the figures that 

are set out in the books of the province for ’95-96, and the 

actual revenues are $4.94 million in that fiscal year, and the 

actual expenses once again directly related to the staffing and 

the people involved in the systems is 1.92 million. That doesn’t 

include then their space through SPMC nor does it include the 

overall administration of the system. 

 

This also does not include the development costs which . . . of 

the modern system that we have which is clearly the best in the 

country. We’ve been told that many times by people in other 

jurisdictions. They wish they had what we have, including some 

of the other places that talked a great deal about how great their 

system was, but when we compared ours they realized that ours 

is better. And that cost was almost $2 million to develop this 

system which is also to be recovered. 

 

But what I would say is that any of these funds which come in 

from fees or whatever, go directly into the General Revenue 

Fund. They’re not revolving funds. They don’t stay in the 

Department of Justice. The money goes into the payment of 

costs, like I said before, includes health, education, interest on 

the debt, social services. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — If I understood the minister correctly a few 

minutes ago, you were telling us that in a few years time anyone 

with a personal computer will be able to access land titles 

information? Is that also correct? Do I have that right, and 

would that also be correct of our personal property registry 

when it is updated? 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to join with the member from 

Saltcoats to introduce in the east gallery, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Risling and Mr. Taylor from the RM of Saltcoats. And also the 

member from Saltcoats, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bob Bjornerud, is   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

in the east gallery. Please join with me in welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  I would remind the members not to use the 

proper name of members in the Legislative Assembly if he’s a 

sitting member. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Nilson:  Well in the answer to your question, what 

you’re asking about has been in effect for two years now on the 

personal property registry. If you’re in a law firm, for example, 

you can go on line and do the searches. There’s a system 

whereby there’s an access code and it calculates whatever the 

fees are and all of that is done that way. So yes, the answer to 

your question is yes, it’s been that way for at least a couple of 

years. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Would that be true also though of home 

computers, that home computers will be able to access personal 

property registry and the Land Titles Office? That was my 

question. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Now if I understood your question 

correctly, is can you access the personal property registry right 

now through personal computer at home? And the answer is 

yes, you can do that through a modem. The plan is for the new 

system, the land system, when it’s all up and operating, that the 

same kinds of arrangements will be available. 

 

Obviously, with both systems one of the big issues is how you 

design the system for security of access to the information. And 

that’s exactly what’s being discussed right now in the 

conceptual stage of the land project. And we have been 

receiving very good advice from real estate people, from oil and 

gas people, and from lawyers, from many lawyers who have 

some ideas about how we should do this. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I know that one of the personal 

interests of this Minister of Justice has been alternate measures 

for dealing with prisoners, and I would like to say that I think 

that ought to include the incarceration process as well. I have 

oftentimes been concerned that periods of incarceration are too 

often times of enforced idleness where young people or adults 

are left to sit in a big room all day with little or nothing to do. 

Now I am certainly not in favour of chain-gang justice, but 

neither do I think that our youth centres and correctional centres 

should be places of enforced idleness. 

 

Now what concerns me is that it seems to me, Mr. Minister, 

we’ve gone backwards in this regard in that we had work 

camps, which were good for prisoners, kept them active, 

provided some value to the province, and which ironically were 

even liked by the prisoners. Even the prisoners preferred being 

at work camp doing something productive for society as 

opposed to being locked up in a big room. And our work camps 

are being lost to the justice system and I understand that White 

Gull has been closed down and Green Lake has been closed 

down. And I’d like to hear something from the minister on what 

the thinking behind these closures is, because to me it runs 

counter to the whole thrust of his philosophy and what he’s 

trying to do in justice generally, namely to develop alternate 

measures of dealing with people in the justice system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’ll respond to your question generally 

first. What we are doing in corrections is once again 

recognizing the component of the first nations aboriginal 

involvement. And you’re correct in understanding that, for 

example the White Gull camp, we intend to eventually close it. 

But basically why we are doing this is that we are changing that 

operation into funds that we can use to build the spiritual 

healing lodge at Prince Albert. So White Gull is still open right 

now; it’s still operating. And it will continue to operate until the 

healing lodge is up and operating. 

 

I guess what I would say is that this is not an easy transition 

from the kinds of traditional correctional centres that we’ve had 

into some that we have . . . some new places that are identified 

primarily by the people who work with us from the first nations 

that are more responsive to some of the personal and spiritual 

needs of the aboriginal people. 

 

As well, you talk about work opportunities. There are within the 

Saskatoon Correctional Centre and the Regina Correctional 

Centre, Prism Industries — and I’m not sure if you’ve had a 

chance to tour and see the kinds of work that are done there, but 

what we are attempting to do in these places, and I think do a 

fairly good job of, providing work opportunities for some of the 

people who are inmates in the correctional centre. Projects there 

include some of the woodworking things. And also in Regina 

they do — and Saskatoon — do welding and building. And it 

provides the opportunity for some of the people who are in the 

correctional centre to gain some skills which are marketable 

when they leave the centre. 

 

Now one of the difficulties with those kinds of programs is that 

they end up in provincial corrections having people who are 

incarcerated for two years less a day and less. And so you often 

don’t have people who are there for a long course of training 

and then the ability to work. But I think that given often the 

shorter-term nature of some of the sentences, Prism Industries 

provide opportunities. And at the present time it works out to be 

about 100 people in any particular day that are working in one 

of these workplaces. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. But I would still 

like to hear a bit more though. It seems to me that in the 

Saskatchewan context, the work camps were certainly not 

Alabama chain-gangs. In fact, to say I think they were more 

appreciated even by the prisoners themselves than spending a 

day in a big concrete room doing nothing. 

 

And I would like to know if the minister thinks these work 

camps have a place in the modern penal system in   



738  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

Saskatchewan, or if they do not figure in the plans. And I’d also 

like it, if he’s prepared to, to expand that into the young 

offenders system. I realize that young offenders incarceration is, 

of course, under Social Services, but there too, is there more we 

can do to have active programing instead of incarceration being 

a time of enforced idleness? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think practically, the answer to 

your question is that we do include in our incarceration system 

a whole range of options. Right now we do have the urban 

camp in Saskatoon which does the kind of work, I think, that 

you’re talking about here in the . . . around the Saskatoon area. 

And there are two of the camps still operating in the North. 

 

There are also many community justice programs which include 

some aspect of people trying to find jobs and while they’re on 

their probation time or whatever one wants to call it, they are 

working as well. 

 

So I think there is a fairly clear plan within corrections to 

involve allowing the people who have been locked up an 

opportunity to get onto a different path so they don’t end up 

there again. 

 

As it relates to the young people and the young offenders 

facilities, you are correct that that is the responsibility of the 

Minister of Social Services. I know that many times the orders 

that are made for young offenders don’t include work but they 

include going to school and dealing with whatever drug or 

alcohol problems or sometimes psychiatric treatment that is 

necessary, but I would ask that you maybe can ask that question 

of the Minister of Social Services so he can give more detail 

about that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, contrary to some of the things 

that have been said, I would respectfully submit that no one in 

the Liberal opposition has said or done anything to indicate a 

lack of appreciation for our justice system and those working in 

it. 

 

However I note that the Martin report says that our front-line 

prosecutors feel that the minister has not taken a public stand in 

appearing to appreciate and validate the work of our front-line 

prosecutors. And one of the recommendations of the report of 

course, is that the minister take the opportunity to, in a timely 

fashion, say that the work of members of his department in 

advancing the cause of justice administration in the province is 

appreciated. 

 

And I wonder if the minister has any comments in that regard, 

say, that far from us not appreciating the difficulties under 

which our prosecutors work, the Martin report has said he 

hasn’t been as upfront as he could have been in saying that he 

supports, he stands behind, and he appreciates the work of our 

prosecutors. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I appreciate the opportunity to 

respond to this particular question. And I think the member 

actually knows the difficulty that one is placed as the Minister 

of Justice when there are public issues and cases that are being 

discussed. 

But I guess what I would say is that as the Minister of Justice I 

have a great appreciation and have always had a great 

appreciation for the hard work that the prosecutors do. I know, 

and I guess I had the opportunity for many years to operate or to 

work in the same building as the, sort of the head part of the 

prosecutions in Regina work and understood the complexities 

of the job. But also I think as the Martin report, Martin-Wilson 

report shows, the increasing public scrutiny of the jobs that the 

prosecutors do. 

 

And I guess the important thing that I would like to say is that 

practically, the job that prosecutors do, and I would add equally 

defence counsel including Legal Aid, is sometimes some of the 

most misunderstood work in all of society. Because we have 

what I would like to say is a very good system of justice for 

getting at some of the most difficult circumstances that arise 

between human beings. 

 

And when a confrontation or harm or some criminal event takes 

place, we have over many, many centuries developed a criminal 

justice system which allows us to get the facts out in as careful 

a way as possible, making sure that we have some very good 

protections for the defendants. 

 

And the role of the Legal Aid defence counsel, the private 

defence counsel, is to make sure that the Crown, the 

prosecutors, present all of the evidence and make sure that they 

do it in a way that is fair to that defendant. Obviously the point 

of the court or of the judge is to make sure that all of this is 

done in as fair a way as possible. 

 

Now I think what public debate has recognized is that, to 

explain a longer, complex process in the short pieces of 

information that we are often able to take in now in our society 

is not . . . it’s not as easy to explain how the whole system 

works. And I guess as, you know, any person in Saskatchewan 

knows that, I know that. 

 

But I guess what I would like to say here publicly — and I have 

said it privately and publicly — is thank you very much to the 

prosecutors. I appreciate the chance now after the report is done 

to say this more often and more publicly. And as you can well 

understand, while this whole review was on, it wasn’t 

necessarily the easiest thing to get up there and be accused in 

some way of influencing what the report might say or do. 

 

And while I’m at it, I will say thank you to all of your former 

colleagues in the legal aid system because they have also a very 

difficult task and a task that I’m very pleased to support in all 

the ways that I can. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I would like to thank the minister for that 

statement and say that I echo his sentiments. 

 

On another matter, Mr. Chairman, again we may be suffering 

from faulty research, but our information is that as many as 400 

farmers are being prosecuted in this province over gross 

revenue insurance program contracts. And I would like the 

minister to say how many farmers are in fact involved in legal 

suits with the minister now. How many farmers are suing the 

minister over the cancellation of GRIP (gross revenue insurance   



April 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

program)? And if a contingency fund has been set aside to take 

account of what might may be a very substantial liability 

against this government in the event that those suits are 

successful, 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If I understand your question correctly — 

and let me clarify it so that I’m answering the right question — 

initially you asked about people being prosecuted, and I don’t 

think that’s what you meant, but more there is a lawsuit 

involving a number of farmers in Saskatchewan related to GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program). And it’s actually, I think, 

taking place right as we speak now. So I think I would defer 

any answer on that question and basically allow the courts to do 

their job. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But how many . . . Mr. Chairman, I don’t think 

it in any way compromises an ongoing court case to say how 

many farmers are in fact involved in these suits. How many 

suits are out there? The number is not something that 

compromises litigation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well if . . . I haven’t been up to the 

court-house to count the files but . . . I don’t know the answer to 

that. And if you wish, I could undertake to find out. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. One of the ongoing things which 

has diminished confidence in our justice system is the unseemly 

spectacle of the Minister of Justice being involved in litigation 

with the provincial court judges. 

 

Now your predecessor said that an independent judicial 

commission was an essential hallmark of any independent 

judiciary. And of course after saying that, he cancelled the 

independent judiciary and fired them, and no independent 

judicial commission has been reappointed. 

 

I would like to know if the minister believes that an 

independent judicial commission is in fact a hallmark of an 

independent judiciary. And while I realize that the court case 

with the judges is ongoing, I wonder if he shares my view that 

this is an embarrassment to the judicial process generally, that 

the justice system is supposed to be working together to deal 

with the issues out there, as opposed to the justice system in 

court dealing with fights among themselves. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As the 

member knows, this litigation is ongoing so I’m not able to 

comment, other than I can say generically about the point that 

he’s raising that there are other jurisdictions that do not have the 

type of independent commission that you’re talking about. And 

some places do, some don’t; and at this time we don’t. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I realize we don’t, but your predecessor as 

minister of Justice said that it is essential to have such a 

commission if we say that our judiciary is independent. Now I 

wonder, does this minister believe that as well? Is that your 

philosophy or do you have a different philosophy that no, this is 

not essential for the integrity of our judiciary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chairman, this particular question is 

quite inappropriate as this is a direct issue in the litigation that 

is taking place, as well as a direct issue in the courses that are 

before the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, how many farmers are being 

sued for the non-payment of crop insurance premiums from 

recent and past years? Are there a large number of cases in that 

regard and how much money would be involved in those suits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would suggest that you ask the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance about that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I would like to know the minister’s views on 

retroactive legislation. This government of course passed 

retroactive legislation after missing the deadline for cancelling 

of the gross revenue insurance program. And I would suggest 

that at least in terms of our farmers, this too has not had a 

particularly good effect on making the citizenry of this province 

hold our justice system in high regard. It’s been a long-standing 

principle of our law and our legal system that retroactive 

legislation is offensive. 

 

And I would like to know what the minister thinks about 

retroactive legislation. Is this a tool that he thinks is 

appropriate? Does he agree with me that this does little to instil 

confidence in our people in justice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Chairman, once again I know that the 

member understands that this question relates directly to one of 

the key issues in the litigation which is undergoing . . . which is 

going right now as it relates to the GRIP matters and also as it 

relates to the Provincial Court judges. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, one thing that is not the subject 

of litigation yet is the question of the cost of feeding a prisoner 

in our correctional system. I wonder if the minister could 

divulge the figures perhaps on a per capita per day basis of the 

cost of feeding prisoners in our correctional system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, Mr. Chairman, that question is not a 

very simple one to answer because it relates to all of the 

different institutions. Each of them has a different cost, 

depending on the various arrangements as it relates to the food 

services, and I’m not in a position to answer that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Could the minister give those figures for any 

correctional centre operating in the province? If I may, Mr. 

Chairman, it shouldn’t be a particularly difficult figure to say 

that, this is the cost of groceries purchased for Regina 

Correctional Centre, this is the cost of salaries for the kitchen 

staff, and this is the number of prisoners who are fed on an 

average day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well we can try to take a look at all of the 

books and see what kinds of information that we do have. But 

what I would say is that it’s very difficult to try to answer the 

kind of question that you talk about without expending great 

amounts of time chasing a mouse through a huge granary. 

 

And I guess what I would say is that if this information is of   



740  Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 1997 

great significance to you or others that are with you and it 

justifies a fairly dramatic amount of work, we would consider 

doing that. But practically, I think that there are other issues that 

maybe we could discuss that would be of more use to the 

public. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 713 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 713 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 713 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 713 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 714 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

  Renaud ............................................................................................................................................................................... 714, 736 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 714 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 736 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Vimy Ridge 80th Anniversary Celebration 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 714 

 New Buns Master Bakery in Regina South 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 715 

 Love is Blind 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 715 

 National Geography Challenge Winners 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 715 

 50th Anniversary of the Melfort Credit Union 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

 Approval for Joint-use Facility in Estevan 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

 William Johnstone Milne 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

 Battleford Area Teens Enter National Science Fair 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 716 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 716 

  Teichrob ............................................................................................................................................................................. 717, 719 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 

 Workers’ Compensation System 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 

 Potential SaskTel Rate Increase 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 719 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 719 

 Political Patronage 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 720 

 Prosecutions Review Report 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 720 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 

 Surgery Waiting-lists 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 721 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 721 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 220  The Shortline Railway Successor Rights Suspension Act 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 721 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 721 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 721 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 14  The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 721 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 722 

 Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 724 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 726 

 Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 728 

 Bill No. 24 — The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings Transfer Act 

 Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le renvoi des instances 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 728 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 729 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 729 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 730 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Justice  Vote 3 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 730 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 730 

 

 


