



















































Hansard: May 21, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1879 

 May 21, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Good morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 

to ask leave of the House that we would now proceed directly to 

motions for return (debatable). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 1 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

particular item has mainly been dealt with because it deals with 

the sale of Wascana Energy either to Talisman, which is what 

the question was about, or to any other entity. 

 

With the sale to CanOxy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue has 

been basically resolved, although we still feel it would be 

important to have gained this information to understand just 

what role the government had played in the sale of Wascana 

Energy and the sale of the government shares when they offered 

them onto the market. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move the return, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue a return showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for CIC: (1) the details of any 

meetings taking place between the officials of Talisman 

Energy and cabinet ministers, Crown Investment officials, 

and/or any other government officials prior to February 13, 

1997, at which the possible take-over of Wascana Energy 

was discussed; (2) the dates and locations of any such 

meetings; (3) whether any telephone and/or conference 

calls regarding the take-over of Wascana Energy took place 

prior to February 13 between any representatives of 

government and Talisman Energy; (4) provide a list of all 

individuals in attendance at any such meetings; (5) whether 

there were any written minutes, briefings, and/or notes 

taken at any such meetings pertaining to Talisman’s 

attempted take-over of Wascana Energy; and (6) the names 

of any cabinet ministers or other government officials who 

indicated support for the Talisman proposal at any such 

meetings and/or whether they considered Talisman’s 

proposed bid of $18.50 per share to be a fair price, and if 

so, the cabinet ministers or other government officials that 

provided Talisman with these comments. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: —Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 

make a couple of comments, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

dealing with these motions for return, that it’s the government’s 

intention to go through these today and those . . . the majority 

of the motions that we have before us, we will accept the 

motions, vote on them, and we will be tabling the responses 

directly. 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is I think, in my memory, 

only the . . . my tenure sitting in this legislature, only the second 

time that this has been done. We set up this process last year 

where we were able to provide the motions for return 

immediately. I believe this process is far superior than what was 

done in the past. I recall sitting in opposition benches, moving 

these motions, and then waiting up to 150 days for the 

responses to occur. So I just wanted to provide you with this 

information. 

 

There will be some motions that we will be amending, and of 

course there will be some motions that we’ll be recommending 

defeat of because of inability . . . or perhaps jurisdictional 

reasons. 

 

And what I want to do then for this motion no. 1 is to 

recommend that it be passed, and upon passing of this motion, I 

will submit the return. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 2 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from North Battleford, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 2 showing: 

 

That the Minister of Northern Affairs, during the 1992-93 

fiscal year, the amount of revenues the government 

collected from northern Saskatchewan from the following 

sources: (1) mining; (2) forestry; (3) tourism; (4) personal 

income tax; (5) corporate income tax; and (6) fuel tax. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes 

to motion no. 2 and also 3 and 4 and 5, the questions that are 

being asked for . . . the answers that are being asked for are 

things that are not broken down ordinarily . . . or not broken 

down by region by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Furthermore, a lot of this information that is requested . . . or 

some of the information as requested requires some federal 

government input and is not broken down by them either, by 

regional basis. 

 

Therefore, any response that would be given to a question like 

this one would require a great deal of estimation, perhaps even 

an arbitrary determination. It’s our feeling that the value of such 

an answer would really be questionable and its accuracy could 

be questionable. So I therefore request the members to defeat 

this motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 3 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from North Battleford, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 3 showing: 



1880  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: during the 1993-94 

fiscal year the amount of revenues the government 

collected from northern Saskatchewan from the following 

sources: (1) mining; (2) forestry; (3) tourism; (4) personal 

income tax; (5) corporate income tax; and (6) fuel tax. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I once again, for reasons I stated for the 

previous motion, I recommend defeat of this motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 4 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from North Battleford, an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 4: 

 

To the minister of Northern Affairs: during the 1994-95 

fiscal year the amount of revenues the government 

collected from northern Saskatchewan from the following 

sources: (1) mining; (2) forestry; (3) tourism; (4) personal 

income tax; (5) corporate income tax; (6) fuel tax. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I want 

to mention that records of this nature are not kept on a regional 

basis. I request the Assembly to defeat this motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 5 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think the 

important thing I want to add before I move the final motion on 

item no. 5 is often throughout the discussions and consultation 

over the past few years, there has been always a statement made 

by the Hon. Minister of Northern Affairs in essence at times it 

seems congratulating the government for spending more dollars 

than what it puts in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And often the figure that he uses, for every dollar we take out of 

northern Saskatchewan, we put a dollar sixty back in. And a lot 

of it is discussions, and the points that he makes along the way 

just simply shows that his facts are not based on . . . or his 

points are not based on facts because the information that they 

don’t have cannot support his argument in terms of what 

exactly he does collect off northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So the challenge that I have to the Minister of Northern Affairs 

is, how could he make those statements that for every dollar 

they take out of the North they put a $1.60 back in, when they 

can’t answer these questions about what exactly they collect 

from northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the point has been well made; 

the government hasn’t got specific information and the Minister 

of Northern Affairs shouldn’t be making specific references to 

what they actually collect and what they actually take out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by  

the hon. member from North Battleford, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 5 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: during 1995-96 fiscal 

year the amount of revenues the government collected 

from northern Saskatchewan from the following sources: 

(1) mining; (2) forestry; (3) tourism; (4) personal income 

tax; (5) corporate income tax; and (6) fuel tax. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I should like to mention to the 

Assembly that when it comes to motions for return, the items 

that are asked for and the items that can be provided are ones of 

factual nature. When the members are questioned in estimates, 

the response that is given is just that — it’s an estimate. So I 

want to just differentiate between those two processes for the 

members’ edification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the reason stated before, that records of this 

nature are not kept on a regional basis, I urge the Assembly to 

defeat this motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 7 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once again 

when certain actions and moves and closures are made by the 

government in the interest of the economics, to save monies, 

it’s not always known whether or not the moves do in fact result 

in any kind of savings. Therefore I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue a return: 

 

To the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation: (1) the amount the government 

pays per month in rent for the Saskatchewan Environment 

and Resource Management office at 117 Third Avenue 

West in Melville; (2) the amount that has been budgeted 

for the renovations at the Provincial Building in Melville 

for the relocation of the SERM office to the Provincial 

Building; (3) the amount the province currently budgets 

per year to hold Provincial Court in Melville. 

 

Seconded by the hon. member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I recommend that we pass this motion, and 

upon passing this motion, I’ll be pleased to table the answers to 

the questions. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 8 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can see that 

the Hon. Minister of Justice did in fact provide this information 

during estimates, and unless the return is prepared, I do not see 

the need of pressing this matter at this time. The Minister of 

Justice did in fact address it in estimates. It may be dropped, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Item 7 dropped. 

 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

Return No. 9 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this case the Minister 

of Justice was questioned on this in estimates but did not 

provide an answer. 

 

I know the Minister of Justice said that this would be difficult 

to provide an answer, but if I may say, I would be even satisfied 

with representative institutions, say the Regina provincial 

correctional centre. The food budget divided by the average 

daily census, I submit that that should not be difficult for the 

Justice department to provide. I think it can be done easily. It’s 

not complicated. 

 

And therefore I would move, seconded by the hon. member for 

Humboldt, to move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 9 showing: 

 

The average food service budget per inmate per day for 

inmates in custody in Saskatchewan’s provincial 

correctional institutions in 1996. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I appreciate the member’s remarks and 

member’s comments, Mr. Speaker, and we will be providing an 

answer with respect to a representative facility, as Regina. But 

in order to do so, I will be making an amendment to the existing 

motion, an amendment which reads, and I move: 

 

That return (no. 9) be amended by deleting the words after 

“food” and the following substituted therefor: 

 

cost per inmate per day for inmates in custody in the 

Regina Correctional Centre for the fiscal years of 

1995-96 and 1996-97. 

 

Seconded by the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to mention 

that I have . . . I will be pleased to table the answer to the 

question upon passing of this motion. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 10 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I recognize 

that the Hon. Minister of Justice did certainly try to answer 

questions 9 through 12 in general in estimates. However I 

would still appreciate receiving the exact figures. He certainly 

answered them in general but didn’t have the exact figures at 

his fingertips at the time. 

 

So I will move, seconded by the hon. member for Humboldt, 

that an order of this Assembly do issue for a return no. 10 

showing: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: the number of sentencing 

circles that were held in Saskatchewan in 1996 and where 

they were held. 

The Deputy Speaker:  I would ask the member who 

seconded the motion. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The member for Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Upon passing this 

motion I’ll be very pleased to give the member from North 

Battleford the very exact figures that he is looking for. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 11 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. I move, seconded by the hon. 

member for Humboldt, that an order of this Assembly do issue 

for return no. 11 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: the number of sentencing 

circles that were held in Saskatchewan in 1995 and where 

they were held. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be pleased to 

provide the response; although I want to mention that in this 

case the response, the information, is not available exactly at 

this time but we’ve made a commitment to provide it as soon as 

it is available. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 12 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member for Humboldt, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 12 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: the number of sentencing 

circles that were held in Saskatchewan in 1994 and where 

they were held. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 13 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 13 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: the number of sentencing 

circles that were held in Saskatchewan in 1993 and where 

they were held. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 14 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I still wonder why the government refuses to 

give the specifics to where these wooden penises now call 

home. I guess it’s just a good example of what good sales 

people we are over here. When the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus brought up the wooden penis fiasco, 

boom, they’re all sold. Then we help the NDP sell hundreds of 

perogies, and I’m sure the phone lines are now lighting up to  



1882  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

stock up on Avon. 

 

I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return: 

 

To the Minister of Education, regarding the 1,000 wooden 

penises purchased by the Education Department: (1) please 

provide a list of any provincial government departments 

and/or organizations outside Saskatchewan that have 

purchased wooden demonstrators from Saskatchewan’s 

Education department: (2) the “household name” firm that 

purchased the wooden demonstrators from Saskatchewan’s 

Education department; (3) please provide a list of 

Saskatchewan schools and health districts that purchased 

46 wooden demonstrators. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

member opposite has asked for a list of departments and 

agencies who have purchased wooden demonstrators from 

Saskatchewan Education, and he has differentiated between in- 

and out-of-province purchases. Now this issue, I believe, is one 

that has been the subject of a great deal of what I would call 

inappropriate humour, despite the seriousness of the subject, 

particularly on the part of the people who are trying to do some 

good about the subject. 

 

We don’t believe that there should be . . . is any good served by 

subjecting individual agencies who are approaching the subject 

responsibly, to further instances of inappropriate humour. 

Therefore we are amending the motion to provide a breakdown 

of in- and out-of-province purchasers by number only. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 

 

That the motion for return (no. 14) be amended by deleting 

all the words after “Department” and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

(1) provide the number that has been provided to 

organizations or institutions outside of Saskatchewan; 

(2) provide the number that has been provided to 

organizations or institutions within Saskatchewan. 

 

And upon passing of this amendment and the motion, I would 

be pleased to present the Assembly with the answer to these 

questions. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 15 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the 

reasons why we’re asking the questions in reference to item no. 

15 really deals with the expense of well over $7.7 million in 

terms of out of court settlements in reference to Saskatchewan 

Energy and Mines. And there’s no specific information as to 

why that figure is so high and what the value of or the reason 

for all the lawsuits. So in essence, that’s one of the reasons why  

we posed these questions. 

 

I move, seconded by the hon. member of North Battleford, that 

an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 15 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Energy and 

Mines: in the 1995-1996 annual report for Saskatchewan 

Energy and Mines, page 32, under petroleum and natural 

gas, the listed expenditures are $11,378,907; included in 

this amount is an expense of $7.714 million in out of court 

settlements to resolve lawsuits against the Crown: (1) the 

individual amounts for each of these settlements is 

required; (2) the recipients of these settlements; (3) the 

circumstances involved in each of these settlements; (4) 

whether there are any lawsuits still pending against the 

Crown with regard to Saskatchewan Energy and Mines; (5) 

the amounts of the out of court settlements that have been 

settled since the end of the 1995-96 fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

mention that the departments have been very diligent and 

supplied us with the responses, and I will be pleased to table 

these responses as soon as this motion is voted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 16 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from North Battleford, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 16: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Energy and Mines: (1) 

the amounts of settlements of any lawsuits against the 

Crown with regard to Sask Energy and Mines in the year 

1992-93; (2) the recipients of these settlements; (3) the 

circumstances involved in each of these settlements. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, I recommend that 

we pass this motion and we’ll be tabling the response 

immediately after the motion is passed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 17 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe 

the intent of the questions here is to really see exactly how 

much over a period of years that Sask Energy and Mines has 

been paying out in out of court settlements. These figures could 

be very substantial and we want to rest assured . . . have the 

taxpayers feel assured that these dollars certainly aren’t 

continual and they aren’t simply here to cover matters up. 

 

So I move, seconded by the hon. member from North 

Battleford, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 

17 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Energy and Mines: (1)  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

the amounts of the settlements of any lawsuits against the 

Crown with regard to Sask Energy and Mines in the year 

1993-94; (2) the recipients of these settlements; (3) the 

circumstances involved in each of these settlements. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 

spirit of open, accountable, and responsible government, I 

would be pleased to table a response upon passage of this 

motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 18 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

we’re doing this for every year because, you know, we have to 

find this information out as quickly as we can. Therefore I 

move, seconded by the hon. member from North Battleford, 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 18 

showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Energy and 

Mines: (1) the amount of the settlements of any lawsuits 

against the Crown with regard to Sask Energy and Mines 

in the year 1994-95; (2) the recipients of these settlements; 

(3) the circumstances involved in each of these settlements. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 19 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little surprised 

that the government has been reluctant to table the answers to 

this question to date. The information should be readily 

available from the department regarding, of course, the 1996-97 

district . . . health district budgets. As well as they should have 

a handle on the ’97-98 amounts that they’re going to be giving 

to the health districts. 

 

However, if the government is intending on doing as they did 

last year and pumping some emergency money into the health 

care system, Mr. Speaker, in particular the health districts, then 

they can simply table the figures to date and provide additional 

the figures as they deem necessary. So I’m a little surprised that 

the government is not being very open and accountable in 

regards to something as important to health care in this 

province. 

 

Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Melfort, that 

an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 19 showing: 

 

To the Minister of Health: (1) the total funding from the 

Department of Health to each individual health district for 

the 1997-98 fiscal year; (2) the percentage funding 

increase provided to each individual Saskatchewan health 

district in 1997-1998 compared to a total funding provided  

to districts in 1996-97 which included a $40 million 

emergency payment to districts. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The orders 

for return, as I mentioned earlier, are items that should be 

asking for factual information. This question asks an estimate 

for the current year and it asks for a comparison with that 

estimate. Those questions should properly be . . . have been put 

to the Committee of Finance to the Minister of Health. 

Therefore I ask the Assembly to defeat this motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 21 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think the 

important thrust in trying to get reference to the request for 

information on no. 21 is the fact that northern Saskatchewan 

and the people living in northern Saskatchewan have the 

unusual high rates of cancer, heart disease, and TB 

(tuberculosis) and other serious illnesses. 

 

And this fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is also complicated with the 

lack of adequate water and sewer in many northern 

communities. And certainly the housing problem, the isolation, 

all these add to tremendous challenges for the northern 

Saskatchewan community and the people there as well. 

 

And secondly, with the influx of modern life in the last 50, 60 

years, their diet has changed. And that also affects their health 

in many ways, shapes, and form. And most recently, 

transferring wild meat which people used to eat in the previous 

years to more domesticated meat such as cattle and pork and so 

on, we’re also seeing this also attributes to many health 

challenges for northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the gist and the thrust of this question is really to determine 

what the government is doing to react to these unusually high 

rates that are caused by housing problems, by isolation, by the 

change of diet. And what we do not want to see is we do not 

want to see any effort to diminish these problems and we want 

to make sure that the government is staying on top of the 

problem, especially of TB and other assorted illnesses. 

 

So this is the gist of the questions and we’re making sure the 

government is realizing the health challenges are associated to a 

variety of causes. We’ve identified housing and overcrowding 

of housing as one of them, the lack of water and sewer as 

another one of them, and that list of course, goes on. 

 

However, to be sure that the provincial meat inspection is not 

the case or cause of TB, we want to make sure that these things 

and these sites are properly inspected. 

 

So therefore I move, seconded by the hon. member from North 

Battleford, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 

21 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs: (1) the 

number of provincial meat inspectors that work in and for 

northern Saskatchewan; (2) the names and locations of  



1884  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

these inspectors; (3) whether the number of northern 

provincial meat inspectors has increased or decreased over 

the past year; (4) whether there has been any reports of an 

increase in the number of tuberculosis cases in northern 

Saskatchewan; (5) whether there is any evidence that the 

decrease in provincial meat inspectors is related to the 

increased number of TB cases in the North; (6) what is the 

government doing to address these problems? 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I will be pleased to table a response to the 

member’s question. But I do want to mention to the member 

that the answer he’s going to be getting will supply the number 

of cases of tuberculosis in the northern administration district. 

 

But the portion of the question respecting meat inspectors, 

maybe we’ll have to turn to his federal cousins for their answers 

to that, because those are actually federal meat inspectors. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 22 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I posed this question because there are a number of 

communities and health districts in the province that are waiting 

for the government to give some assurance that funding will be 

provided for capital projects that have been in fact promised by 

this government or through their ministry in some fashion. 

 

They have been assured of facilities that will meet their needs, 

and it’s impossible for these people in our health districts to 

understand whether the assurances given by government are in 

fact going to come about if they do not have some notification 

of approval for the capital project funding in a pertinent time so 

that they may begin to plan around those funds. 

 

And so I move, seconded by the hon. member from Arm River, 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 22 

showing: 

 

To the Minister of Health: (1) the health facility capital 

projects that have been approved by the Department of 

Health since April 1, 1996; (2) the health facility capital 

projects that have been submitted to the Department of 

Health for approval and are currently awaiting such 

approval from the department; (3) of those health facility 

capital projects currently awaiting approval by the 

Department of Health, the dates that they were submitted 

to the department for such approval. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

mention, that is a very good question and I have some very 

good answers for that question. And all the facts will be 

supplied upon passage of this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Return No. 23 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the questions posed — the next seven 

questions — have to do with the amount of projects contracted 

under the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement in the 

various Crowns that are signatories to the agreement. I do 

understand that if the government needs to, is to change from 

the calendar year that the question was asked in, to change for 

the fiscal year ’96-97, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that would be 

acceptable. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded 

by the member from Arm River, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 23 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible of Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation: the total value of construction 

projects which Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 

will undertake during 1997 coming within the scope of the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I will say 

with respect to item no. 23 applies also to 24, 25, 26, and 27. 

All of these motions for return request information about the 

total value of construction projects that will be undertaken into 

the future. 

 

I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that orders for return can be 

supplied when we can supply actual factual information. This 

question deals with contracts which have not yet been set or let. 

 

The Crown corporations, by tradition, report the financial 

results of their year after the year closes and do not present 

advance budgets, as do departments and agencies. And I believe 

that anybody that’s been in business could understand the 

reasons for that, because the contracts have not been yet set and 

it may well interfere with the bidding processes. 

 

Therefore I ask that the Assembly defeat this motion, as well as 

I will be asking the same thing for the next four motions. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 24 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the member from Arm River, to move for an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 24 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance: the total value of construction projects which 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance will undertake 

during 1997 coming within the scope of the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 25 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Arm River, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 25 showing: 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company: the total value of construction 

projects which Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

will undertake during 1997 coming within the scope of the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 26 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the member from Arm River, to move that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 26 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation: the total value of construction projects which 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation will undertake during 

1997 coming within the scope of the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 27 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from Arm River, to move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 27 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the total value of construction projects which 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation will undertake during 

1997 coming within the scope of the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 28 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from Arm River, to move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 28 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the total value of construction projects which SaskEnergy 

Incorporated will undertake during 1997 coming within the 

scope of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 29 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from Arm River, to move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 29 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications: the total value of construction 

projects which Saskatchewan Telecommunications will 

undertake during 1997 coming within the scope of the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 30 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 

again the thrust of this question no. 30 is really to deal with 

housing in northern Saskatchewan, another great area of 

concern as I’ve expounded in this Assembly on a number of 

occasions. And particularly the whole thrust of this question is 

to talk about removing the disincentives associated with the 

social housing programs in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And we have been calling for years and years, and once again 

calling for the government to come up with an innovative, 

exciting, and dynamic approach to housing in northern 

Saskatchewan, a housing package that would encourage people 

to work, would encourage couples to own their own homes, to 

establish the true market value of some of these homes. And all 

these questions that have been asked and presented to 

governments and basically have fell on deaf ears. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, housing, as I’ve mentioned time and 

time again, is the number one problem in northern 

Saskatchewan, from the lack of housing to the lack of repair 

programs for older people, for young families; to lack of a 

system which encourages people to go to work and to promote 

home ownership; to the lack of a study to determine the true 

market value of some of these homes — all these questions are 

out there and basically nothing has happened. Absolutely 

nothing. And I challenge the government to begin to address 

some of these problems if you really, truly do care about the 

North. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

hon. member from North Battleford, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 30 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Municipal Government: (1) 

the interest rate you are charging on northern mortgages; 

(2) the ratio of mortgage payments assessed versus the 

actual mortgage payments received; (3) the number of 

current mortgages that are with working families; (4) the 

number of families who are in payment arrears and the 

average outstanding amount; (5) the arrangement between 

the province and the federal government and the terms of 

reference to past social housing agreements, specifically 

mortgage arrangements. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will be 

tabling a response to this question, but I will want to make an 

amendment in order that the question provide accurate 

information that the member is actually seeking. 

 

With respect to the housing that is subsidized by the provincial 

and federal governments, the owners of the home, or the 

residents, do not actually pay a mortgage. They actually pay 25 

per cent of their household income. And then the difference 

between these payments and the actual mortgage payments is 

made up by the government . . . respective governments. 



1886  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

We will also be amending portion no. (3) . . . or deleting portion 

no. (3) of his question which asks about the number of current 

mortgages with working families. And the reason is because 

these records are not kept by employment status. 

 

And we will be deleting no. (4) which asks the number of 

families that are in payment arrears and the average outstanding 

amount. These records are not kept in any statistical manner and 

the cost of answering this would very, very high. We’d have to 

go through every folder, individual portfolio, for every member 

that was . . . or every household owner. 

 

Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster, 

the following amendment: 

 

That motion for return no. 30 be amended by: 

 

deleting all the words in section (2) after “payments” and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

“made by mortgage clients in the North to payments 

received;” and 

 

deleting sections (3) and (4); and 

 

renumbering section (5) to section (3). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 31 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess to 

summarize some of the questions that we’re trying to make 

points here in terms of northern Saskatchewan problems. We’ve 

talked about health care; we’ve talked about some of the 

challenges of community health; about the isolation factors; 

about employment; we’ve spoken about housing. 

 

And certainly now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would not be 

complete in terms of some of the questions we have . . . the 

specific questions we need to have answered is on road 

construction. 

 

Road construction in northern Saskatchewan remains to be one 

of the biggest challenges for many northern communities. 

We’ve spoken about thousands of people that are isolated 

during the critical months before winter freeze-up and certainly 

during the spring thaw, and the fact that it seems that highways 

are receiving less and less and less priority in northern 

Saskatchewan. And this is just totally unacceptable. 

 

It seems the budgets and the efforts to maintain northern roads 

have just been driven into the ground. And that again is an 

indication of a commitment of this government to northern 

highways. 

 

I think one of the reasons why we want to have these questions 

asked in terms of a statement made by the Minister of Northern 

Affairs in which he identified $5 million going into northern  

Saskatchewan, of which 4 million would be going into my 

constituency, we wanted to get the affirmation in terms of 

where exactly these dollars were being spent and certainly who 

was spending these dollars. 

 

It is our contention that between the Indian bands, between the 

corporations that have contributed to a number of funding 

agreements with the province to maintain roads where mines 

and forestry activities are happening, that they also contribute a 

great share of the northern road budget. And as well we have 

Indian bands that also contribute, and training dollars that are 

also used for road construction. 

 

So we’re trying to prove with questions of this nature, the one 

point is where exactly is the money coming from. And what we 

hope to prove is that between the federal government, the 

Indian bands, and the companies operating in northern 

Saskatchewan, that they have indeed outspent the province in 

that regard. 

 

(1100) 

 

And secondly, we also want to point out that highways 

continues to be a main problem in northern Saskatchewan, and 

we cannot stress that enough. Time will not allow me to do that. 

 

And third, to call for a comprehensive long-term strategy for 

highways. And when they make statements in this House of X 

amount of million dollars, you can almost guarantee that we’ll 

put them to task to confirm where these dollars are coming 

from and to ensure that these figures are substantiated by who’s 

putting what in. 

 

So as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 

that I move, seconded by the hon. member from North 

Battleford, that an order of the Assembly for a return no. 31 

showing: 

 

To the Minister responsible for Highways and 

Transportation: (1) the financial breakdown in terms of (a) 

location and (b) type of project for the $5 million the 

government allocated to northern highways (for example, 

the amount of money that will be spent on roads and the 

amount on bridges, furthermore, the location of these roads 

and bridges); (2) the proportion of the money allocated to 

northern highways that was collected from the following 

sources: (please break down accordingly) the forestry 

industry, the mining industry, Indian bands, the federal 

government, community contribution; (3) the amount of 

money that was allocated for specific training programs to 

the above projects from the following sources: Metis 

Pathways, the forestry industry, the mining industry, Indian 

bands, the federal government, community contribution; 

(4) of the total expenditures on highways in the North, the 

proportion that is allocated for the primary purpose of 

extracting resources from the North; and by primary 

purpose we are referring to those roads with a higher rate 

of use by heavy-haul vehicles other than civilian traffic. 

 

I so present. 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

Mr. Kowalsky:  What’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

member doesn’t want to know about the highway projects in 

northern Saskatchewan. However, the wording of the sections 

(1) and (2) are unclear. Therefore before providing the 

information, I would like to move an amendment, following 

which we’ll be providing the information. 

 

I move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 

 

That the motion for return no. 31 be amended by 

 

deleting all the words in section (1) and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

the capital highways projects in northern Saskatchewan 

funded by the province that are to be undertaken by the 

department during the 1997-98 fiscal year. Project 

details including: location of work, type of work, and 

estimated 1997-98 costs are to be provided; and 

 

deleting all the words in section (2) and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

the capital highway projects in northern Saskatchewan 

that are to be undertaken by the department during the 

1997-98 fiscal year with funding provided through other 

sources (i.e., federal government, industry, Indian bands, 

communities, etc.). Project details including: location of 

work, type of work, estimated 1997-98 costs and source 

of funding are to be provided. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 

through you to everyone assembled here this morning, I’d like 

to introduce a group of 40 students, grades 9 through 12, sitting 

in your gallery, accompanied by their teachers Mike Hubick and 

Guy Genest as well as chaperon Valerie Burton. 

 

I understand that half of these students are from my riding, from 

Vanguard School, and the other half are from the province of 

Quebec. So I would just like everybody here this morning to 

give them a warm welcome to our Assembly, and I hope you 

enjoy the balance of your day’s travels. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Belanger:  With leave, to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 

through you I want to introduce a very special guest that 

travelled many miles to be here with us here today. He’s sitting 

in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

I’m not sure where I could say he’s from. I know he was . . . 

he’s from Green Lake and he eats near Silver Lake where his 

mother’s house is. And he lives in Beauval and he works on the 

highway. So really, I really can’t say where exactly he’s from. 

 

But I’d like the Assembly to welcome Merlin Morin to the 

Assembly today. And I’ve had the distinct pleasure of being his 

first cousin. And him being a trucker and an athlete and a great, 

popular man, it’s really nice to be associated with him. So I’d 

ask the Assembly to please welcome Mr. Morin to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 32 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I would be prepared to give leave to the 

member sitting who may want to move this motion on behalf of 

Mr. D’Autremont. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The Government Whip has requested 

leave that the motion be moved by another member. I must also 

state that the member must have a seconder for the motion in 

the Assembly. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return showing: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) whether any 

government-run pension plans invested in Bre-X in ’95-96 

fiscal year; (2) if the answer to no. 1 is yes, list the 

pensions which invested in Bre-X, the number of shares 

that were purchased and the price, whether the Bre-X 

shares were sold, and the selling price. 

 

And I so move, seconded by the member from Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I will be pleased to table a 

response upon passage of this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 33 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Again for this motion, or any other motion 

that may come, I would ask the Assembly to give leave to any 

member moving the motion for the member who has submitted 

the motion. 



1888  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I move an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return showing: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) whether any 

government-run pension plans invested in Bre-X in ’96-97 

fiscal year, and if the answer to no. 1 is yes, list the 

pensions which invested in Bre-X, the number of shares 

that were purchased and the price, and whether Bre-X 

shares sold, and the selling price. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, providing a long list of when 

shares were bought and sold and at what price, as the member 

requested, is sort of a cumbersome way of inquiring about any 

losses incurred. Therefore I will be proposing an amendment to 

that section in order to provide a clear and direct answer. 

 

I move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 

 

That the motion for return no. 33 be amended by deleting 

all the words in section (2) after “yes” and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

list which pension plans invested in Bre-X and the losses 

incurred. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 34 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 34 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1991 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll be pleased to table the 

response upon passage of this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 35 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 35 showing: 

 

To the Minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1992 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the interest of open,  

accountable, and responsible government, I will be pleased to 

table this response upon passage of this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 36 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 36 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1993 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 37 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 37 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1994 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1115) 

Return No. 38 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 38 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1995 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 39 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 39 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated: 

the lands that were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1996 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 40 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

by the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for a return no. 40 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the lands that were expropriated by 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation during the year 1991 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 41 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, since questions 39, 40, 41, 42, 

and 43 on the blues are all similar questions for different years, 

I was wondering if, by leave, if we could do them all 

simultaneously. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I would advise the member that it is 

kind of impossible to do them by leave because they are 

separate questions to separate departments with separate 

answers. So I would recommend that we do them individually. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would note that the 

questions I asked for are all from the same department. But I’ll 

rely on your wisdom and proceed. 

 

I move, seconded by the member for Melfort-Tisdale, to move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 41 

showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the lands that were expropriated by 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation during the year 1992 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 42 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 42 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the lands that were expropriated by 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation during the year 1993 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 43 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 43 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the lands that were expropriated by 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation during the year 1994 and 

the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 44 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 44 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water Corporation: 

the lands that were expropriated by Sask Water 

Corporation during the year 1995 and the names of the 

registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 45 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 45 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation: the lands that were expropriated by Sask 

Water Corporation during the year 1996 and the names of 

the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 46 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move, seconded 

by the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for a return no. 46 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Power Corporation: 

the lands that were expropriated by the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation during the year 1991 and the names of 

the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 47 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, Mr. 

Speaker, for 45 to 50, which is returns to 52, to simply read the 

number of the order and the year. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move, seconded 

by the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move an order of the 

Assembly to issue for return no. 47 for the year 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 48 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 48 for the year 1993. 

 



1890  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 49 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 49 for the year 1994. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 50 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 50 for the year 1995. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 51 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 51 for the year 1996. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 52 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 52 showing: 

 

To the Minister responsible for SaskPower Corporation: 

the lands that have been expropriated or are presently 

subject to notices of intended expropriation by 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation for the construction of 

the Condie-Queen Elizabeth line and the names of the 

registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 53 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 53 showing: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation: the lands that 

were expropriated by Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Holding Corporation and its subsidiaries during the year 

1991 and the names of the registered owners of such lands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 54 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to do 52, 3 and 4 

and 5 with just the return and the year. 

 

Leave granted. 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 54 for the year 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 55 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 55 for year 1993. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1130) 

Return No. 56 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 56 for the year 1995. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 57 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 

the member from Melville, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 57 for the year 1996. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Over the last hour and a half we have been working on these 

motions for return, and I think just the fact that it took us an 

hour and a half to get through voting the motions would give us 

a little bit of an indication of just how much work is required on 

the part of all of the employees — the public servants of this 

government, the employees who work not only in the city of 

Regina but those that work in other parts of the province — 

because they are called upon to supply the answers to these 

questions. 

 

So I would at this time like, on behalf of all the member of the 

Assembly, to thank the employees of the government who were 

involved in securing the answers to these questions. 

 

I would like to thank the host business office for assembling the 

questions for us and thank the members opposite for putting the 

questions in the interest of the general public. 

 

And I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, that this 

is only the second time to my knowledge that a process like this 

has been followed by a government where the orders for a 

return have been supplied immediately. And I have been proud 

to do this on behalf of the government in the spirit of open, 

accountable, and responsible government. 

 

Upon passage of this very last motion, it will be my pleasure to 

table the responses to even this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would request leave  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

of the House that we now revert back to government business. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce her official. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is Bill Werry, the executive director of the sport, recreation, and 

lotteries branch of Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. 

And welcome to your officials. 

 

The Bill No. 68, just a couple of questions about it. I wonder if 

the minister can tell us how much currently sits in the 

associated equity fund, please? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question from the member opposite, in this year’s estimates for 

’97-98, there is 2.4 million. There is a residual from last year, 

but we’re not quite certain of the amount yet because we know 

the amount from the Regina casino, which is about 2 . . . just 

under $300,000 for the associated entity share, but the first 

nations-run casinos have not completed their audit yet so we 

don’t have that number for ’96-97. Whatever that number is 

will be in addition to the numbers I’ve cited. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I take it then that 

you don’t have the numbers and the amounts in the first nations 

fund as well, the separate fund? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. Those 

are the statements where the audit is not yet complete. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Madam Minister, can you tell us 

what the exact date was that these funds were established? Do 

you have that information? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the legislation 

somewhat predates this and I had no involvement in that. But 

in, I think, August 1996, responsibility for only part III and part 

IV of the Act, which relates to the associated entities fund, was 

transferred to my responsibility and the numbers to be 

distributed appear in the budget for Municipal Government as 

of August last year. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Then by the same 

token, I expect that you would not have a specific amount that’s 

been distributed thus far and to which groups or agencies, if any 

at all. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, aside from the first  

nations fund, the associated entities fund has established a 

board of trustees who met on May 6 to deal with the issue of 

distribution based on the applications that were received. And 

those decisions are being made now and the groups whose 

application is successful will be notified shortly. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I take it then that 

this legislation that’s before the House is to legalize the 

distribution — the collection and distribution of these funds. 

Am I correct in that assumption? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that is correct. And 

those determinations are made at arm’s length through the 

board of trustees of the associated entities fund. And what this 

legislation is doing, it was when we started to consider the 

distribution that Finance notified us that there was a flaw in the 

Act because it deals with the distribution of the Regina casino, 

but there is no legislative authority for distributing the proceeds 

from the first nations-run casinos, because at the time I think 

. . . well SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority), as we 

call it, wasn’t established yet when this legislation originated, 

and there were no profits. Because obviously there weren’t any 

first nations-run casinos, there was no contemplation of how the 

profits would flow. So there’s no authority for us to receive 

money from the first nations-run casinos and no authority to 

pay it out. And that’s what the amendments here are correcting. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess that was 

the concern that was raised, is why has it taken so long to bring 

this legislation in, when in fact this operation has been in place 

for several years, and why has it taken so long? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s because the 

. . . there were no native-, first nations-run casinos at the time 

this legislation was passed. And we didn’t know this, because 

we had responsibility for only section 3 and 4, and it was when 

we started to contemplate the distribution that Finance notified 

us that the Bill was deficient in that respect and that we needed, 

in order to have the authority to pay it out, needed to make this 

amendment with reference to the first nations-run casinos. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And thank you to 

your officials. And thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is John Edwards, who is the director of municipal policy and 

legislative services; behind me is Doug Morcom, manager of 

rural financial assistance; and beside him is Grete Nybraten, 

manager of urban financial assistance. 

 

Clause 1 

 



1892  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 

morning, Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. I’d 

like to just make a few comments to start with, Madam 

Minister, before I get into our line of questioning. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will enable the provincial 

government to bring their legislation into line with the 25 per 

cent funding cuts and to offset the removal of the $8 million in 

health . . . hospital levies. And I might like to also add there, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, that the municipalities actually have gained 

nothing through this because it was removed on one hand and 

then taken out of the revenue-sharing pool on the other. So it 

was a no-win situation for them. 

 

(1145) 

 

This legislation strikes at the heart of the matter that we have 

been presenting on behalf of Saskatchewan communities and 

rural municipalities all session long. It speaks directly to the 

drastic underfunding many local governments are struggling to 

cope with. Several times we have stood in question period and 

many other times during speeches in this House, to tell the 

minister and the government members opposite just exactly 

what devastation their revenue-sharing cuts are having on 

services, facilities, and the way of life in smaller centres. 

 

Many local administrators and local government members are 

frustrated with severe underfunding. They say they have cut 

services as much as possible and have no other alternative but 

to raise their mill rates. And as I have told the minister a 

number of times, four out of five municipalities will be raising 

their mill rates that have reported back to me so far. 

 

So there we have it — the downloading handed down by the 

NDP government forces local property owners to shoulder more 

of the financial burden. In other words, they are balancing the 

budget on their backs. 

 

Smaller communities are also trying to cope with dropping 

population bases and they fear that the higher property taxes 

will be a great disincentive to those who may be considering 

moving to their towns, villages, and hamlets. 

 

According to notes we received from SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), this Bill will legalize the 

decision of the provincial government to ignore the escalator 

index as a basis for adjusting the size of the grant pool to match 

the growth in four provincial tax bases. 

 

This Bill also removes the requirement to pay an equalization 

grant to each urban municipality along with per capita and basic 

grants. 

 

The cuts to municipal revenue-sharing are now more than three 

times as great as the percentage of decrease in federal transfers 

to Saskatchewan in 1997. 

 

Madam Minister, I guess where I’d like to go back to today to 

start with is, and we touched on this, I believe it was yesterday 

or the day before, and I’ve been contacted by a number of 

municipalities that listened to the debate we had that day. And  

we were touching on the revenue sharing, Madam Minister, for 

the future and that could be next year, the year after. And I 

think why they are concerned — I know why they are 

concerned — and why I am concerned is because to run an RM 

(rural municipality) or a town administration out there you have 

to have some stability in your funding. 

 

And I think the question they’re asking and I asked you the 

other day, and I don’t think they were quite satisfied with your 

answer, and I . . . probably what I am asking you, Madam 

Minister, is maybe could you elaborate or expand on where you 

feel funding will be going in the following year and the year 

after even? I think they would be satisfied with some kind of 

direction that you could show them where we would be heading 

next year. 

 

Will there be more cuts? Will the cuts stop? Will there be an 

increase in funding possibly? Where are we really heading, 

Madam Minister? And it’s not just me that is asking today, but I 

think there are municipalities out there listening for the answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I first need to correct 

some inaccuracies in this statement that the member opposite 

has made. Particularly with respect to the removal of the public 

health, hospital, and social services levy. 

 

The original intention was to offset the entire 17.6 million off 

the revenue pool. But in fact in the budget, the government did 

pick up $5.1 million, which represented the social assistance 

levy and the public health levy. 

 

And we also, at that time, put an end to the agreement which 

would have seen an escalator because then Saskatoon and 

Regina would have had to pay, starting January l of 1997, 

according to an agreement that they signed in 1994 that would 

have raised the public health levy from $6 per capita to $12 per 

capita. So they had anticipated that increased financial 

responsibility, but with the removal of the levies entirely that 

escalator didn’t take place, saving those major centres, 

representing almost half the population of the province, saved 

them a lot of money. 

 

And in effect we did take the other 12 million off the 

revenue-sharing pool, but it gives municipalities now 

permanently that tax room that they can use where they no 

longer have to remit the money collected by that 2 mill hospital 

levy and the public health levy to the province. So they do have 

that amount of room. If you offset that from the 

revenue-sharing cuts, in some cases municipalities are actually 

better off. 

 

In terms of the escalator that you refer to in the revenue-sharing 

formula that was established in the ’70s, that in effect has been 

inoperative since 1982. So our change in removing it from the 

legislation simply reflects the reality that has now existed for 15 

years. 

 

So as to the future, as always it will be part of our budget 

deliberations and we also have had throughout this process an 

important dialogue with the municipal organizations through  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

the municipal round table and through the discussions with 

respect to the memorandum of understanding that was entered 

into a year ago. 

 

So we’re working out solutions in the formula and in the 

funding at that level. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I think we 

once again have to agree to disagree. When you removed the 

health levy — and I remember back when I was still a reeve of 

an RM, that we were asking for that for a few years — what in 

our wildest dream we didn’t expect to have it removed on one 

side and then taken away on the other end. 

 

I disagree with the minister when she says that they have the 

ability now to replace that with something else, because really 

all we were as municipalities was a collection agency for that 2 

mills. That money, I believe was passed on, and correct me if 

I’m wrong, to either a health district or into the health system. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It certainly wasn’t used by RMs. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Exactly. It was not there for the RMs to use 

for themselves. Now having taken that away, and being we 

were only a collection agency to pass that money on, we gained 

nothing there. 

 

But we definitely, as municipalities of all kinds, lost on the 

other side because the revenue-sharing pool was not only 

dropped by that amount . . . Because then you add the other 

funding cuts that came in, and we had talked about 25 per cent. 

And I think in many cases, Madam Minister, we all know that 

the 25 per cent was very, very low in reality when everyone got 

their numbers out there. 

 

So I think I need . . . I’d like to have a comment on that, Madam 

Minister. Because I think we’re coming from two different 

areas and we’re kind of passing kind of a misconception out 

there as to what really happened. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s certainly 

no confusion in my mind that there was an offset to the 

revenue-sharing pool. And yes, municipalities simply . . . it 

wasn’t their revenue. They simply passed it through to the 

health system. But they now, without increasing taxes, they 

could continue to collect that amount and use it for their own 

purposes without their ratepayers seeing any net increase in 

what they’re paying. 

 

So it’s $17.6 million that was collected from local taxpayers 

province-wide for the three levies and passed through, which 

they now, without their ratepayers seeing an increase, have that 

tax room that they can collect and use for their own purposes. 

Because the government, in making this offset, has permanently 

removed that responsibility from local ratepayers. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well I think we still disagree, Madam 

Minister, but I guess we can understand maybe where you’re 

coming from. I guess yes, they can take that 2 mills, leave it on 

and put into somewhere else. But then never forgetting, and I 

know the municipalities, RMs, and the towns aren’t forgetting,  

that they are cut on the other hand. 

 

So they already have had to raise their mill rates to offset the 

funding cuts that have gone on since `91, and they’ve been 

drastic in many cases. So to say that this has really helped them 

out, I don’t think that 2 mills is a . . . is a very small drop in the 

bucket. And even though we disagree on the understanding of 

what you’re saying. 

 

Madam Minister, you also have removed general government 

costs from the recognized expenditures. Can you explain why 

this was taken out the administrative end of it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, what we’re trying to 

emphasize in the municipal organizations at the round table and 

in the MOU (memorandum of understanding) discussions agree 

with this, is that the goal of local governments is to provide to 

the greatest extent they can, high quality services to their 

ratepayers. So we have ceased to recognize administration costs 

and are recognizing the level of service provided instead — to 

cost share in that. 

 

And so if two communities of equal population, if one of them 

spends more on administration, for example, which is no longer 

recognized, they would get less than the other community with 

similar population that emphasizes service delivery and spends 

a smaller percentage of their budget on administration. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, I’d just like to go back. Something just struck us on 

this side — that you said that you would take the credit for 

removing the 2 mill health levy. But then really what you are 

saying is, you would take the credit for removing that but when 

the RMs keep that 2 mill on to replace something else, that 

actually they are at fault. And there’s where I think the problem 

comes in here, is that you’re trying to look good on one hand 

and really blame the RMs for keeping it on on the other hand. 

 

Madam Minister, some Saskatchewan communities are now 

paying more in provincial sales tax than they are actually 

receiving in grants from the province. And I kind of wonder 

here, because we pay GST (goods and services tax) and PST 

(provincial sales tax) on such things . . . take an RM, for an 

example, on graders or whatever their purchases are, or the 

cities or the towns, whatever they buy out there, they pay PST, 

GST. 

 

But in the case of the GST, and because in some cases we’re 

blaming the federal government all the time for their offloading, 

they return 57.14 per cent of that GST to the municipalities, if 

I’m right — and you can correct me if I’m wrong — but in the 

case of the PST, yes it went from nine to seven, which helped. 

 

But, Madam Minister, maybe we’re at the point now if we were 

going to go to zero funding — and I presume that’s where 

we’re heading the way . . . at the speed we’re heading there — 

maybe it would be time to say to these municipalities, okay, we 

are downloading onto you, we have cut you drastically; we in 

turn will remove the PST from any purchases you make, 

whether it’s a city, town, village, or RM. Would you comment  



1894  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

on that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not trying to take 

credit for anything. What municipalities have been asking for 

for a long, long time is to have their municipal tax base reserved 

exclusively for municipal purposes and not to act as an agent to 

fund health and social assistance and public health. So we 

simply responded to a request they’ve been making so that the 

municipal tax base is now clean and anything that they raise is 

raised for their own purposes. 

 

And in terms of the sales tax, I think the member opposite is on 

really thin ice, bearing in mind the broken promise of the 

federal government to get rid of the GST. And we have reduced 

the sales tax by 2 per cent in the last budget. We are now . . . 

have the lowest level of provincial sales tax of any province 

having such a tax. 

 

We have the misfortune to live beside the one province that 

doesn’t have a sales tax, but every other province has a sales tax 

at some level, and our level is the lowest in Canada. And if we 

start exempting municipalities from paying sales tax, if we start, 

then the education system would likely say, well this is a worthy 

cause; we shouldn’t pay sales tax. Health system doesn’t want 

to pay sales tax. Well who’s left to pay the sales tax? 

 

So we have some exemptions, limited exemptions. The answer 

of the federal Liberals is — your cousins in Ottawa — to 

harmonize. The biggest scam to . . . It’s such a nice-sounding 

word. It’s a huge transfer of tax from corporations and 

businesses who get refunds, to individuals. 

 

And we’re opposed to that. We want to continue to move the 

level of the provincial sales tax down within whatever ability 

we have to do that. And we have . . . we also have the narrowest 

tax base of any province in Canada in terms of the exemptions 

for children’s clothing and restaurant meals and so forth. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, just a comment in listening to the 

debate that’s taking place in the Assembly today. 

 

Madam Minister, as I’ve been trying to follow your reasons for 

removing the health levy and telling RMs that you’ve done such 

a good job — you’ve removed the health levy — but then in 

cutting more funding, you’ve basically taken more away from 

RMs. But you’re asking . . . saying to them, well you do have 

the 2 mill health levy that used to be there that you were the 

collection agent for; you can now go and grab a hold of that and 

raise more funds. 

 

The other concern, Madam Minister, and we talked of . . . the 

member from Saltcoats just talked about the provincial sales 

tax. And that’s a major concern, especially when you look at the 

costs of equipment. 

 

Madam Minister, I would suggest that you could do a lot for 

RMs, a lot for rural taxpayers, by, if you will — if you want 

them to generate their own revenue and provide for their own 

programing — take a hold of the educational portion of the  

property tax, and fund education as a province should in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I would almost guarantee that 

rural municipalities would certainly be able to generate the 

revenue they need and provide all the funding that is necessary 

without increasing taxes. 

 

So as you’ve said you’ve done to the municipalities for health 

revenue — you’ve removed the 2 per cent levy — now absorb 

and take control of the property tax or the educational portion, 

fund education as you should be, by the province, rather than 

asking property taxpayers to continue to bury the load. Thank 

you, Madam Minister. 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

has heard the Premier; he’s heard the Minister of Education; 

and he’s heard myself say that we are studying that issue. And 

our goal is to fund education, as it’s sustainable over a term, to 

a greater degree from the treasury to reduce the property tax 

burden on the local taxpayer. That’s our goal. 

 

And I need to . . . the member says that it’s a no-win situation 

for municipalities; I say it’s a no-lose situation for 

municipalities because there is an offset. We took it off revenue 

sharing but they no longer have to collect that exact same 

amount from their ratepayers to cover the costs of hospital, 

health, and social services that they always paid before. It’s 

$17.6 million of tax room at the local level. 

 

So there is . . . and we’re more generous in the offset because 

we didn’t . . . we put back in the 5.1 million that covered the 

two levies and only reduced revenue sharing by the 12. So it’s 

better than an offset. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, no matter how you cut it, it’s a 

direct loss that property tax owners . . . or ratepayers are going 

to have to pick up. 

 

On the other hand, Madam Minister, just one further comment. 

You mention that the Premier has mentioned this; you’ve 

mentioned this; I think you said the Minister of Finance has 

mentioned it; that you’re studying it. My comment to you is, I 

hope you don’t study it to death to the point that we never see a 

move on it. That indeed there is a major move to fund 

education, as you’ve indicated, as your colleagues said they 

would do when they were in opposition, that they would fund it 

rather than allowing it to grow, and the shift to take place — as 

we’ve seen in the province over the last five years — from a 

40/60 split of taxpayer versus the province that we had back in 

1991, the shift where the province is now only paying 40 per 

cent instead of the 60 per cent. 

 

So I trust, and I encourage you, Madam Minister, not just study 

it, but indeed make some firm actions and commitment to move 

on this issue. Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it becomes abundantly 

clear why, in 1991, we inherited from the administration of that 

party, a $14 billion debt. He says, just spend the money; don’t 

study it. Don’t contemplate; don’t worry about whether it’s  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

sustainable. Just write a cheque; throw money at it. And this is 

the kind of voodoo economics that put us where we are. And 

we would be able to reach that goal of funding education to a 

larger degree from the treasury a lot faster if we hadn’t inherited 

the mess of debt that we did. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, if 

you want, we can continue this all day. You talk about the debt 

in 1991. Madam Minister, no one is saying that there wasn’t 

some further debt accumulated and that there was a large debt 

in 1991. No one is saying that it wasn’t there. 

 

But if you want me to go back, Madam Minister, I can take a 

fair bit of time and just show you what was there prior to . . . 

what the government of the ’80s had to live with; what the 

government had to do to balance off the costs that were 

incurred in land bank costs because there wasn’t enough 

revenue generated to pay the interest; the potash debt that was 

accumulated — the potash corporation that was built, not by the 

former government, but by the previous government. 

 

Madam Minister, there are so many things that we could get 

into and debate here this afternoon — I’m not going to take the 

time to do it. But I would suggest that if you want to get into 

that, you can certainly get up and just give me more fuel and 

more ammunition to work with. I’d be more than pleased to do 

that. 

 

All I’m asking you right now, Madam Minister, is to put into 

action some of the comments that you have made regarding 

reducing the cost to property tax owners of the area of 

responsibility of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

Government of Saskatchewan should have. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we have said that that 

is our goal and we will plan, carefully, towards that goal, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read for the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 Return No. 1 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1879 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1879 

 Return No. 2 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1879 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1879 

 Return No. 3 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1879 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

 Return No. 4 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

 Return No. 5 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

 Return No. 7 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

 Return No. 8 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1880 

 Return No. 9 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

 Return No. 10 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

 Return No. 11 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

 Return No. 12 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

 Return No. 13 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

 Return No. 14 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1881 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

 Return No. 15 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

 Return No. 16 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

 Return No. 17 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1882 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1883 

 Return No. 18 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1883 

 Return No. 19 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1883 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1883 

 Return No. 21 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1883 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 Return No. 22 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 Return No. 23 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 Return No. 24 



 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 Return No. 25 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 Return No. 26 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

 Return No. 27 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

 Return No. 28 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

 Return No. 29 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

 Return No. 30 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1885 

 Return No. 31 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1886 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

 Return No. 32 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

 Return No. 33 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 34 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 35 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 36 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 37 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 38 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 39 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 40 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1888 

 Return No. 41 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 42 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 43 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 44 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 45 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 46 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 47 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 48 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1889 

 Return No. 49 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 50 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 51 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 



 

 Return No. 52 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 53 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 54 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 55 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 56 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

 Return No. 57 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1890 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1887 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1891 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1891 

 Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1891 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1892 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1894 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1895 

 Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1895 

 

 

 


