



















































Hansard: March 10, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 55 

 March 10, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is an immense privilege for me to be able to second 

the Speech from the Throne. I was very pleased earlier today to 

be able to address this Assembly and to address a few 

preliminary remarks on this speech. I thank the legislature for 

their indulgence in allowing me to give my preliminary 

remarks, and now I want to address some more substantive 

matters with respect to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Before I do so though, I want to once again thank the mover, 

the member from Swift Current. And I want to in the strongest 

of all possible terms, compliment him on his extremely fine 

delivery of a very clear and impassioned speech that so 

articulately outlines the policies, themes, and priorities for this 

government in this upcoming session. I think he did an 

excellent job, and I really commend him for the job he did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Swift Current commented on his 

constituency. I too wish to comment about the nature of my 

constituency because there is an interesting contrast between his 

constituency and mine. His, as he pointed out, is deeply rooted 

in his particular corner of the province and defined by the 

singular traditions and attitudes of its inhabitants. 

 

I am as proud of my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast as he 

is of Swift Current. Unlike Speedy Creek though, most of my 

constituency is under construction. Just 15 years ago, it was a 

playground for gophers and the odd deer. We are part of the 

fine and booming city of Saskatoon and the Corman Park 

municipality but we have few established neighbourhoods or 

institutions and the traditions that come from them. 

 

My constituents are relocating their sense of community and 

cooperation onto new territory. As we move towards a new 

century, I am confident that they will build strong and healthy 

communities for themselves and their children. 

 

Before I begin my comments on the Speech from the Throne, I 

want to congratulate the new member for North Battleford. I 

wish him all the luck in his legislative duties, and I certainly do 

not want to intimidate him, Mr. Speaker, by saying that he has a 

tough act to follow. But the truth is, former MLA (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) Doug Anguish, was renowned for his 

stubborn and scrappy determination to do the best for his 

constituents. So the new member does indeed have a tough act 

to follow. I wish him all the best of luck for his temporary time 

in this legislature. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s only two months and a little over a 

week into 1997 and I’ve already chalked it up as a year of 

significant changes for myself. For instance, on January 24 I 

observed my 50th birthday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I thank all the members for their applause and I 

want you to note that I said I observed my 50th birthday. I can’t 

quite bring myself to say I celebrated it yet. But maybe in 15 

years or so I’ll look back and say yes, that was a time of great 

celebration. 

 

On a sadder note though, Mr. Speaker, on February 14 I noted, 

with some sadness and a lot of love, the 10th anniversary of my 

husband’s early death from cancer. And just last week, on 

February 27, I was in Holland, and I held my mother-in-law’s 

hand while she completed her own journey of 84 years. 

 

So for me, Mr. Speaker, 1997 has been a time of significant 

changes and a time of reflecting on old directions and new 

pathways yet to come. Therefore for me, the privilege of being 

asked to second the Speech from the Throne is a rare 

opportunity to be able to reflect on the twists and demands of 

both public and personal change. 

 

As I think about these changes, I sometimes find it ironic that 

when I was a young adult in the ’60s I thought and I 

demonstrated against government of all sorts, at all levels. At 

that time in the ’60s we were labelled radical, left-wing 

activists. Nowadays, you get called a right-wing reactionary if 

you rail against big government. 

 

It’s really strange because somehow along the way, those of us 

on the progressive social democratic side seem to have lost 

track of the notion that the state can never, for very long or very 

effectively, serve as a substitute for good and just society. We 

seem to have forgotten — some of us — that bureaucracies, 

entitlements, privilege, and an unbalanced emphasis on rights 

rather than duties leads to a weakening of the fragile and 

precious bonds of strong and healthy communities. 

 

At the same time, people of other political points of view 

pushed to emphasize the supremacy of the individual over the 

collective of families, community, civic groups, and co-ops. 

This is the most noticeable change that I’ve observed between 

the ’60s and the ’90s. It’s a very public change, and it shouldn’t 

have been too hard for progressive social democrats to predict 

the results. If the “me” side gets precedence over the “us” group 

and then gains control of the apparatus of the state, then of 

course the politicians of individualism are going to tumble all 

over themselves with promises of centrally administered 

programs for personal pleasure — the hot tubs and cheap gas 

routine of the ’80s. And the devil take any concern about 

today’s debt, let alone tomorrow’s. 

 

So it is small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that we got ourselves into 

the bollocks of mortgaging our future and weakening our 

communities. It’s easy enough now with the wisdom of 

hindsight to look back and to see where our collective society 

went wrong, provincially and federally. What was not so easy 

was to put it right and to make sure that everyone was a 

meaningful part of the solution. 



56  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Luckily, as the Saskatchewan people know, we did elect a 

government in 1991 that had the boldness, the courage, and the 

decency to begin once again on the process of building a just 

and prudent, progressive society. In practical terms, this has 

meant a process of turning just about every cherished notion of 

social democracy upside down and inside out for awhile. 

 

First, we had to figure out how to get back to good, grey, 

government — the nothing flashy, non-demagogic, long-term, 

slow-term, not-in-your-face kind of government that people in 

Saskatchewan want, used to have, and definitely still deserve. 

So if people now accuse us of being boring, we shouldn’t 

apologize, Mr. Speaker. We know all too well, to our chagrin, 

the results of experimenting with a different sort of government. 

The disastrous $15 billion debt will remind us of that faulty 

flirtation for many, many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, slow and sure wins the race; gaudy and greedy 

sinks the ship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  You know, responses to the Speech from the 

Throne are in many ways ritualistic. And don’t get me wrong, I 

do believe that rituals and tradition are very important, as the 

member from Swift Current said. But what’s just as important, 

Mr. Speaker, is good, steady government and the day-to-day 

things about good, steady government that affect people’s lives. 

 

Saskatchewan has been fortunate. We’ve been a laboratory for 

social change of many kinds. Our citizens have been able to see 

the best and the worst of governments. But at the end of the day 

what it all comes down to is not a fancy-sounding Speech from 

the Throne; what matters most is the quality of day-to-day 

government that emanates from that speech. 

 

So really what this speech, the 1997 Speech from the Throne, is 

all about is good, grey government. The kind of sustainable, 

plodding, methodical approach that people need and want. 

People want to know that the state is there for them if need be 

but that there is no need for it to be intrusive and in their face. 

It’s there when you need it. That counts for more than all the 

flowery phrases in speeches from the throne, because really in 

Canada there is no throne — the throne is the people. Politics, 

Mr. Speaker, happens day to day as we all know in this House. 

And we on this side of the House have learned painfully that 

there is no free ride. We’re still suffering from that experiment 

in the ’80s. 

 

So what I want to do today is to give a speech about work — 

working government, working people, workable approaches. 

The proof of the success of our approach came with our 

re-election in 1995. And the proof of the soundness of that 

approach is being demonstrated today in this legislature with 

this throne speech and with the upcoming budget speech. Slow, 

steady, progressive, and not terribly flashy. In many ways, as an 

hon. member said earlier, boring. But it’s revolutionary none 

the less, because it is government with a solid commitment to 

investing in people, investing for people, and investing with 

people. That, Mr. Speaker, is revolutionary. 

Now that’s not the sort of revolution in government that Mike 

Harris talks about in Ontario. His revolution, I would suggest, is 

neither common nor sensible. He takes education off the 

property tax so that he can pay out a promised income tax cut. 

He funds this by dumping welfare responsibilities and public 

health costs onto municipalities unlucky enough to have poor 

people living within their civic boundaries. Just imagine how 

welfare recipients could be hounded from town to town to town 

if municipalities there are forced to fund welfare off the 

property tax base. That’s the system we changed in 

Saskatchewan 30 years ago. Been there. Done that. 

 

I can tell you from direct personal experience that it is 

demeaning, debilitating and unfair. We got rid of the welfare on 

property tax system in the ’60s. I shudder to think now that 

Ontario is embracing that system in the ’90s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, telling a 10-year-old to trudge through the snow to 

a neighbour’s farm to separate their cream and churn their 

butter in exchange for their skim milk might shave something 

off the welfare food costs for a town, but it is not — it is not — 

a smart investment in people. It is not fair to fund a middle class 

income tax cut on the backs of poor people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1915) 

 

Ms. Lorje:  That sort of approach, Mr. Speaker, is not an 

investment in people; it is a debasement of people. It may be 

revolutionary but it is not the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I used to be a municipal councillor in the city of 

Saskatoon. When I became aware of the rampant debt and 

disdain for government that had crept into our public process, I 

decided to run for provincial office. I knew then that we would 

have to be firm and say no to proposals that took money out of 

one pocket and stuffed it back into someone else’s, but at the 

same time, proposals that ripped holes in the pockets of the 

clothing of our children and our grandchildren. 

 

I left municipal office with few regrets and many dreams. I 

came down here to help out with the task of rebuilding our 

province’s finances and, as we will see when the Finance 

minister tables, in a few short days, what will surely be yet 

another consecutive balanced budget, that task is well on the 

way to success. 

 

I came to this legislature, as I said, with few regrets and many 

dreams. After five years in government, I have some regrets and 

fewer dreams. I am incredibly saddened, for instance, that the 

prescription drug plan is now a mere shell of itself, a pale 

imitator of a plan. I blame the drug patent legislation of the 

federal Tories and their pet parrot Liberals as well as the fiscal 

irresponsibility of the Devine administration. 

 

I am pleased that we managed to salvage comprehensive drug 

support for poor people, but I still want to see improvements for 

everyone else’s drug coverage when our finances improve. It 

pains me that cut-backs to the drug plan were a necessary 

sacrifice to the basic and most important goal — a fiscal fitness  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

and a balanced budget. 

 

Also with considerable regret, Mr. Speaker, I look around and I 

realize that we have many swords to swing before we can truly 

slay the poverty dragon. I take some comfort in the fact that our 

government alone in Canada has never rolled back social 

assistance rates and indeed has consistently, through six 

budgets, brought in measures to help the most vulnerable in our 

society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Further, Mr. Speaker, I regret that the pernicious 

cancer of part-time and low-paying jobs still has a stranglehold 

on our economy. I am also disappointed that the noise coming 

from people who want to roll back changes in health care 

sometimes drowns out the celebration of reforms that give more 

grass roots control over decisions and places more emphasis on 

service rather than bricks and mortar. I am impatient as well, in 

our efforts to reform our education system and to create an 

economic climate that will lead to full and meaningful 

employment for everyone. 

 

Yes, I have many regrets. I was rudely awakened from my 

dreams of a quick creation of a strong and just, progressive 

society when we, on the government side, were shown the fiscal 

disaster dumped on the people of Saskatchewan by a 

supposedly populist government. They believed that 

government was essentially bad and they set out to prove that it 

was so. 

 

The cold-water reality of the debt and deficit meant that many 

of the dreams and hopes of my colleagues and I on the social 

democratic side of the legislature had to be put on hold for 

awhile. But again, on reflection, I don’t think that this is 

necessarily a bad thing. I’m reminded of a poignant sentence 

out of a book called Cloudstreet by Australian writer, Tim 

Winton. One of his characters, an industrious and determined 

woman, says: “Hoping is what people do when they’re too lazy 

to do anything else.” 

 

Well we could have sat back and hoped that the financial 

disaster of the Devine administration would magically 

disappear, or we could do exactly as we did: temporarily — 

temporarily, I emphasize — suspend our idyllic dreams of a 

New Jerusalem appearing effortlessly overnight. We set about 

building the basic structure to create it block by block, day by 

day, the realistic way. It’s not fancy just yet. The streets have a 

few potholes but it is solid and it is the start of a New 

Jerusalem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  We started with the foundation. If you build a 

house, you don’t spend all your mortgage money on a pool 

table for the rec room. No, what you do is you build from the 

ground up and you furnish it room by room as your financial 

wherewithal permits. 

 

This is what we did. We put our financial house in order and by 

the way, we put it in order so that it will stay in place for a long  

while. We’ve rebuilt the province’s foundation on firm ground, 

not shifting sand. So now we have the basics in place. We’ve 

worked on the financial and the social conditions to make it 

sustainable. We’ve worked on the task of earning trust and 

confidence for the public interest once again. We’ve had to be 

patient, almost as patient as Tommy Douglas was when he 

started a similar process back in 1994, or as patient as 

generations of Saskatchewan people and their optimistic 

determination to leave a better province for their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a truism but it bears repeating. Politicians 

have two basic tasks. One is to remind people about yesterday 

so that it’s not forgotten today. Simultaneously we need to 

explain tomorrow to today so that we can actually move 

forward to achieve that tomorrow. We have to be rooted in the 

present, straining for the future, and ever mindful of the past. 

And that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, has been the strength of the 

current NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 

 

While many people — and I admit it, primarily people in our 

own party — criticized us for the fiscal measures we had to 

undertake, nevertheless we knew that the dreams of tomorrow 

would be nothing but dust if we weren’t wakeful and watchful 

today. It meant sacrifice by the people of Saskatchewan. It 

meant many regrets. But as we see now in this throne speech, 

ultimately it also means a solid and sustainable foundation for 

the future. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, we acted according to the wisdom 

imparted in Aesop’s fable of the crow and the pitcher. It’s a 

succinct story that gets to the heart of the matter, and it goes 

like this. 

 

A crow half dead with thirst came upon a pitcher which had 

once been full of water. But when the crow put its beak into the 

mouth of the pitcher, he found that only very little water was 

left in it and that he could not reach down far enough to get at 

it. He tried and he tried, but at last he had to give up in despair. 

 

Suddenly though a thought came to him, and he took a pebble, 

and he dropped it into the pitcher. Then he took another pebble, 

and he dropped it into the pitcher. Then he took another pebble 

and dropped that into the pitcher. Then he took another pebble 

and dropped that into the pitcher. Then he took another pebble 

and dropped that into the pitcher. And then he took another 

pebble and dropped that into the pitcher. And so on and so on. 

At last, at last he saw the water level rise up towards him. After 

dropping in a few more pebbles, he was able to quench his thirst 

and to save his life. 

 

Now the moral of that tale, Mr. Speaker, is simple and it’s 

profound. Bit by bit does the job. That story of the crow and the 

pitcher is a perfect illustration of the task we faced in 1991 and 

the value of perseverance and good, grey government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that I have some regrets for the lost 

programs that had to be trimmed and tightened so that we could 

get our financial house in order. But equally importantly, I have 

absolutely no regrets for our solid commitment to fiscal 

responsibility. In this session our government will demonstrate 

that five years of hard work and sacrifice by the people of  



58  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Saskatchewan were well worth it. The worst is behind us, 

thankfully. We’ve cleaned up the mess left by the circus 

elephants of the 1980s, and we can now, with solid optimism, 

begin the next phase of investing in people. 

 

The throne speech has six major investment themes: jobs; 

education; child poverty and welfare; a stable, secure, and 

caring health system; rebuilding transportation, and 

underpinning it all with the preservation of Saskatchewan’s 

new-found, but still fragile financial freedom. 

 

These themes are the themes that the people of Saskatchewan 

told us were important. Curiously, the Liberal Party opposite 

has many of the same themes. I don’t know, maybe that means 

people talk to all politicians. But equally curiously, the Liberal 

Party only has four priorities, not six. Their priorities are jobs, 

education, health care, and potholes. 

 

Now what do they leave out? What about fighting poverty, and 

what about being fiscally responsible? What kind of a party has 

no concern for people trapped on welfare? What kind of a party 

has no concern for children trapped by their parents’ poverty? 

And equally telling, what kind of a party has no concern 

whatsoever for the financial well-being of an entire province? 

 

You know, deficits and spiralling debt are just one fiscally 

irresponsible budget away. But do the Liberals feel finances are 

a priority? No way. They want to spend 400 million dollars on 

potholes. And they think, they think they’ll find the money 

from savings in health care. Tell that to the front-line health 

workers, Dr. Melenchuk. It doesn’t sound very financially 

responsible to me. 

 

It is a cute idea to have a 1 800 number for bumps in the road 

— really cute. But just like there is no free lunch, Mr. Member 

from Wood River, so too there is no free ride. Pothole patching 

has to be paid for from somewhere. And unless you can get 

your buddies in Ottawa to reverse their decision on the Crow 

rate, the damage to the roads is just going to get worse. And 

quite frankly, I don’t see anyone lining up to pay more taxes for 

anything, let alone a hole in the road. I really wonder what sort 

of response the Liberals would get if they put in a 1 900 number 

where people had to pay to report the potholes. 

 

(1930) 

 

Of course the condition of our highway infrastructure is a 

problem. But a telephone-complaint line is not the answer. 

What is needed is a solid strategy, a solid, sustainable strategy 

to rebuild our transportation system. It’s not flashy and it’s not 

in your face. But the strategy our Minister of Highways will 

outline this session will be solid, sustainable, and affordable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  And that is the sort of program the people of 

Saskatchewan want and deserve. Mr. Speaker, the New 

Democrats in this House have worked hand in hand with the 

people of Saskatchewan for five years to restore the fiscal 

health to the province. We have reached our goal. Our credit 

rating is good. We’re paying down the debt, and we are now 

 ready to invest in the future. 

 

This throne speech is all about investment, and I think a little bit 

of definition is in order. What exactly does investment mean for 

progressive social democrats such as the government members 

in this House. Mr. Speaker, for me and I believe for my 

colleagues, investment does not mean intrusive state 

government. It is not the place for government or politicians or 

anyone else for that matter to tell families what they should 

value, read, or eat. It is, I maintain, the function of government 

to provide the very best possible atmosphere for families to 

make their own decisions on these matters. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we will have government investment in 

people, but it will not be the sort of government-knows-it-all 

kind of investment that many might expect from a social 

democratic government. It’s not reactionary to say this — it is 

progressive. At least it was in the ’60s, and if we can shape up 

some of the fuzzy thinking of the ’90s, it will be so again. 

 

The role of government is not to solve problems for people. The 

role of government is to create a climate where people have 

fiscal and social resources and access to power to be able to 

solve their own problems. At the same time, when we talk about 

investing in people, we do not mean that we will cavalierly 

leave it all up to the private sector to decide who they’ll invest 

in, when, where, and why. 

 

Private finances, quite properly, are mostly about profit. When 

we talk about investment in people though, we know that the 

private-profit motive and cash alone aren’t sufficient. Resources 

are often, indeed usually, more — much more — than financial. 

Social resources as well as capital resources are important when 

you’re investing in people. So the private sector alone isn’t and 

shouldn’t be expected to be up to the total task. 

 

There’s another sector though, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 

government and private interests, that needs to be involved in 

the strategy of investing in people, and that is the sector loosely 

and variously referred to as civil society — the clubs, the 

unions, and the voluntary organizations that add up to the whole 

notion that we call community. It’s larger than mere 

self-interest. 

 

Community, at its simplest and most basic, means people joined 

together by shared needs and a desire, individually and 

collectively, to improve their opportunities for the future. 

 

Community isn’t a place, it isn’t an object — community is a 

practice, and the practice of good community isn’t created by 

élitist profits. The job of politicians who care about 

communities is to foster dialogue that builds communities, 

especially those that emphasize positive values that maintain 

diversity — diversity of culture, of dreams, and of deeds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Strong communities recognize the value and the 

importance, not to mention their own enlightened self-interest, 

in helping others. That’s why when we talk in this throne 

speech about jobs and reducing child poverty, we know how  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

important it is to level up wages and benefits for everyone. We 

refuse to accept the currently fashionable rush-to-the-bottom 

approach. Further, we know that reducing poverty will improve 

the quality of community life and reduce the fears of job loss, 

crime, and social unrest for everyone, not just the poor. 

 

Everyone benefits from this. It’s not a case of the poor, 

beleaguered middle class being squeezed again. A model to 

reduce poverty that is based on all of us investing together is 

much more than the traditional nanny state that has caused so 

much resentment in the past. It is community and individual 

self-reliance, and it brings the state back to a more reasonable 

level of involvement. 

 

This is what the child action plan is all about. It means 

investment in people by government, the private sector, and 

most importantly the civil society sector. And that is our 

investment strategy for Saskatchewan people and this throne 

speech sketches how we will make it happen. 

 

I’m excited by these initiatives, Mr. Speaker, but I am saddened 

that the federal government is not a partner with us. The federal 

Finance minister has continued his budgetary, time-released pill 

strategy, by budgeting on the backs of poor children in Canada. 

 

It may seem to be smart politics to go into an election saying he 

cares about poor kids, and has a national child benefit plan in 

the works. But the glib promise will just feed public cynicism 

and it certainly won’t feed hungry kids. He had a chance to 

bring in the first new national program in 30 years. Instead he’s 

made it a hostage for the upcoming federal election. 

 

I give him notice, Mr. Speaker, that we will be holding him 

accountable for this. In 1993 the Liberals promised to scrap the 

GST (goods and services tax) and to introduce a national day 

care plan. After the election, “pht” they changed their mind. 

Will they do the same thing with the national child benefit plan? 

I’m very concerned that they will. 

 

Well Saskatchewan cares about those poor kids waiting for an 

election ploy to play itself out. We care today, not a year and a 

half from now. We’re not going to sit back and hope for a 

program in late 1998. We are going to work with communities, 

inner city neighbourhoods, rural areas, and northern 

communities to build on the child action plan for children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  We will create the tools so that people can help 

themselves together as a community. That is investment in 

people -- solid, progressive, workable and sustainable 

investment. 

 

Totally on a different topic, Mr. Speaker, I am particularly 

pleased in these days of bean counting and obsession with the 

bottom line, that our government has the wisdom to recognize 

the importance of the arts to society. One of the most exciting 

things in the throne speech is the plan to create a single arts 

agency. This will be the most fundamental reform in an 

important sector in our society. 

In 1947 Tommy Douglas created the first publicly funded, 

arm’s-length Arts Board in North America. And now in 1997, 

our NDP government will open a window for creativity for both 

amateurs and professionals, volunteers and arts companies, with 

the single arts agency. It will be an opportunity for this province 

to excel in an aspect of human endeavour that is most 

memorable for society. 

 

I know that it’s fashionable these days to focus mostly on 

economic development and to ignore the incredibly meaningful 

and wonderful contributions the arts makes to our lives. But 

frankly, economic development without art is industry without 

imagination. 

 

When people look back to the end of the 20th century here on 

the Prairies, they’re not going to remember the hamburger 

joints and the shopping centres. But they will remember the 

artists and their works. People like Laureen Marchand, visual 

artist; Bill Epp, sculptor; Anne Szumigalski, poet; Greg 

Daniels, playwright; Robin Poitras, dancer; Gail Bowen, writer; 

Brenda Baker, musician; Maria Campbell, film-maker; and 

many, many more. 

 

These are the people creating the memories for tomorrow. 

These are the people who encourage us to be bold and 

confident. They are all people who recognize the wisdom in the 

words of the Russian poet, Vladimir Mayakovsky. He said: “Art 

is not a mirror to reflect the world, but a hammer with which to 

shape it.” It is my hope and expectation that the new single arts 

agency will be the plank for the hammers of the diverse and 

talented Saskatchewan artists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  And just to remind the members opposite who 

think that art is some guy down at the pub, the arts prime the 

economy at the same time as they lift the soul. They are an 

important building block of the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current said that the 

stories of the Book of Genesis still resonate for us today 

because of the deeply human quality of those stories. Another 

story from another mythology speaks to us in a different, but 

equally significant way. The ancient gods had the story of 

Sisyphus, the man who angered the gods and was condemned 

throughout eternity to roll a huge stone up a steep hill, only to 

have it slip down from him at the top and roll down to the 

bottom. He had to start again and again and again. 

 

It’s a simple story but it’s an instructive one, especially for 

those of us in public life. Consider this: for nearly 40 years, 

with a long, lean, seven Liberal years in between, CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 

governments rolled that rock towards the summit, moving 

towards the strong, new society that generations of 

Saskatchewan people desired, slow step by patient step, as I 

said earlier. 

 

By 1982, Saskatchewan had reached the point where universal 

social programs and social democratic economic achievements 

were about to be phased . . . merged into a phase of  



60  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

development which Allen Blakeney called beyond universality. 

This was the phase where the nagging, specific, difficult 

programs not susceptible to universal approaches would be 

targeted — problems of wage disparity, gender discrimination, 

educational inequality, and so on. 

 

As Blakeney said, in Saskatchewan we knew how to deal with 

problems of poverty. It was time for us to learn how to deal 

with the problems of prosperity. We were poised to reach the 

top of the hill. That was in 1982. History will show that the rock 

broke the sound barrier as it crashed to the bottom. So here we 

are again, Mr. Speaker — not at the top, maybe not even very 

close. But through the heroic efforts of the people of 

Saskatchewan and their government, we’re moving upwards 

again. 

 

(1945) 

 

And here I think is where I would like to close. I know, as did 

Sisyphus, that the rock may never get to the top. No human 

endeavour — individual or collective, public or private — is 

ever completely perfect. It is entirely possible, maybe even 

likely, that what we’ve accomplished together will not prevail 

for ever. 

 

But this is what is important: we tried. We are trying. We are 

pushing that rock towards the top with every ounce of social 

democratic strength that we can muster. Along the way, we’ve 

done a lot of good. We’ve repaired a lot of damage, and we’ve 

made a difference. Of that I am sure. 

 

I think my colleagues will agree with me when I say that the 

portion of grace that we may achieve in our efforts comes from 

the trying. The claim that we might have to any sort of 

historical permanence comes not from the finality of our work 

but from its diligence and its sincerity. The great French writer, 

Albert Camus, said that we can imagine Sisyphus eventually 

smiling at his task, realizing that it would never be finished, 

convinced that its value lay in the attempt. 

 

We are working, Mr. Speaker, to bring about a better society 

than the one we inherited — a society of fairness, opportunity, 

and equality in the workplace, in the home, in the school. 

Because I am convinced of the validity of our work, I will 

gladly second the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to rise before the Assembly and speak to the 

motion of address in reply to the throne speech. 

 

But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also mention a few 

preliminaries. This is the first opportunity that I’ve had to 

welcome some new faces to the legislature, and I’d like to, on 

behalf of the Liberal caucus, extend a welcome to the new 

pages that will be helping throughout this session. Without 

them, the work would not go on in the legislature, and I know 

they attempt to make it so much easier for us. To Michael 

Dowie, Claire LaBelle, Guy Turton, Daniel Abramson, and 

Lyle Cowles, thank you very much and we look forward to a 

very good session. 

 

With the start of the second session of this twenty-third 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, it also reminds me — and I’m sure all 

MLAs that live a significant distance from Regina — that this is 

also a very special time for our family members. The fact that 

most of us leave our homes on Sundays and travel into Regina 

and do not return until Friday places additional responsibilities 

on spouses, on children. 

 

And on my own personal behalf, I would like to thank my wife 

Gail and my son Bryce and my daughter Lindsay for taking on 

those extra responsibilities and for ensuring that the things get 

done when I’m away. And I’m sure that the other members 

extend those sincere appreciations to their family members as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to extend a very 

hearty welcome — and I would say a very healthy welcome — 

to one of the members opposite. I know that many of us face 

very trying times at various times throughout our lives, and 

when I had a discussion with the Minister of Highways not too 

long ago I realized the kind of situation that he was going 

through, having incurred something very similar in my own 

time. I told him that, for the moment, I’m living proof that 

indeed life only gets better. And I want to extend to the member 

of Carrot River Valley a very sincere welcome. And I know last 

Friday’s debate tells me that he’s ready to roll for this particular 

session. So I extend that to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I also — like the member for 

Saskatoon north east, I believe — want to thank you personally 

. . . Southeast, I’m sorry, Saskatoon Southeast. I would also like 

to extend to you my appreciation for the tour that you took 

throughout the schools in Saskatchewan and especially those 

schools in Canora-Pelly constituency, one at Canora and the 

one at Foam Lake. 

 

I know in talking with the students in terms of the kind of 

program that you put before those students, that indeed that is a 

great way to bring to the young people of this province a greater 

respect for politicians and indeed a greater respect for this 

institution and the work we do. And I want to thank you very 

much for being there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, as this speech signifies the 

beginning of a new legislative session, it also signifies a new 

beginning for the official Liberal opposition. We now have a 

year of experience under our belts as the official opposition and 

much has happened since we last addressed the House. A new 

leader, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, has brought a fresh focus to our 

efforts, and I’m sure it won’t be long before he joins us here on 

the floor in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I would also like to welcome a very special member to the  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

Chamber, the MLA for North Battleford, who has become the 

newest member of our official opposition team. During the next 

several years all members of the House will learn what I have 

learned over the past few months: that this gentleman is 

extremely capable and competent in his new capacity. He will 

make a very strong addition to public debate, fighting for the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we are very pleased and excited 

to have him aboard. Best wishes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I understand that several of the members 

opposite have been telling the member from North Battleford 

not to get too comfortable in his seat here at the legislature. For 

once they’re right, Mr. Speaker. He shouldn’t get too 

comfortable because, after the next election, we’ll be all moving 

across to those seats. Then we’ll see who will be looking for a 

new chair outside the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, when the people of this once 

NDP stronghold elected a Liberal to the legislature, we know 

they were sending a message to the government: no more cuts 

to the hearts of our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In electing a Liberal, North Battleford 

citizens were electing a representative who would stand up and 

defend them, not another back-bench New Democrat who has 

forgotten how to speak up, not another back-bench New 

Democrat who pats the Premier on the back while he closes 

local hospitals. There are enough of those in the legislature 

already. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  During the nine months, the nine long months 

that this government hid from the public making decisions 

without open debate in the legislature, we in the Liberal 

opposition kept very busy listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan. What we have discovered is that the sentiments 

of voters in North Battleford towards this NDP government are 

echoed throughout the province. 

 

Saskatchewan people are being ignored. They are sick of this 

government’s arrogance. They are sick of tightening their belts 

while the Premier loosens his. And they are sick of having big 

government try to control every aspect of their lives. This is the 

message they have asked us to deliver, Mr. Speaker, and we 

will not let them down. We are here to make a difference and, 

believe me, we will make a difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  It would be so easy to sit in this Assembly 

and be lulled into complacency by the NDP’s throne speech. 

According to this government, our province is in a suspended 

state of bliss. They would have us believe that we should be 

sleeping easy, our nights filled with dreams. Well let me tell  

you, there are sleepless nights for thousands of families and 

their dreams are more like nightmares. 

 

I’m referring to the people who are up all night worrying 

because they can’t find work and don’t know how they will 

feed their children. They aren’t buying the government’s 

dreams. The people who watch their life savings slip away 

thanks to the burden of government over-taxation in their 

communities, they aren’t buying the government’s dreams 

either. And the people who are driving hundreds of miles to get 

their sick child medical care because hospitals have closed and 

doctors have left, they certainly aren’t buying the government’s 

dreams. 

 

How disheartening this throne speech must be to the people of 

Saskatchewan. How many times have we heard those same old 

buzz-words like strong foundation and fiscal responsibility, 

only to be disappointed in the end result? How many times have 

we heard from this government that Saskatchewan has turned 

the corner, only to study the figures and realize that we haven’t 

even left the starting blocks? How many times have we given 

the government’s . . . have we been given the government’s 

promise only to find out that their word isn’t worth a dime? 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as this year’s throne speech indicated that the 

government’s first priority is jobs, last year’s throne speech 

indicated the very same priority. Yet the government’s 

performance in this area is certainly sluggish, placing us well 

behind the status of our neighbours. Although the latest 

StatsCan figures show that a late surge resulted in an increase of 

7,000 jobs in Saskatchewan this past year, the same report also 

indicated that Alberta witnessed job growth of 31,000 over the 

previous 12 months. And the recent Manitoba throne speech 

announced the creation of over 23,000 new jobs during the 

same period. 

 

Our government’s dismal record in this area means we are well 

off the Economic Development minister’s promised mark of 

30,000 new jobs by the year 2000. Imagine how upsetting this 

must be to our young people who are faced with a jobless future 

when they graduate from high school or post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the StatsCanada report of last Friday confirms that 

the unemployment rate for the age group 15 to 24 in 1996, the 

month of February, that percentage was 11.6, and in February 

of 1997 that percentage has risen to 13.3. 

 

The Saskatchewan private business sector would dearly love to 

lead the way in job creation but they cannot do so as long as 

this government continues to keep its foot on the economy’s 

brake. 

 

A recent study by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business shows that our province’s entrepreneurs cite high 

taxes and oppressive government regulations as two of the main 

factors hindering their performance. This government has 

promised tax cuts in the past but has yet to deliver. We must not 

be close enough to an election yet. 



62  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Moira Wright of the Saskatchewan taxpayers association points 

out, and I quote: 

 

The contempt for taxpayer continues. As long as we have 

such arrogance from our leaders, as long as politicians 

continue to believe that they have a bigger and better claim 

to spend your hard-earned tax dollars than you do, the 

spirit of enterprise will not thrive here as it could. 

 

My colleagues and I certainly echo these sentiments. Small 

businesses and consumers are denied tax breaks by the NDP at 

the very same time millions of dollars are being given out to 

firms like Intercontinental Packers, Sears, and the Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce — hardly the nation’s business 

basket cases. Where are this government’s priorities, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

(2000) 

 

Last year I brought to the attention of the House a constituent 

named Leonard Sebulsky, the owner of the family general store 

which has been an institution in the town of Sheho since 1906. 

Leonard’s greatest concern was the oppressive business 

regulations imposed by our provincial government which were 

driving him out of business. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government committed itself to 

decreasing red tape by 25 per cent over the next 10 years, which 

really isn’t much of a commitment at all if you think about it. In 

fact it’s more so like a store having a half-price sale after it’s 

doubled the prices. 

 

But how did the government then proceed to carry out this 

promise? In September of 1996, a 250-page document was 

released regarding occupational health and safety which 

increased the number of OHS (occupational health and safety) 

regulations from 373 to 494. What a great start. Does the NDP 

keep its word on any promise? 

 

Over the past few months, Leonard Sebulsky’s complaints 

regarding government over-regulation have been repeated to me 

by many other Canora-Pelly entrepreneurs whose businesses are 

being suffocated by government red tape — Ernie Babinchuk of 

Hyas Garage, Terry Houston of the Northstar Esso in Canora, 

Florian Slogocki of Buchanan’s Central Garage — they each 

have a problem stemming from the oppressive rules of the 

Department of the Environment and Resource Management. 

Don Yasinski of Crispy’s Chicken and Ray Lussier of 

Chugger’s Bar in Canora are both caught in the red tape of the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. Ralph Ager of 

Preeceville Implements and John Oystryk of Canora’s Active 

Accounting have complaints regarding the stifling regulations 

of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

These business owners and many others across Saskatchewan 

want me to deliver a message to the provincial government: get 

your noses out of their small businesses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  They will be especially disappointed that the  

topic of government over-regulation received no attention in the 

throne speech. 

 

Yet despite the facts, Mr. Speaker, the government speaks very 

glowingly in the throne speech about its commitment to 

economic growth and job creation. I’d like to remind the 

Premier of the words he spoke in 1988 when he was the leader 

of the opposition. He said: 

 

We have more unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan 

today than we’ve had in recent years. We’ve had young 

people who are now entering their last weeks and days of 

school, looking for graduation, and now looking for jobs, 

anxiously looking for jobs. And this process for young people 

has not just begun. It’s been going on for weeks, and no jobs 

to be found. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, after six years of NDP government, this 

situation hasn’t improved one bit. The only difference now is 

that futile job searches have been lasting for several years, not 

several weeks. Mr. Speaker, the Premier knew there was a 

problem then, and I can only assume he knows there is a 

problem now. My question is, why isn’t he doing anything 

about it? Where are this government’s priorities? Where is the 

leadership? 

 

The government is so busy stirring up these magical dreams of 

prosperity, it has failed to address the very real, long-term 

problems that the lack of jobs has created. It prevents healthy, 

capable people who want to work from supporting their 

families. In some cases they are forced to go on welfare, and 

sadly the child poverty rate increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased that the throne speech focused on 

the reduction of child poverty. I can only hope that this is not 

another of the government’s empty promises. Providing this is a 

serious commitment, we in the official opposition will be eager 

to work alongside the governments of Canada and 

Saskatchewan to end this tragic social problem. Indeed this 

devastating increase in poverty affects every community in our 

province. Unfortunately it hits our aboriginal sector even 

harder. 

 

Let me read a section from the Regina Leader-Post a few weeks 

ago. Doug Cuthand speaks: 

 

Welfare has the ability to sap a person’s strength, lower 

expectations, and create a climate of hopelessness. Welfare 

has become a serious problem in first nations communities 

and it’s a serious challenge for leadership. 

 

Has this leadership come from the government? Simple answer 

is no, not in this throne speech. 

 

On Thursday we heard talk of the wonderful things this 

government has done for the agricultural economy and for rural 

Saskatchewan. Talk about living in a dreamland, Mr. Speaker. 

You’d have to be an NDP die-hard to claim that this 

government has done anything to improve our rural way of life. 

 

Publicly the NDP speak glowingly of good deeds they have  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

done for small town Saskatchewan. Behind closed doors 

however, they sing a different tune. Consider the words of Dr. 

Lewis Draper, a former NDP, who saw the inner workings of 

this government. In a letter to the editor of the Regina 

Leader-Post several months ago, he warned, “Rural 

Saskatchewan is in a double bind. The NDP doesn’t need our 

votes, so they will continue to ignore us.” 

 

Remember also the leaked internal memo from the Minister of 

Economic Development. It stated: “There was and still is no 

intention to provide a grand strategy for rural Saskatchewan.” 

Remember that? Mr. Speaker, if this is the case behind closed 

doors, why does this government continue to pretend 

otherwise? They do not intend to provide employment 

opportunities for our rural residents and they have certainly not 

done so for urban citizens either. 

 

Of course the members opposite will shrug their shoulders and 

say, oh well, jobs are a federal issue, because they are so fond 

of playing the blame game. But I’d like to remind them that it 

wasn’t the federal government that made the promise of 30,000 

new jobs by the year 2000; it was the provincial Minister of 

Economic Development. The New Democrats made the 

promise and now they better be willing to deliver. 

 

Jobs mean strength, security, and self-sufficiency. The 

provincial government must take care of Saskatchewan people, 

and that means providing them with access to employment 

opportunities. 

 

Already, Mr. Speaker, the statistics have shown that our 

government’s dismal job-creation record is beginning to have 

long-term, negative effects on our province. Saskatchewan has 

lost an entire generation of its youth to other provinces where 

jobs are available. We are educating our children, then forcing 

them to find employment elsewhere — what a shame. 

 

The only thing which seems to be slowing the steady stream of 

young people leaving the province are the terrible highways, 

which are too treacherous to travel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  According to the Canadian Automobile 

Association, in 1988 the province spent 94 per cent of the 

revenue it collected from fuel taxes and motor vehicle 

registrations on highway maintenance and repair, the intended 

purpose for the gas tax in the first place. As of the last 

provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, that figure had dropped to 

approximately 35 per cent, a loss of nearly 60 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the government in its throne 

speech promising renewed emphasis on provincial highways, I 

must say they certainly have a long way to go to catch up to the 

cuts they have already made. Late last month, the official 

opposition established its pothole patrol hot line. Since its 

inception, the phone has been ringing off the hook. Concerned 

citizens from every corner of the province are calling in with 

horror stories of our once proud highway system. I have 

personally received calls about the deplorable conditions of 

Highway No. 310 near Foam Lake and Highway No. 8 north of 

Norquay, which has been likened to a cattle trail with massive 

amounts of potholes. 

 

Consider some of the other comments we have heard on the hot 

line: “Welcome to Saskatchewan where everything is flat 

except the highways.” Or, “In a five mile stretch I counted 210 

potholes.” Or, “I would like a politician to go for a ride with me 

and try to carry on a conversation on the road.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our provincial highways have become a national 

joke. The throne speech mentions that the government plans to 

promote tourism in Saskatchewan. Why bother when so much 

of our road system is virtually impassable in many areas? 

Unsafe highway conditions may seem trivial to the government, 

but they are creating havoc in rural communities. It’s time the 

New Democrats took our deplorable highway conditions 

seriously, and we will certainly be reminding them of that 

responsibility throughout the session. 

 

Some of the most vocal critics of Saskatchewan’s highway 

system are school bus drivers worried about safely transporting 

our children between home and school. As a parent these 

complaints certainly concern me. 

 

However as the official opposition critic for Education, I have 

received even more disturbing phone calls and letters regarding 

the schooling of Saskatchewan children in the face of provincial 

funding cuts and rising expenses. I’m well aware of the 

sacrifices which have been made by students, parents, teachers, 

staff members and school boards. The frills are gone, Mr. 

Speaker, and as cuts continue, we have seen major damage to 

our education system. 

 

I want to share with the Legislative Assembly a few excerpts 

from various letters I have received detailing what is happening 

to our education system under this NDP government. Keep in 

mind these are statements that have been made by education 

professionals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The first commentary is from Dianne Gordon, 

secretary-treasurer of the Kindersley School Division. She 

writes: 

 

As capital expenditures continue to be much less than is 

required to maintain the educational facilities throughout 

the province, students and staff are forced to work in 

environments which are not conducive to learning and are 

in direct conflict with the occupational health and safety 

standards, as well as non-compliance with fire codes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are our children we are sending to these 

facilities, not cattle. If these types of horror stories do not 

convince the government that something is wrong with their 

priorities, then Heaven help us. 

 

Ms. Gordon also states: 

 

There is something drastically wrong with the way 

education is funded in this province. That we are forced to 

continually accept lower standards after striving for so 

many years to build up our education system goes against  



64  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

our strong desire to be the best that we can be. How do we 

raise our children to become our future and fulfil the hopes 

and dreams of tomorrow if we can no longer offer them the 

opportunity to achieve these goals? 

 

(2015) 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we have seen the province’s share of 

funding for K to 12 education drop from 60 per cent of total 

costs down to its current rate of 40 per cent, with local 

taxpayers forced to back-fill the remainder. That has prompted 

this angry response from Ralph Eliasson, the director for 

education in the Long Lake School Division, and I quote: 

 

Our board firmly believes that the nearly 60 per cent local 

support for education does not reflect the commitment that 

the Government of Saskatchewan needs to have to the 

young people of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this lack of commitment 

to education by our government has resulted in a great deal of 

turmoil. Schools are being closed, teachers fired, courses 

discontinued — all corners that are being cut at the expense of 

our future and our children’s future. In the meantime, leadership 

from the provincial government through this difficult period has 

been sorely lacking, non-existent. 

 

I received a letter from Mr. Bill Fraser, the chairperson of the 

board of education for the Wilkie School Division, discussing 

his board’s frustrations in trying to deal with a shrinking budget 

and an insensitive Department of Education. I quote: 

 

We have tried to implement an alternate school year, 

initially suggested by the Minister of Education, only to 

have the same minister refuse to follow her own protocol 

for our proposal. It’s extremely difficult to work in an 

environment which blocks division initiatives while failing 

to provide provincial leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The Turtleford School Division has also 

experienced the lack of leadership demonstrated by the 

provincial government. Its board chairperson, Judy Helperl, 

writes: 

 

To indicate that there will be changes . . . particularly in 

rural school divisions, without any more leadership than 

has been provided . . . is causing a good deal of stress and I 

might add distress in rural Saskatchewan. Historically, this 

has not been ‘the Saskatchewan Way’. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech promises that the government 

will refocus on education, but I have seen many times how 

adept the Minister of Education is at juggling figures. In fact 

she and I have locked horns on these issues of funding cuts and 

lacking leadership numerous times. You can be assured that 

these confrontations will continue until this government takes 

real action to make the K to 12 and post-secondary education of  

our children a priority once again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Lacking leadership is a prominent trademark 

of our NDP regime, but nowhere has it been more evident than 

in the provincial government’s treatment of Saskatchewan 

municipalities. Last session the New Democrats tried to take a 

big stick to local governments and force them to amalgamate, 

but municipalities stood tall and refused to be steamrolled and 

we in the official opposition were very happy to have helped 

them in their efforts to halt the absurd district services Act. And 

we are sure that this Act remained on the order paper and was 

not passed. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is 

masterful at playing the blame game. True to form, the Premier 

offers stinging criticism of Ottawa for lowering transfer 

payments to the provinces, despite the fact that the federal 

government is still working to eliminate a $19 billion deficit. 

Yet he has no problem in turn slashing provincial funding to 

municipalities by $38 million — nearly a 50 per cent cut. But 

when asked why he is so severely slashing grants to 

municipalities rather than making sacrifices within his own 

government, the Premier quickly changes the focus of his attack 

and blames someone else. At a recent NDP convention, he 

remarked upon his funding cuts to municipalities by saying that 

if local governments couldn’t find savings within their own 

administrations, that they had to jack up property tax rates. 

Then: “I guess they have to make those decisions individually.” 

 

Shame on the Premier, Mr. Speaker. When the people of 

Saskatchewan need leadership, all he’s interested in doing is 

passing the buck. 

 

I have a great deal of contact with municipal leaders in my 

constituency on this matter. Mayor Gary Sawatzky of 

Preeceville states in one letter: 

 

The revenue sharing cut for 1997 will trigger our local 

taxes to increase, thereby making it impossible to maintain 

revenue neutral budgets during the legislated property 

assessment re-valuations. The local taxpayers will have 

enough problems dealing with managing the local tax 

shifts under the reassessment without any added provincial 

cut-backs. 

 

Mayor Sawatzky’s disappointment is echoed in letters from 

Mayor Steve Kitzan of Buchanan, Mayor Ray King of Foam 

Lake, and Lorraine Kaminski, the administrator for the village 

of Rama. These civic leaders have each expressed concern of 

the government’s handling, or should I say mishandling, of 

property tax reassessment. They realize that the old system was 

outdated, but they looked to the province for leadership, and 

instead found a leadership vacuum at the top and were pushed 

away to deal with the public outcry themselves. Patrick 

Dergousoff, the administrator for the town of Canora, offers the 

views of his council on the NDP’s handling of reassessment, 

and I quote: 

 

Council is of the opinion that the province was lacking in  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

the leadership it provided with this very contentious issue. 

Once started, progress was slow and the direction vague. 

Too much had to be done in a very short time at the end of 

the process. It takes time for councils and then the general 

public to orientate themselves to new concepts and ways of 

doing things. Many are still struggling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will receive this very same response from 

municipalities around the province. The NDP has sought to play 

the old game of divide and conquer. They deflect blame to 

municipal governments when tax bills increase, and pit rural 

taxpayers against their urban counterparts when controversy 

arises over the education tax. 

 

So very little was mentioned in this throne speech regarding our 

municipalities and the sacrifices they have made under this 

government. This is very disheartening considering the 

important role they have traditionally played in Saskatchewan 

life. 

 

This was billed as the NDP’s redemption throne speech, kicking 

off a session in which they finally loosen the purse-strings and 

put money back in Saskatchewan. Judging from what was said 

on Thursday, I sincerely worry for the fate of the province’s 

municipalities. It appears as if they will continue to be viewed 

by this government as little more than potential scapegoats. 

 

The game of divide and conquer was also played by the NDP 

during its gutting of our health care system. Throughout that 

process the New Democrats have been very cunning. They 

provided continually shrinking budgets for front-line service 

provision, then watched from a distance as neighbouring 

communities fight amongst themselves to save their hospital 

beds or their nursing homes rather than banding together and 

focusing on the real culprits, the provincial government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The New Democrats have even included a 

safety feature in its health care destruction strategy, establishing 

puppet district health boards to act as its fall guys. The health 

boards have provided a cushion, allowing the provincial 

government to dictate cuts without being held directly 

responsible for those affected. That’s quite a scheme, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously. 

 

Last session we provided documented cases of how deep health 

care cuts are devastating the people of Saskatchewan. These 

were examples from real people with real fears. But in typical 

NDP fashion, the only response from the Minister of Health 

was, blame the federal government or blame your local health 

board. In fact, blame anyone else but us. How out of touch with 

reality this government has become. 

 

The members opposite claim through the throne speech that 

they have done such a fabulous job of health reform; that the 

system is now strong on its new foundations. Mr. Speaker, I 

wouldn’t attempt to build a granary on the foundations the NDP 

have provided, let alone the health care system of an entire 

province. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, if we had believed the 

government members over the past several months, we would 

think that their health care reform was a huge success. If you 

were to ask the average citizen, however, you would hear a very 

different opinion. 

 

People don’t need to read billboards posted by the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses to know that there is a health 

crisis. They see it every day in their communities. 

Saskatchewan people are scared of what has happened to their 

health care system. They are scared that there won’t be a bed 

for them when they need it. They are scared that their rural 

doctors are leaving the province in disgust. They are scared that 

their nurses are being overworked. In short, they are scared to 

get sick or grow old because they don’t trust this government to 

maintain adequate health care services for them. 

 

And who can blame provincial residents for their scepticism? I 

have been contacted by people like Betty Kluk of Norquay, 

whose elderly mother, Dora Harasem, is confined to a 

wheelchair which she can no longer move because she is too 

weak. Mrs. Harasem has been found numerous times lying on 

the floor, just trying to somehow get over to the bathroom. Yet 

despite her serious, deteriorating condition and months of 

anguish, she had been unable to secure a home care bed within 

the Assiniboine Valley District until this past January. 

 

I have also heard from people like Helen Harkness of Foam 

Lake, whose severely disabled son will no longer be allowed to 

receive respite care in the Foam Lake health care centre because 

there is no money available to provide someone to look after 

him. 

 

And I have heard from several constituents, like Verner 

Sikorski of Sturgis, who has had to put his life and his teaching 

career on hold due to the constant pain he feels. In the 

meantime, the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) he requires 

before back surgery keeps getting pushed back further and 

further, as there are too many patients in the system and not 

enough capability to handle them. 

 

These Saskatchewan citizens want to know how this 

government has let things get so bad so fast. Mr. Speaker, we 

will certainly be asking the members opposite that very 

question throughout the session. 

 

I would like to repeat for the members of the House the words 

of the Premier when he was in opposition in l988. At that time 

he stated: 

 

I want to say about medicare, after six years of 

administration by this PC government, we have a sorry 

record in health: 11,000 people waiting to get into a 

hospital bed; we’ve got a pharmacare program which has 

been gutted; we’ve got a children’s dental program which 

has been dismantled and the substitute program is nowhere 

to be seen; we have doctors in revolution almost against 

this government’s approach; we have nurses who are 

understaffed and overworked and they’re tired and they’re 



66  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

 harassed and nobody listens to them; nobody over there 

listens to them. They’re pleading for some additional 

assistance. We have a mess on our hands in the health care 

system. 

 

Unfortunately those words ring as true today as they did in 

l988, except the waiting-lists have grown longer, and the 

doctors and nurses are even more overworked. Health care is 

still a mess, and this Premier has only made it worse. 

 

(2030) 

 

In the throne speech we hear that a strong economy and fiscal 

stability mean stable and adequate public funding for health 

care. I would certainly hope this to be the case, but I’m not 

holding my breath. If the government expects to throw a token 

amount of money at the health care system in an attempt to 

appease Saskatchewan citizens, then they will be in for a rude 

awakening. 

 

I assure you, this session we will continue to bring these 

examples forward in the House day after day until the 

government finally takes positive, long-term action to reverse 

the damage it has done to Saskatchewan health care, and people 

can once again feel secure with health care in their 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the types of things we have been hearing 

from Saskatchewan citizens during our consultations. While the 

government has been hiding from the public, huddled up in its 

closed-door meetings, provincial taxpayers want us to deliver 

these messages. They are tired of the broken promises which 

seem to be a daily problem with this government —GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program), VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenue sharing, school board funding, job creation. 

The list goes on and on. 

 

You are not only providing false hope for the people of 

Saskatchewan, you are betraying their trust in their elected 

representatives. This will have detrimental effect for decades to 

come, as confidence lost is doubly hard to regain. They are tired 

of the lack of leadership. School board, civic, and health care 

officials are furious with being made into scapegoats. You were 

put in office to lead the people of Saskatchewan, not to mislead 

the people of Saskatchewan. When you put forth government 

policy which affects the province, stand by it. Don’t leave 

someone else twisting in the wind taking blame for your 

actions. 

 

Saskatchewan citizens are tired of the government’s divide and 

conquer mentality, where cooperation and consultation are 

needed instead. For once during your term in office, look past 

what is politically expedient and do what is right for the 

long-term benefit of Saskatchewan. 

 

Cooperative community spirit is what built this province — 

rural and urban; neighbour and neighbour. These relationships 

are absolutely essential in Saskatchewan. Do not continue to 

drive a wedge between these provincial partners for your own 

gain. Provincial residents are tired of this government being out 

of touch with Saskatchewan people. A constituent remarked on  

one of the Deputy Premier’s many trade junkets, stating: “He’s 

more concerned about the weather climate in Mexico than the 

business climate in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  You aren’t responding to the wants and needs 

of Saskatchewan citizens because you either don’t listen or you 

don’t care. Either way the problem has become academic. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are tired of this administration’s 

big government arrogance and hypocrisy. I still find it hard to 

believe that the Premier chastises municipalities for wasting 

money on administration overlap while he maintains two 

portfolios of Education and two portfolios for gambling. And 

nobody wants to see any more of the Premier’s buddies, college 

room-mates or former law partners play musical chairs for 

patronage appointments or watch as hefty raises are continually 

given to Jack Messer and Carole Bryant after SaskPower rates 

have been hiked and services cut to improve the corporation’s 

bottom line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  And Saskatchewan citizens are tired of this 

government taking credit for improving the province’s finances 

when it’s their pockets that have been picked and that they are 

now the ones struggling. 

 

The NDP has taken great pleasure in attacking the previous 

government for its financial record, and I agree. The 

Progressive Conservative record is pathetic, but let’s look at the 

figures a little more closely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The 1986-87 Public Accounts show that the provincial 

government incurred expenditures of roughly $4 billion. 

Revenue was much lower at $2.8 billion — 1.35 billion of 

which was collected in taxes. Compare these numbers with the 

1995-96 Public Accounts, which show expenses of $5.1 billion 

and revenues slightly higher. However the portion of revenues 

comprised of taxes sky-rocketed to $2.85 billion, more than the 

entire provincial revenues collected nine years previous. 

 

This is hard-earned money which used to be in the pocket of 

Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker, money which they used to 

spend in local businesses and invest in Saskatchewan 

enterprises, money which now finds it way into the hands of the 

Premier to be redistributed as he sees fit. 

 

The New Democrats have not cut down on government 

expenditures one dime. In fact they are spending more now than 

ever before. The only difference between this government and 

the last is that the Devine Conservatives chose to run deficits to 

spend on . . . to finance their wild spending spree while the New 

Democrats would rather tax Saskatchewan citizens to death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatchewan are plain and 

ordinary people who don’t demand much from their elected 

leaders. All they ask for is honest, responsive, trustworthy 

government which will provide them with fair taxation, the  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

opportunity to prosper, and adequate basic services like health 

care and education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been a total failure in each of 

these categories and this throne speech offers little to suggest 

they are trying to improve. The people of Saskatchewan have 

lost their confidence in this provincial government and I am 

committed to speaking on their behalf. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion before us today as 

it currently stands. Therefore, I move, seconded by the Deputy 

Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member from Melville, that 

the following words be added to the motion: 

 

but calls upon the government to make a change from its 

present course and embark upon a better policy; a policy 

which will renew the Saskatchewan people’s hopes and 

optimism for the future by showing leadership and 

commitment; a commitment to build this great province 

through vision, through meaningful consultation, and 

through long-range planning; planning that meets the 

needs, priorities and aspirations of the people of this great 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

to enter into this debate tonight, particularly given the very 

detailed and insightful amendment that the opposition leader 

has moved. I was dozing off there a little bit as I was listening 

to him tonight but woke up to find out it wasn’t actually a 

nightmare, it was simply a continuation of his speech that I was 

catching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start tonight by welcoming the member 

for North Battleford to this Assembly. It’s a pleasure to have a 

new person join us here in the Chamber. I think that that always 

changes the dynamic a little bit. And I hope that he finds this to 

be as enjoyable and interesting a place as I have found over the 

past 18 months. 

 

If I could offer any advice to the member for North Battleford, I 

would simply harken back to the words of Disraeli, who said 

that if you’re not too clever, it’s often better to be conciliatory. 

And I think that these are probably words that we should all 

bear in mind as we go through these debates, particularly as the 

members often, I think, come forward with what they believe to 

be great vim and vigour and great ideas on how things should 

be. It’s much different when you’re actually tasked with having 

to govern the province. It’s easy to be the Pollyannas that some 

of the people opposite are. And I think we need to remember 

that. 

 

There is something to be said for being conciliatory. I think 

there is something to be said for remembering to being humble 

and modest, and I hope that the members opposite don’t lose 

that in the arrogance and the interest that they have in this 

debate. 

Mr. Speaker, I, in welcoming the member for North Battleford, 

am reminded of another Liberal member who joined this House 

in the last session, that being Anita Bergman. I hope that this 

member for North Battleford’s time is as enjoyable and brief as 

hers was. As such, I welcome the interim member for North 

Battleford and look forward to obviously debating him. 

 

The other people I want to congratulate as we start this second 

sitting of this session are in fact the members opposite who 

have recently sought the Liberal leadership. I want to say this 

quite sincerely: that I do think it is quite an important part of 

our democracy to ensure that internally within our parties there 

is in fact change and renewal, new ideas, and some new 

approaches brought forward. 

 

The members opposite, I think, and I say this again in all 

sincerity, I think really did — those members who ran — did 

bring forward some very interesting ideas and did help change 

the debate in the province. 

 

In that regard, I want to welcome the Liberal opposition leader, 

the member for Canora-Pelly, in his new duties. I notice tonight 

that we’re not joined by the actual Liberal opposition leader. I 

assume that’s because his caucus office lets him go at 5 o’clock. 

I assume there’s no budget for him to be here on overtime, as 

the member for Sask River says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we laugh at that to a certain extent, but I have to 

tell you it concerns me to a certain extent as well. When this 

government came to office in 1991, I remember the words from 

the very first Speech from the Throne that were delivered, and it 

promised in December, 1991 to restore honesty, integrity, and 

competence to government; that honesty and integrity was in 

small things as well as the large. 

 

And I know at the time one of the pieces that was under debate 

and under some scrutiny was in fact the recommendation from 

the Provincial Auditor, who was being quite critical of the 

previous Conservative government for hiring staff to do certain 

jobs and then sending them off to constituency or caucus offices 

to work in a different capacity. 

 

To be quite honest, Mr. Speaker, it worries me some that we see 

this Liberal opposition employing a similar tactic to employ 

their leader. I say that not as a cheap partisan shot, but simply 

because I do think we should have learned something from the 

Tory years; that these sort of, whether you want to call them 

cute or whether you want to call them deceitful activities, this 

playing with the rules, I think, really does in many ways 

demean all of us. And I would really hope that the members 

opposite would find another way to deal with this issue. 

 

I appreciate that the Liberal leader is not in fact a member of 

this Assembly, that he does want to play a role. I’m not so sure 

that we should be bending the rules of this Assembly to allow 

him to be working as a caucus office researcher when clearly 

that’s not what he is doing. 

 

(2045) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



68  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I think that to a certain extent 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  How are they funding their 1 800 lines 

by the way? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  That’s for a whole . . . another speech, 

member for Saskatoon Southeast, how they’re funding their 1 

800 numbers. 

 

But I think we need to take a look . . . Having listened to the 

Leader of the Opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly, 

tonight, I want to go back and talk about some of the things in 

fact that this throne speech that was presented does do to 

promote hope and optimism in this province in a very realistic 

sense. And I want to read to you a section of it that I was quite 

impressed by. During the speech the Lieutenant Governor said: 

 

We are showing that a people who hold true to the values 

of co-operation, community, mutual aid and responsibility: 

 

can return from the brink of bankruptcy; 

 

can preserve and renew the foundations of civil society, 

like Medicare and education; and 

 

can build a growing, competitive high-employment 

economy, 

 

without regressive transfers from the poor to the rich, and 

without undermining essential supports for our families. 

 

I think in many ways that sums up very clearly what this 

government has attempted to do not only since members like 

myself joined in 1995, but it really attempted to do since 1991. 

 

In that regard, when we talk about a couple of the pieces that 

have been discussed to a certain extent tonight — and in 

particular, I want to talk about how there are in fact different 

models and different opportunities and different choices 

governments can make — and I think there is a good, a very 

good, set of case studies. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition was talking about a case study 

that they had done. Let me talk about the case study the 

Canadian people have done. They’ve elected a New Democratic 

government to govern Saskatchewan. The people of Canada 

have elected a Liberal government to govern the country. Faced 

with many of the same problems, faced with deficits, faced with 

difficult debt problems, faced with having to deal with the same 

interests from the same set of voters, well, these governments 

have dealt with these issues very differently. 

 

And I think that that’s an interesting point to start from tonight 

in terms of how these two different governments have dealt 

with these competing interests, and I think have dealt with them 

very differently. We as a government and as a party, have opted 

on a course -- I think a fairly conciliatory approach -- and one 

which we believe is balanced. Our overriding approach has 

been to ensure that competing interests are balanced; to ensure 

that we look after the various sectors of our society, particularly  

the poor, particularly children, particularly those who have been 

left out of the economy in the past. That’s been our choice. 

Now we look at how we’ve done that. 

 

Let me talk for a second about the question of jobs. What we’ve 

strived to do over the past five years and what this throne 

speech outlines that we are interested in doing in this session is 

that we want to bring forward a comprehensive, 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan that will help Saskatchewan people 

get ready to enter the labour force in a meaningful way, to 

connect, to have jobs, to create jobs and to be able to participate 

fully in our economy. 

 

We have done that, I think fairly successfully, through 

programs like Youth Futures and JobStart. I think we’ve done 

that rather successfully through our training strategies in SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). I 

look at how, on the other hand, Ottawa has dealt with this same 

problem. While we’ve attempted to put more money into our 

education system, while we’ve attempted to bring people 

together, bring stakeholders together, to bring together our 

communities, Ottawa’s divided them. They’ve divided 

provinces — pitted them against each other. They’ve pitted 

various stakeholder groups against each other. They’ve pitted 

communities against each other. I think that’s wrong. 

 

We listened to the Leader of the Opposition tonight talk about 

the situation of youth seeking jobs. But he forgot to mention 

some of the very important things that the federal government 

has done. This is a set of issues that are very important for me. 

These are people that obviously I still feel a fair affinity with. 

Many of my friends are still in universities. Many of the people 

I know are out there looking for jobs still. 

 

And I think one of the points that the Liberals fail to mention is 

the fact that the federal Liberal government in Ottawa is not 

interested in cooperating with Saskatchewan. It is not interested 

in working with governments that are not Liberals. It is not 

interested in protecting people that don’t live in Liberal ridings. 

 

And I think we need to make that very clear. The proof is this. 

This year because of actions taken by Ottawa on post-secondary 

education, 4,000 — 4,000 — Saskatchewan people will be 

denied adult basic education. That is solely a responsibility of 

the federal Liberals. Four thousand people will be denied basic 

adult upgrading that will allow them to participate in the labour 

force in a way that the rest of us take for granted. These aren’t 

simply seats; these aren’t simply positions; these are people. 

And yet, have we heard a word from the Liberals? Not a word. 

We didn’t hear a word last session about it; we haven’t heard 

anything yet. 

 

Beyond that, we have a Liberal government that was not 

satisfied to simply cut 4,000 people out of adult basic 

education. They cut 1,200 apprenticeship positions. The Liberal 

leader stands up tonight and says that he’s interested in seeing 

that young people are able to participate in the job market. He 

says that too many of them are going to Alberta. Well I’m 

sorry, that’s not simply the case, and the Liberals are incredible 

in the true sense of being incredible — lacking credibility on 

this issue — when they come forward and they can cut 4,000  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

people out of adult basic education, cut 1,200 people out of 

apprenticeship programs, and then they turn around and say it’s 

a provincial problem. I don’t think so. 

 

What happened to the situation that we used to cooperate as a 

nation? What happened to the approach where we used to look 

at people not based on federal voters and provincial voters, we 

looked at them as simply being Canadians and Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fear that what we are going to see this session 

from the Liberal opposition, despite the new leader, despite the 

fact they say they’ve got a new beginning, is still the same old 

rhetoric. And it is a flip-flop. Because we’re going to see them 

saying on the one hand we should be doing more, and like their 

motion that I’m speaking to tonight, it’ll be completely devoid 

of detail. It won’t have any meaningful suggestions. It will 

simply be nice pie-in-the-sky rhetoric. 

 

And I think we have seen that even in question period. As I 

listened to the interim member from North Battleford stand and 

ask his questions, I don’t hear any concrete suggestions for 

change. I didn’t hear any in the so-called emergency debate that 

the member tried to lead on Friday. I haven’t heard any from 

the member for Melfort. I haven’t heard any from the member 

for Wood River. I certainly haven’t heard anything from the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

There’s nothing being offered except for saying, we’d do it 

better. But when we look at it, when we look at what the Liberal 

record — is where the Liberals have governed — we see that 

you don’t do it better, you do it worse. You talk left wing and 

yet you exclude people who are not in that establishment class, 

that are not in that working class. You cut them out. 

 

How else do you explain the fact that you’ve stayed silent on 

the 4,000 people who were denied adult basic education in this 

province, in Saskatchewan. How do you explain that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s move off of that education piece, because 

when we talk about jobs and the economy, they say oh, there’s 

other pieces there. That’s true; there are. We can talk about 

taxes. And let me talk about that for a second. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition stands tonight and says, well the 

province is bringing in more tax money. A previous Liberal 

leader used to say that that was the way we should do it. You 

grow the economy and more people will pay taxes. It couldn’t 

be that the economy is growing; it couldn’t be that the economy 

is any better. 

 

I mean when we take a look at it, and we take a look at the 

number of people working, we know there are many more 

people — more than 10,000 more people — working now than 

there were when we came to office. We know that — what were 

the stats for last month? — 7,000 more people; 7,000 more 

people working than a year ago. 

 

But it can’t be that these people are working, earning an 

income, and paying taxes. No, no, no, that can’t be it. So  

somehow between the time that we lost the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone as the Liberal leader and we now have the 

member for Canora-Pelly as the Liberal leader, somehow this 

has changed. No longer can you simply increase your provincial 

revenues to provide programs by growing the economy. Is there 

some other fiendish, evil plot at work here on our side. 

Obviously, I don’t want to dwell a lot on this tonight because I 

look forward to debating this once we get into the budget 

because I think there’s a lot of contrast and comparison here. 

 

I of course want to mention again the fact that the Liberal 

opposition has refused to join with us in opposing 

harmonization of the GST and PST ( provincial sales tax). I 

want to make the point, as we did last session, that in fact they 

support this harmonization. They support transferring $400 

million worth of taxes by the consumers. 

 

So do you think that’s going to have an impact? Do you think 

that’s going to make a difference on the individual working 

families? I listen to the interim member from North Battleford 

talk about poverty, and I wonder how much better off are those 

people going to be under a Liberal regime that has them pay 15 

per cent on everything or 16 per cent on everything. How does 

that help them, member for North Battleford? I simply don’t 

understand how this makes things any better. 

 

The whole question here I think comes back to one of 

credibility. And this is one of the pieces I think we’re going to 

have an interesting time debating this session, is who is better 

equipped to govern Saskatchewan in a way that the people 

want. And I would say to you, based on the platitudes and the 

rhetoric that I’ve heard even two days into this session now 

from the Liberal opposition, that we know it will be the folks on 

this side who are making the tough choices, who are balancing 

out the various interests and demands, and we are listening. 

 

I want to tell you, Leader of the Opposition, that we are not 

hiding behind the closed doors. The only closed doors I’ve been 

hiding behind for the past six months are those of constituents 

of mine who invited me into their homes to tell me what their 

priorities are. 

 

And let me tell you this — let me tell you this — that we have 

recently . . . as I tabulate through the results of what people 

have written me with, people say to me that one of the most 

important things they want to see happen in this province is 

they want to see the debt reduced. They say that. You tell us we 

spend too much time on the fiscal agenda, but people are 

worried about it. This is something — another place — where 

I’d say that the Liberal Party I think fails to understand. 

 

Well let’s talk a little bit about the budgets here. We’ve got a 

federal government; you say well the federal government has 

the same problems. Yes, and they’ve been dealing with it now 

for four years. Have they balanced the federal budget yet? No, 

not once. Not once. In fact the federal deficit has ballooned to 

$600 billion. That’s the way the Liberals govern. And in the 

process, what happened? Where were the cuts? Seventy-three 

per cent of the cuts they made were to health, education, and  



70  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

social programs. 

 

Great social agenda. You should be smiling, member for North 

Battleford, at the great social compassion that your party is 

showing in Ottawa . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll tell you, 

member from Melville, I appreciate your interjection but if you 

concentrate and look at what is happening in Ottawa, if you 

were to support the Saskatchewan people, if you were to stand 

up for Saskatchewan people, we would all be better off. 

 

Why is it impossible for you people to stand . . . you stand and 

you attack us on health care and yet you say not a word to 

Ottawa. How is it that we know there have been 73 per cent of 

the federal cuts have come to health, education, and social 

programs and yet you don’t say anything? Not a word. The only 

people that are standing up for Saskatchewan are on this side of 

the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  I don’t want to dwell on budgetary issues 

tonight because I know we’ll have a chance to debate this in a 

few days. But I say, you take a look at the priorities of this 

government, the New Democratic government here in Regina, 

in Saskatchewan, and you compare that with the Liberal 

government in Ottawa that governs federally and you see where 

we spend our money. 

 

Fully 71 per cent of our program spending goes to health, 

education, and social programs. Do you want to take a guess on 

what the federal amount is? You want to take a guess? 

 

(2100) 

 

An Hon. Member:  What is the federal amount? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Seventeen per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well where do they cut? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Well let’s be generous. Let’s be generous. 

Let’s take out the amount they pay to debt. It rises to a massive 

24 per cent. Not even a quarter of federal expenditures, 

excluding your deficit payments, their interest payments, goes 

to social programs. 

 

Well I would be very interested to know what exactly are they 

spending the money on, because Saskatchewan people . . . and 

the Leader of the Opposition, The Leader of the Opposition, I 

think, has made this point clearly tonight, what Canadians are 

telling him, what Canadians are telling us. And whether it is in 

their role as Saskatchewan taxpayers or Canadian taxpayers, it 

doesn’t matter. They’re interested in the same thing. 

 

An Hon. Member:  There’s only one taxpayer; you’ve got 

that right. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  That’s right, because there’s only one 

taxpayer. And what they’re interested in is maintaining their 

health services; they’re interested in making sure their schools 

are good for the kids; they’re wanting to make sure people are 

able to find jobs through training; and they’re wanting to make 

sure that the needy are looked after. 

 

Well when I look at a massive commitment of 24 per cent of the 

federal budget, excluding deficit payments, to that I have to say: 

whose priorities are wrong? Whose priorities are wrong? The 

New Democratic government in Saskatchewan that commits 71 

per cent of its program spending to those three areas or a 

Liberal government in Ottawa that commits only 24? My 

question . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Who’s responsible for education? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Oh but now we’ve got the Leader of the 

Opposition saying who’s responsible for education. He just tells 

me there’s only one taxpayer. We are in agreement that these 

people have the same interests; they have the same set of 

priorities. Why do we constantly worry about that? There’s a 

reason there are cost-shared programs in place, Mr. Member. 

 

An Hon. Member:  There were cost-shared programs. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  There were cost-shared programs. At one 

point, that’s right, there were. But there’s a reason why that was 

the case, and it was because we recognized that Canadian 

people wanted social programs. They wanted to be able to 

protect their families. They wanted to be able to protect the 

poor because that was part of what made us Canadian. 

 

And I think we should take a look at this. Mr. Speaker, I am 

actually reminded of the fact, and I think in many ways, 

although the throne speech addresses the six provincial points 

that this government attempts to introduce, we need to 

remember that they are also six federal points that are extremely 

important to us. Because Canada is a federal system and we 

want to rebuild it, we want to renew it, and we want to make it 

strong again. 

 

The Premier’s position, he’s been very clear on this, and I 

support this fully, and I would suggest that the members 

opposite should probably jot this down if they haven’t already 

made a note of it. Federally what we attempt to do is the same 

thing we want to accomplish here at home. We want a 

commitment to a strong social safety net. We want a 

cooperative debt management plan, a national investment 

strategy, comprehensive taxation review, improvement for the 

working conditions, wages and benefits, and workable changes 

to Canadian federation. 

 

That’s the second half of the agenda. It’s the agenda we need to 

pursue in Ottawa as united Saskatchewan people in order to be 

able to protect those things that we cherish here at home in 

Saskatchewan, like health care, like medicare, like education, 

and like social services and other social programs. And those 

are the very things that we hear nothing from the Liberal 

opposition on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

think even the interjection from the interim member from North 

Battleford saying, will I eat for $4 tomorrow, shows how 

absolutely petty the approach of the opposition is. 

 

What we need, what we are striving to do, is to build an agenda  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

for change that will start here in Saskatchewan and will roll to 

Ottawa so that all Canadians are able to benefit from the same 

good programs, the same good quality of life that we have here 

in Saskatchewan. Join us on that. Don’t sit there in your seats 

with your hands under your seats. Join us. 

 

Takes me a minute to calm down here and remember the 

importance of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . my conciliatory 

approach, that’s right. And I had promised to stay on for this 

year. That’s right. I did promise a kinder, gentler member from 

Regina South this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s one other issue I want to address tonight, 

just briefly. You know I feel so . . . one of the members asked, 

where are the Tories? Why am I not picking on them tonight? I 

feel so sorry for them. You know I figure we should just leave 

them alone for a little bit and, you know, I’ll pick on them very 

soon. But I’ll tell you I think at this point there is not a person 

who does not turn on the TV set and who doesn’t take a look at 

what’s gone on or think about the terrible situation we’re in and 

not remember the Tories. 

 

But what we need to be careful of — and I think what people 

need to remember — is that there’s not a whole heck of a lot of 

difference on that side of the floor because we’ve seen this in 

Ottawa. Brian Mulroney could only have dreamed of putting in 

an agenda like Jean Chrétien is doing in Ottawa. And I’ll tell 

you that someday, if the Liberals are ever on this side, Grant 

Devine will be saying the same thing, that they would never 

have been able to believe that, the right-wing approach of that 

Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there’s any doubt about that — I’m sorry. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — if there’s any doubt about that, I think we 

only need to take a look at what’s happening directly in health 

care and the differences between what we saw with caucus 

researcher, a.k.a. (also known as) Liberal leader Jim 

Melenchuk, in terms of his views on district health boards, his 

view for the medicare system in Saskatchewan, his view for a 

hospital system in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think this is a very interesting compare and contrast 

because what we have here is we have a very anti-democratic 

approach. We on this side of the house believe communities 

need to make decisions. They need to come together. They need 

to work together. To do that, we have introduced district health 

boards, elected district health boards, elected . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I can assure you, member from Melville, that in 

all of our wisdom, as much as we liked her, I don’t think we 

would’ve ever appointed Anita Bergman to the Regina District 

Health Board. She was elected. 

 

Now in terms of the elections, I think what we need to 

remember is this. The elected health boards we have generally 

stayed out of. They have the responsibility to listen to their 

communities, to make their decisions. We don’t always agree 

with their decisions. I certainly don’t always agree with their 

decisions. But nevertheless, we respect the fact they’re a 

democratic institution of local government. 

 

What do you believe? Yes, what’s the first thing that the  

Liberal administration will do under Dr. Melenchuk? Well I 

don’t hear anything from the other side of the floor, but let me 

jump in and answer it for you. In case you’ve lost your script, 

opposition members opposite, I would remind you that your 

stated position is to abolish the health boards . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . It’s to abolish the health boards. Why don’t 

you just admit to that? 

 

This is the difference that we have. We are democrats. We 

believe in communities coming together to make choices. You 

aren’t. You’re going to close down the district health boards. 

You’re going to take that control out of the community and 

you’re going to pull it back down here to Regina, directly under 

the control of the Liberal administration. 

 

Some of the members say that that’s just like the Tories. 

Actually I think that’s worse than the Tories. The Tories at least 

. . . even though they had 450 of these boards, they had to have 

at least somebody in these communities dealing with them. 

 

But what we have here is a case where you’re prepared to 

abolish, simply abolish, a whole level of local government. That 

is unheard of, absolutely unheard of that you would abolish. 

Why, because the doctor knows best? Because you know best? 

Is that why? 

 

I think we don’t even need to go back to the debate we were 

having about funding priorities and the difference between the 

federal Liberals on health care and us. We’ve never cut the 

health care budget. I would remind you that we spent — what is 

it we spent? — $1,600 per capita on health care in this 

province, one of the highest in Canada. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It is the highest now. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  The highest, the highest. I’m corrected. I 

stand corrected. 

 

But we are providing this money. When we heard . . . we were 

out in the community, we understood that there was a feel that 

they needed more money. We responded, yet we get 

condemned by the members opposite for using a special warrant 

to provide more money for health care. Well isn’t that 

interesting? 

 

So we’ve got a group of Liberals opposite who want to abolish 

the district health boards. We’ve got a group of Liberals 

opposite that say no, we shouldn’t have put more money into 

health care this summer. We’ve got a group of Liberals opposite 

who support their federal cousins in cutting — cutting — health 

care dollars to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very interested to see how this 

session plays itself out because I think when the dust settles on 

the Liberal side of the floor, what we are going to see, once the 

chairs stop rotating, once they figure out who’s doing what job 

over there in that Liberal caucus, I think that what we will see is 

that it is the same Liberal agenda that is being played out in 

Ottawa. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is not an agenda  



72  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

that is good for Saskatchewan people. I will tell you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is not an agenda which is good for 

Canadian people. And I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is not an 

agenda that these people on this side of this House will ever 

endorse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude tonight . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I forgot to mention I really . . . The other 

group I’m thankful for are my colleagues here in the House. 

They make giving my speeches most difficult because they’re 

so helpful, but I appreciate that. 

 

I simply want to end by again reading that passage from the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  I want to thank the members opposite for 

their warm enthusiasm tonight. I simply want to conclude by 

re-reading this point and saying that this is the reason we should 

defeat the Liberal amendment, and we should support the 

motion proposed by the member for Swift Current early this 

afternoon in his excellent remarks providing much of the 

philosophical grounding as to why I think we are pursuing the 

agenda that we are in this province. 

 

And I also want to thank the member for Saskatoon Southeast 

for her ever-thoughtful comments. I say that very sincerely 

because there are folks who often get caught up in day-to-day 

political matters, and I have always appreciated the fact the 

member for Saskatoon Southeast takes the time to sit back and 

think about where we’re going as a society, and I think that that 

really is a very useful endeavour. 

 

Bu, Mr. Speaker, I again want to remind the members opposite 

that in the throne speech it says: 

 

We are showing that a people who hold true to the values 

of co-operation, community, mutual aid, and 

responsibility: 

 

can return from the brink of bankruptcy; 

 

can preserve and renew the foundations of civil society, 

like Medicare and education and; 

 

can build a growing, competitive, high-employment 

economy, 

 

without regressive transfers from the poor to the rich, and 

without undermining essential supports for our families. 

 

The day may come when this model too — and the values 

that underlie it — will find its way into our country’s 

national life. 

 

I only hope that as we move along in that direction that the 

Liberals will find their feet under them and stand up for the 

people of Saskatchewan, as we are doing on this side of the 

House. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s nice 

to be back in the halls and walls of this great Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And as always it was a pleasure and an honour 

to hear the Lieutenant Governor Wiebe speak. While his speech 

was admirably delivered, I’m afraid that there was little 

substance for me to comment on, and it’s hard to reply to 

something with no content. 

 

I would like to take a moment, though, to offer a warm greeting 

to the new MLA for North Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I believe his combined drive and 

intelligence will serve the people of North Battleford and this 

province well. 

 

I must admit though, we were somewhat lucky in winning that 

seat because, from what I understand, the weather had 

something to do with his victory. The weather was supposed to 

be quite a bit worse for the NDP supporters than it was for the 

Liberal supporters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I would also like to take the opportunity to 

thank the third party for lending us a number of their voters, and 

I’m sure in ’99 they’ll once again lend us many more when we 

form government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I might mention too that the Leader of the 

Third Party spent just about a month previous to the by-election 

in North Battleford, and I’m thinking that if he had’ve spent 

two months, we might have had all their people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province faces many problems and 

governmental inconsistencies require addressing. I am in 

regular communication with the citizens of my constituency and 

they have asked me to bring to your attention their concerns. 

This, along with my own observations, causes me to stand 

before you tonight. I think the single most upsetting feature of 

our current government is its arrogance. 

 

(2115) 

 

Regardless of how loudly the people cry out, their words appear 

to fall on deaf ears. Whether their voices come as 7,000 

signatures in protest to the government’s health care cut-backs 

to cries of objection about the loss of schools and school 

programs or the reminders of past promises now broken, none 

are given credence. When asked about the possibility that 

life-saving fire-fighting equipment be freed from the burden of 

the provincial sales tax, the response was that it won’t happen. 

 

Well the previous NDP premier wasn’t listening either and look 

what happened to him in 1982. History is about to repeat itself 

again, electing a Liberal government in 1999, and, Mr. Deputy  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

Speaker, a landslide? I think so. 

 

This government, instead of taking such things seriously, sit 

back and claim that these complaints and concerns are merely 

media hypes or exaggerations that serve the self-interest of the 

opposition. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is absolute 

nonsense. 

 

The people of this province know what the priorities are and 

they should. They live them every day. The people of 

Saskatchewan know that change is necessary but believe that it 

must be done in a well-thought-out and organized manner. 

 

Health care is one of the number one issues. Our electorate 

shows, in this government’s own polls, their continuing lack of 

faith in this government’s abilities to manage our health care 

system. People are feeling betrayed and frightened as cuts 

continue. Broken promises reign supreme as we hear of further 

hospital bed closures in both Regina and Saskatoon after 

reassurances that this wouldn’t happen. 

 

The people want to know how these hospitals are to be expected 

to handle the larger demands on their time and space now so 

many of our rural hospitals have closed, and if more and more 

beds are being shut down. Where is the logic in this? 

 

Then more planning . . . more poor planning is proven in the 

problem surrounding rural citizens in my area who require 

dialysis. As it stands now, people in my constituency have to 

travel two, three times a week to Regina for treatment in all 

kinds of weather and regardless of cost. 

 

My office and the people of my constituency have repeatedly 

asked that a dialysis treatment centre be set up in Yorkton — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this would ease the suffering and hardship 

on many of these people — and the response to this that we 

received back is that it’s too costly and there is no funding for 

this project, even though the equipment is already there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time to show the people of Saskatchewan that 

their health care is important, because for my people to drive 

600 kilometres three times a week to Regina is just 

unsatisfactory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this talk of poor planning brings up the issue 

of the new assessment tools handed down to the municipalities. 

I think all can agree that reassessment was probably long 

overdue, but it appears that the system of implementation and 

the logic behind many of the valuations have been found to be 

poorly thought out. 

 

First, too little time has been given to local governments to 

absorb the impact of these changes. Many municipalities did 

not receive their figures until the latter part of ’96. Rural 

municipalities are still reeling from the shock of these figures. 

Small town hotels, for an example, some of whom have been 

there in their communities for longer than any of us can 

remember, have been assessed value increases to such a height 

that the owners may be unable to keep the doors open if 

required to pay the taxes based on the current figures. 

I believe that the intention of this reassessment was to create a 

fair level of taxation. Instead, inequities have been created and 

huge tax shifts have taken place. The ratio of increase in the 

assessed values of farm land have been far greater compared to 

that in the villages, towns, and cities. At this point, rural 

municipalities are fighting for their lives and have been pitted, 

though, against their urban counterparts. 

 

Like every other big issue in this province, the urban and rural 

communities have been set at cross-purposes to each other. Is it 

this government’s intention to keep the people of the province 

fighting amongst themselves so that they won’t have the time or 

the energy to unite against this government’s high-handed 

actions? Does this government not realize without proper tax 

tools to soften the blows, businesses will close, housing starts 

will come screaming to a halt, and many low income seniors 

and families will be forced to leave their homes? 

 

We need to rewrite the tax reassessment legislation to be able to 

address the concerns of local governments. On top of all of this, 

local governments are facing huge cut-backs in revenue sharing 

and are being forced to find money elsewhere. This government 

regularly blames all its ills on the federal downloading and then 

turns around and does it over and over again to our same 

municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  To make up for lost revenue, local 

governments will be forced to increase their own mill rate, 

causing greater hardship to those who have seen their 

assessments dramatically increase. Cut-backs — does it ever 

end, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Why is it that money can be found for the salaries of those 

surrounding our esteemed government officials, but not for 

health, local governments, education or highways? Why is this 

government not setting an example of good management itself? 

Salaries of close to 100,000 per annum are common amongst 

the highest-position bureaucrats. Patronage, something that this 

government cried out against when it was in opposition, is now 

a regular part of its function. These seem to be the 

government’s priorities — keep their friends happy and 

surround themselves with enough highly paid staff that the 

common man wouldn’t stand a chance of being heard. 

 

Education is another subject near and dear to my constituency. 

The frustration just never ends. With the continued cuts to 

education, we are quickly losing our edge in the world market. 

If schools are closed, teachers cut, programs are not available 

due to the lack of money, how can anyone believe that the 

quality of education in this province will remain unaffected? All 

taxpayers are drowning under the load of the school tax and yet 

school boards are being forced to increase their mill rates to 

keep their budgets in the black. Whose responsibility are our 

schools? Who is it that stands to lose should our children not 

receive a proper education? 

 

In my constituency alone five schools are slated for closure — 

five schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All over Saskatchewan this 

is happening. The children affected by these closures will be 



74  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

expected to travel much farther on roads that are already 

deteriorating, attend classes that are already overcrowded, and 

because of distance, not be able to participate in many 

after-school activities that would broaden their education. How 

can we expect our teachers to probably teach classes of 30 or 

more students? Any assistance they might have received will 

not be forthcoming as cut-backs will decrease also the number 

of teachers’ aides. 

 

How many more children will slip through the cracks and end 

up without an education? How will these children manage to 

find jobs without proper skills? What will this do to our Social 

Services budget? How will we be able to compete in the world 

markets without properly trained and educated employees? 

How are the communities affected by these cuts supposed to 

attract new business when regular health and educational 

services are not available? Where is the long-term plan? Does 

this government have any answers to these questions? I mean 

real answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And, if so, both myself and 

the people of this province would like for once to hear them. 

 

All of the cut-backs to education and health will lead to more 

and more use of our public roadways. Once again the issue is 

planning. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government collects 

approximately $400 million each year from gasoline tax and 

registration revenues. With this being the case, why is it then 

only 168 million went directly into the maintenance of our 

highways and roads? Where is the rest of the money? Certainly 

not in additional funding for education and health, nor in the 

coffers of our local governments. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, recently the federal government 

announced that phase 2 of the infrastructure program would be 

made available to the province and municipalities. How can this 

government endorse the program while at the same time fully 

realize the difficulty local municipalities will have in taking 

advantage of it? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to repeat something I said in 

November of ‘96 in the hopes that this government will hear 

and absorb my words. Local governments cannot endure a $20 

million reduction in third party funding, a $17.6 million cut to 

the municipal revenue-sharing pool, and still be expected to 

maintain their respective road systems. The money has to come 

from the revenues taken from the gas tax and vehicle 

registration. This is what it was designed for, and that is what it 

should be used for -- nothing else -- highways and rural roads. 

 

One through Saskatchewan has to be twinned to avoid a 

bottleneck disaster as drivers enter the province. I wonder how 

many prospective tourists we lose each year as road conditions 

force people to go south around us. Winter always brings 

terrible road conditions, but these have been made worse by 

staffing decreases in crucial rural areas. 

 

Our own pothole patrol has been flooded with calls from all 

over this province with horror story after horror story of 

treacherous road conditions. 

 

The threat of closure of many short-line railways will only 

make the situation completely intolerable in many areas. What  

this province needs is a sensible transportation policy, one that 

considers short-line railways as a true part of the overall 

transportation system. I would like to see this government put in 

place a plan to promote the development of these lines and a 

long-range policy for our entire transportation system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the most difficult to understand is 

our finances. The oil and gas industry is thriving, potash is 

doing well, as is our uranium industry. Grain prices were high 

and hopefully they go up again. Cameco shares were sold for 

$350 million. 

 

This government has reaped the benefits of all this wealth and 

yet the debt is not being paid down. Cuts continue year after 

year. Job creation is dismal in this province compared to our 

neighbours. We are exporting our most valuable resource, our 

young people. And, Mr. Speaker, do you really know how bad 

it is in this province? I’ll tell you. The geese even left the city. 

And you know, with our high taxes they probably won’t be 

coming back. 

 

All this points to the fact that this province is being 

mismanaged. I believe that this is as simple as that — poor 

planning, downloading, and setting our people against each 

other. Mr. Speaker, I think it is high time this government got 

out of their respective offices and listened to the people. They 

may be surprised at what they hear. 

 

In the rural areas a certain belief is growing stronger each day. 

The people are afraid that their communities are being 

destroyed purposely. If one looks at the facts — loss of schools, 

hospitals, doctors, closure of government offices, closure of 

short-line railways, heavy land taxes, continued downloading, 

tremendous provincial taxation, horrific road conditions, and a 

history of broken promises — one can see their point. 

 

What is the government’s real agenda? Certainly this 

government has proven not only its lack of compassion for rural 

Saskatchewan, but has launched and is undertaking the 

complete decimation of it. What they have forgotten is that 

many of our city dwellers have come from rural Saskatchewan 

and still have family there. 

 

This government is casting away the roots of people of this 

province and they both may be urban and rural. I do not 

understand the lack of vision. Rural Saskatchewan could and 

should be the land of our dreams come true, but continued 

decreases in services and financial burdening will not bring this 

to pass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote the remarks of one of my 

constituents. In light of what has transpired in rural 

Saskatchewan in the past few years, she has said this to me. 

 

Maybe what this government would like to see are two 

super cities wherein all the people in Saskatchewan move 

to either Regina or Saskatoon, and leave the fields to lie 

fallow and the towns to fall into the ground. Then this 

government could donate the rest of our province to 

Canada as its largest natural park. 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

Mr. Speaker, these sentiments are echoed daily. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as the official opposition we know that we have a long 

road ahead of us but we are ready for the ride. And as we are 

well aware, in Saskatchewan that ride is going to be bumpy. 

 

Thank you. 

 

(2130) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise here on behalf of my constituents to support the Speech 

from the Throne. I want to thank the mover and the seconder for 

the excellent job that they did, and I would also like to welcome 

the member from North Battleford. And I’m not going to pick 

on him because I think he’s going to get enough of that in the 

coming session. 

 

I’ve also heard tonight a lot of pessimism, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think it’s time for a little more optimism in our speeches here 

— not contradicting them, just give them some real facts. As 

you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, my constituency includes the city of 

Estevan — a city which is known as the energy capital of 

Saskatchewan due to the abundance of electricity, coal, and a 

large and vibrant oil industry, which has certainly helped in the 

economic turnaround of our province recently. 

 

With record-breaking land sales and development of deep well 

drilling, I’m told this latest activity could be larger than the 

Leduc find in Alberta. Estevan also holds the title of sunshine 

capital of Canada. A title that a city you’re familiar with, Mr. 

Speaker, once tried to steal from us, but in consultation with 

Environment Canada we clearly retained this title. 

 

In my constituency we have people who think many hours of 

this sunlight is wasted in the wee hours of the morning, as we 

struggle with the expense of our recreation programs in the 

darkness of early evening. But that is an issue for a different 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently had the pleasure of attending a function 

which is not quite a title for Estevan, but an achievement of 

some of my constituents. I was present to help send off some 

talented people from Estevan as they head to Alberta. And this 

is not a sad occasion, Mr. Speaker, for I am sure they will return 

victorious. I am also sure that all members of the legislature 

will want to join me in giving our best wishes to the 

Saskatchewan Pool Tankard winners from Estevan; the team of 

Jim Packet, Jeff Mosley, Dallas Duce, Ken Loefller, and fifth 

man, Bob Doerr. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Another title that we are well on the way of 

achieving, Mr. Speaker, happened this past October when the 

residents of Estevan and the surrounding communities held 

their 20th anniversary of the Estevan United Way and television 

marathon -- a 36-hour event using local talent and hosts to raise 

money for the United Way. The interesting part of this is that 

for 19 of those 20 years, Mr. Speaker, they were the  

first in Canada to reach their goal for the United Way goals, and 

I think they richly deserve our recognition. 

 

The people of Estevan are not only generous, Mr. Speaker, but 

they are also optimistic. In a recent survey of the Estevan 

Chamber of Commerce, 97 per cent of the respondents are 

reasonably to very optimistic about the year to come. Only 3 

per cent of survey respondents were uncertain as to their 

economic outlook for business in 1997, and no respondents 

expected the upcoming year to be poor. 

 

Business volume is projected by respondents to increase by 

approximately 16 per cent in 1997. Volume increases are 

expected by 68 per cent of those replying, while an additional 

32 per cent of respondents expect volumes for 1997 to remain 

about the same. Forty-three per cent of those same respondents 

expect to increase the size of their staff while 54 per cent intend 

to keep their staffing levels the same. Much of this optimism is 

a credit to the performance of our government over the past five 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  This is evident in a recent letter to the 

honourable Minister of Finance from the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business from which I quote the following 

paragraph: 

 

While we have a long way to go, it is important for the 

business community to recognize that many of the 

forward-thinking decisions that were announced in 

previous provincial budgets -- items like the reduction of 

the small business corporate tax rate; the elimination of 

sales taxes on direct agents and bad debts; the 9 per cent 

investment tax credit and lower corporate income taxes for 

manufacturers and processors — have been of great 

assistance to Saskatchewan firms. Most importantly, your 

government’s attention to the deficit and debt has offered 

small firms one of the most important elements they need 

to create jobs -- stability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Our economic plan is working, Mr. Speaker. 

Slowly and steadily our population grows along with our job 

rate while our unemployment rate remains one of the lowest in 

Canada. This, I believe, is the stability that small business is 

looking for and we will continue to provide into the new 

century. I believe this optimism proves that our economic plan 

for partnership and renewal is working. 

 

In education, Mr. Speaker, we will strive to ensure that our 

children have the best quality public education possible, and 

that our education system is capable of training and retraining 

our workforce to keep up with the explosion of information 

technology. Locally we have taken some very sound initiatives. 

This includes the development of a joint-use program between 

Southeast Regional College and the Estevan Comprehensive 

School with funding being provided by the provincial 

government. This will improve the quality of education in both 

systems. 



76  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Another program being implemented by the comprehensive 

school is the integration of a SIAST course into the school 

curriculum. This was done with the cooperation of SIAST 

officials and the Estevan Comprehensive teaching staff . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . and the Department of Education, as 

the minister has so fondly reminded me. I believe these 

programs are excellent examples of local boards, staff, and 

government working together to improve the quality of 

education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another priority that this government will embark on is to 

continue to protect medicare and to provide the best quality that 

the government can afford within the principles of medicare and 

in the face of federal cut-backs. As you know, Mr. Speaker, we 

provided 40 million back-filling for federal cut-backs last year, 

plus another 40 million for transitional funding, and we will 

have to back-fill again this year for more federal cuts to our 

health system. 

 

But what bothers me is not that we have to protect the 

Saskatchewan people from federal downloading, but that in 

doing so we will be criticized by the opposition for doing it. It 

seems quite evident from their recent leadership convention, 

that they’re trying to convey themselves as the guardians of the 

health system. They even went so far as to elect a doctor as 

their leader. I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but I think 

putting a doctor in charge of a health system is like letting a fox 

guard the chicken coop. 

 

Another direction that this government will take is we will 

invest in a transportation strategy to improve the quality of our 

road system. Great strides have already been made in this area 

with the development of the south-west transportation study, an 

excellent example of communities, railways, Department of 

Highways, and local people working together. And we will 

again, Mr. Speaker, work on our roadways to protect our 

constituents from the mistakes of the federal government — 

who allowed, against our wishes, the demise of the Crow rate 

and the abandonment of rail lines — because we felt it would 

be detrimental to our road system. But did they listen? No. Did 

they initiate a national highway program? No. Did they care 

about our farmers getting their grain to port? No. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, we get the official opposition member 

from Saltcoats on the radio saying, we should have the 

Government of Saskatchewan put a two-year moratorium on 

rail line dismantling to give short-line operators the chance to 

evaluate the feasibility of operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we might like to do that, but it should 

be noted to the member from Saltcoats that the rail line 

jurisdiction is the federal Liberals’ responsibility. 

 

Another issue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, touched a 

nerve. Touched a nerve. Another issue the Liberals have raised 

recently is the fuel tax on gasoline and the percentage that is 

returned back to highways. They quote the CAA (Canadian 

Automobile Association) as stating that in 1988, 96 per cent of 

the tax went back into highways, but in 1996 we only put in 34 

per cent. 

This is an interesting statistic, Mr. Speaker, but totally 

misleading in reality, unless the Liberals are advocating going 

back to deficit financing to the tune of 324 million like we had 

in 1988 under the Tory government. We have chosen not to go 

down that path. Instead we will maintain the fiscal integrity that 

creates the economic stability that comes by balancing our 

budgets. For it is this path which will give us the freedom to 

control our future, which can only be done with the continued 

support of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

For it is only with their support that we can hand over the new 

century to our children, knowing that we did as much as 

possible to give them a fresh start. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  There are many things I’d like to say, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’d also like to say them tomorrow, and so I’d like 

to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:40 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 55 

  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................ 60 

  Thomson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 67 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 72 

  Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 75 

  Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 76 

 


