



















































Hansard: May 09, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1505 

 May 9, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I present petitions on behalf of people in the 

North. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway No. 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road, including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, and Pinehouse, and an 

access road to Garson Lake. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on these petitions are from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Sandy Point, Green Lake, and Jans Bay. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens of the communities of Melville and Yorkton, who pray 

the Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

petitions to do with the creation of regional telephone 

exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

Choiceland, Nipawin, Snowden, Garrick, and Smeaton. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

today that reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area 

by declaring it an accessible, protected wildness area, 

where sustainable, traditional cultural values and activities 

are maintained. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Saskatoon. Some are from Melfort, from Swift 

Current, Warman, and Prince Albert. And I so present, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from the city of 

Melville, as well as from Esterhazy. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to support the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, the 

maintenance of equality of senior staff employee raises 

(MESSER) Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with your indulgence and the indulgence of the 

members of the House, if I may be permitted a few extra 

seconds in the introductions. I want to begin by — I actually 

studied this all last night in order to get this quotation — a 

quotation from Aristotle. 

 

An Hon. Member:  In Greek? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No, in English. 

 

Aristotle once said: 

  



1506  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

 

We become just by performing just actions, temperate by 

performing temperate actions, and brave by performing 

brave actions. 

 

I think it’s a great quotation. And today we’re honoured to be 

joined in this Assembly, in the west gallery and behind me in 

the east gallery, by some 160 young Saskatchewan people who 

by virtue of their actions, are becoming just, temperate, and 

brave members of our society. 

 

I’m referring to the 160 school safety patrollers, grade 7 and 

grade 8 students from right around the province representing 24 

communities of our province who are in Regina today for the 

provincial School Safety Jamboree. 

 

Also joining them are 20 chaperons. Time of course does not 

permit introduction of each by name. But as School Safety 

Week comes to a close, I do want to express on behalf of this 

Assembly, I’m sure, and all the people of Saskatchewan, our 

appreciation for the efforts of these school safety patrollers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it takes a very special kind of person, 

especially a very special young person, to fulfil the important 

duties of safety patrol — a person who cares deeply about 

others, who takes seriously his or her responsibilities, who is 

both diligent and enthusiastic in carrying out those duties. 

 

Or to paraphrase Aristotle: one who displays a sense of justice, 

a temperance of character, and a penchant for bravery. Day after 

day, rain or shine, these young people and others perform a 

tremendously valuable service — safely ushering young other 

children through the crosswalks and bringing peace of mind to 

parents, teachers, and others in the community, in their duties. 

 

They really are heroes — examples of responsible citizenship at 

such a young age and role models for those who will follow in 

their footsteps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the province and the Assembly, I 

want to commend them on their commitment to their 

communities, and to ask all members of this Assembly to join 

me in welcoming them here today with us. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the Premier in welcoming our guests today to the 

Assembly, and it’s certainly a pleasure to see them out on the 

roads as you go past the schools. They are performing a 

valuable service to all of us, especially to parents and to the 

children who attend those schools. And I would certainly like to 

congratulate them and to encourage them to carry on with a 

worthwhile duty. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I too would like to add to the words of the 

Premier. We have a fine group of young people all across 

Saskatchewan who have done just a terrific job in the protection 

of others and ensuring safety for not only their own peers but  

also, as the Premier’s indicated, for peace of mind of parents 

and teachers. 

 

And I want to commend them and wish them a very, very 

pleasant day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mothers’ Day Tribute 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you well 

know, Sunday is Mothers’ Day, and while we have the press of 

our daily business to preoccupy us, it’s right and proper to take 

a moment to honour our mothers and our grandmothers. 

 

I think as well, that any observance has the importance that we 

give it. The fact that at times Mothers’ Day seems to have been 

created as a subsidy for Hallmark Cards should not deter us. To 

some extent I suppose, Mr. Speaker, I’m in conflict of interest 

by making this statement because I am a mother and a 

grandmother. 

 

Although I take pride and satisfaction in having done my bit to 

keep our particular species — and our peculiar species, I might 

add — rolling along, my pride goes far beyond the biological. 

I’ve got good kids, as do the other mothers and fathers in the 

legislature. And I’m happy to have them around. And I’m 

fortunate to still have my mother this Mother’s Day. But we 

have a family double header because it’s also my parents’ 60th 

wedding anniversary this weekend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Now I ask you not to blame her when I 

note that much of what I am today can be traced directly back to 

her. Her genes first, then her guidance, direction, discipline, 

inspiration, and many who know her would add, determination. 

She taught me persistence, gave me the lesson of compassion 

and responsibility, and showed me the necessity of learning. 

And she introduced me to Tommy Douglas. 

 

I don’t want to sound immodest, Mr. Speaker, but I think she 

did a pretty good job, as did all our mothers, and I’m glad to 

have our gratitude placed in Hansard, because nothing but the 

truth is spoken and recorded here. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

30th Anniversary of Melville Motors 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I’d 

just like to acknowledge Melville Motors in Melville, 

Saskatchewan, Canada, for their 30 years of devoted service to 

the citizens of Melville and area. They’ve become an essential 

part and have been an essential part of that community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Small businesses such as Melville Motors are a vital part of 

their communities. They are the major source of job creation  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

and offer quality sales and service to their communities. They 

also sponsor many local functions and contribute endlessly to 

various organizations. It’s important that their devotion does not 

go unnoticed. 

 

President Greg Kohnen read off a list of customers who have 

dealt with this business since 1967. This is a testament to the 

mutual loyalty that’s developed between citizens and leaders of 

their communities. 

 

I deem it a special privilege to acknowledge Melville Motors. 

And what I would like to say, as father and president, Greg 

Kohnen, turns the reins of the operation over to son, Greg, I 

wish them and every other small business who contributes to 

their small communities, success in all the years to come. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Emergency Preparedness Week 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The natural 

disaster unfolding in Manitoba is a reminder to all of us that no 

one is immune to natural, uncontrollable forces. Although many 

of us in this province have never experienced flooding of this 

magnitude, many people experience other disasters just as 

devastating. 

 

In Saskatchewan tornadoes are one form of emergency situation 

that we experience. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Regina has the 

unpleasant distinction of being situated in the heart of the 

Prairies — tornado alley. 

 

The possibility of a tornado or any other type of disaster 

happening in our community is very real. That is why everyone 

should be prepared to cope with these types of emergency 

situations when they occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week has been dedicated as Emergency 

Preparedness Week here in Saskatchewan. Its goal is to help 

and educate and encourage all citizens to prepare for emergency 

situations. Governments must do their part in ensuring 

communities of preparing to cope with these unfortunate 

situations. 

 

Knowing how to react before, during, and after an emergency 

will help save lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot control nature, but we can be prepared 

to deal with most inauspicious predictions that may occur at any 

time. 

 

As you and the legislative Clerk prepare for your journey today, 

I wish you the very best. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Mothers and Families 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased earlier this morning 

when our Premier quoted Aristotle, and it seems to me that  

Aristotle is also the one who said that nations are families writ 

large. 

 

So conversely, of course, our families are the nation writ small. 

They’re the cornerstone of our society, the cornerstone of our 

nation. And I am pleased also to join with other members of this 

House to recognizing our families and particularly our mothers 

on this occasion. 

 

Our own mothers and the wives who share our lives and who 

have been mothers for our children, they are the cornerstone of 

our lives, they are the cornerstone of Canada. And I’m pleased 

to rise and join with other members in honouring this day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert to Host Major Sporting Events 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert has a remarkable 

history of success hosting major sporting events. And the 1992 

Saskatchewan Summer Games and the 1993 North American 

Indigenous Games and the 1995 Senior Canadian Fastball 

Tournament were some of the more recent ones. 

 

In 1999 Prince Albert will host the Western Canada Summer 

Games, an event that promises to be one of the best. And in 

addition to this event, Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert has recently 

been chosen as the site for the 1999 Midget AAA Air Canada 

Cup Tournament. The tournament will feature six teams from 

across the province, including the host Prince Albert Mintos, 

competing for the national championship. 

 

Playing host to this tournament will require a great deal of 

community support. Hundreds of volunteers will be required 

during the planning and preparation stages as well as during the 

event itself. If the community support and volunteerism evident 

in the past events in Prince Albert is any indication, this event 

will undoubtedly be one of the best tournaments ever held. 

 

I want to congratulate the promotional team headed by Jim 

Bristowe and Peter Gach for spearheading events and efforts to 

host the tournament. And I want to acknowledge the many 

volunteers who will make this tournament a success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ranch Ehrlo Society 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take the opportunity today to commend those involved 

with operational management at Ranch Ehrlo — a place just 

outside of Regina that assists troubled youth. I commend also 

all the youth at Ranch Ehrlo who participate in the many events 

throughout the year at the ranch that inevitably assist them in 

their own healing and recovery. 

 

One such beneficial event revolves around the following of 

native traditions. The ranch holds a sweat lodge every month. 

With the help of an elder, the youth prepare the ceremony and 

build a fire. This direct participation gives the youth a better 

understanding of the native sweat lodge ceremony. 

  



1508  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, the staff and youth at Ranch Ehrlo 

come out in full force to volunteer in their community. They 

have lent their skills and enthusiasm to Habitat for Humanity, 

the Rainbow Youth Center, and many other appreciative 

organizations. I am sure that all members in this Assembly can 

appreciate the excellent work and the commitment of the staff 

and the determination of the youth at Ranch Ehrlo. 

 

Again, my highest regard to the staff and their youth. Their 

program is one to be emulated. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Force Increasing 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If it’s Friday and 

it’s another member’s statement, it’s got to be good news day. 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, today the good news I want to share with 

members concerns jobs, jobs, jobs. 

 

Well actually this should come as no surprise to the members 

opposite because if you’ve been following the federal election, 

you’ll know that New Democrats are the only ones talking 

about jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the particular good news I want to share today 

concerns Saskatchewan’s provincial economy and job market. 

And I’m very pleased to report our provincial economy has 

created 11,000 new jobs last month alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, that means that nearly one 

in every eight jobs created in Canada alone last month — one in 

every eight — was created right here at home in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly pleased to report that Regina 

continues to have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, as has been reported in this Assembly previously, our 

population is growing, our economy is growing, and jobs are 

being created. All of this, Mr. Speaker, points to the fact that 

our partnership plan with private business and labour is 

restoring hope, optimism, and confidence to our province’s 

economy. 

 

It also points to the fact that our business climate is indeed one 

of the best in Canada today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Volunteer Award 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday I was 

honoured to make a member’s statement on Yom Ha’ Shoah. 

Now on the last day of Holocaust Remembrance Week, I’m 

pleased to make a related but happier statement about a 

constituent of mine. 

 

This week Marie King Forest was named the Sterling Award 

winner for 1997. This award is given by the Saskatoon Jewish 

community and Hadassah-WIZO (Women’s International  

Zionist Organization) at its annual silver spoon fund-raising 

dinner which I attended. The award recognizes a 

Saskatoon-area woman whose volunteerism has enhanced and 

enriched community life. 

 

Marie King Forest is determined and dedicated. Saskatoon 

Constable Grant Obst calls her a “diminutive powerhouse of 

courage and caring” because of her efforts to have the rights of 

victims recognized and because of her unflagging support for 

those victims. 

 

Marie is a victim of violence herself. She is the widow of an 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer killed on duty 

in 1978. This senseless tragedy was a springboard for her to 

work to correct a law she sees as unbalanced. 

 

She refused to be silenced by her suffering. As a survivor, she 

said she was inspired by the belief that every life is a life to be 

valued. This is a lesson Jews have learned at a great cost. And 

as she said, she was honoured to receive an award from the 

Jewish community, a community that epitomizes survival and 

respect for life. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister in charge of SaskTel has now shed new light on this 

government’s involvement in the NST fiasco, or gigatel for lack 

of a better name. 

 

The minister confirmed yesterday during a meeting of Crown 

Corps Committee that SaskTel originally purchased a 50 per 

cent share of NST but later increased its share to 87 per cent. 

 

Will the minister explain why the Crown decided to increase its 

lame duck investment when it recorded a $2.2 million loss in 

’95 and a further $13.8 million loss in ’96? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as was explained 

yesterday in the Crown Corporations Committee, this was a 

longer-range investment which was expected not to recover 

profit in the first instance. 

 

I’d like to remind the members opposite that we’ve increased 

. . . we increased our investment in the Husky upgrader. Very 

wise. Very profitable. Increased our investment in Crown Life. 

Very wise. Very profitable. We know how to manage the assets 

of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the one 

we’re talking about this morning, Madam Minister, was not 

very wise. 

 

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has stated that business is business in 

trying to brush off this disastrous business venture, but her 

attempts at downplaying this sordid affair simply underline the 

arrogance of this NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 

Madam Minister, you’re no better than your federal leader who 

stated yesterday that she would sign a deal with the devil. If this 

is your intention, at least let’s make this deal good for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

The taxpayers of Saskatchewan have to be asking, why would 

you sink good money after bad into a project and increase your 

share to 87 per cent when your private sector partner was 

willing to go no higher than 13 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, if your partners were not prepared to increase 

their share in this lame duck venture, why were you? Why did 

you essentially gamble with millions of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, very careful and 

considered explanations were given in detail in Crown 

Corporations Committee yesterday. This is grandstanding. The 

member opposite knows that there’s a reasonable, rational 

answer to every part of his question. It is upsetting, Mr. 

Speaker, to be asked these questions by the Bre-X party of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would say that what we are 

doing is trying to hold this government accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan and if that takes grandstanding, then 

I’ll do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NST scheme had been well thought out, the 

B.C. (British Columbia) partner would have found the 

additional money to put up for their share of this project. If they 

could not afford to increase the original investment, one has to 

question why SaskTel would partner with this kind of a 

company in the first place. The impression is that this company 

was obviously a touch smarter than SaskTel management. 

 

Madam Minister, it is easy to compete in the big business world 

when you’re signing cheques with taxpayers’ money. Will you 

finally admit that you and top SaskTel management do not have 

the capability of competing in the real business world? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

forgets to mention the $300 million in profits that have been 

made by the diversified investments of SaskTel. He forgets to 

notice, he forgets to notice that . . . He doesn’t want to know the 

answer, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t want to hear the answer. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It’s grandstanding. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  It is grandstanding. The proceedings 

of yesterday’s meeting of Crown Corporations are carefully 

noted verbatim in Hansard for all the public of Saskatchewan to 

see, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite is so disappointed  

that there wasn’t any press there yesterday, although it’s open to 

the press, that he brings his grandstanding to the House today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You just heard 

about the mess that this government made with the gigatel 

fiasco and now they’re putting taxpayers’ dollars at risk once 

again with the deal to buy half the Guyana power corporation. 

This is a company that has been riddled with debt. The country 

is millions of dollars in the hole and it has one of the highest 

debt to GDP (gross domestic product) ratios in the world, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister of SaskPower has refused to provide the public 

and this legislature with the information necessary for them to 

review this deal before it is finalized, if indeed it already hasn’t 

been. This is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have the right to know if this government is jumping 

into another bad business deal using their hard-earned money. 

 

Mr. Minister, it appears you’re trying to hide something. Why 

don’t you come clean and tell us what it is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased 

to respond to the member’s question. I want to begin by saying 

that he should be aware of the fact that there are six 

international companies who also competed to enter 

negotiations with the Government of Guyana with respect to the 

purchase of GEC (Guyana Electricity Corporation). 

 

And I also want to say that member opposite might have 

selective amnesia, because in terms of international dealings 

and other dealings outside this province, he forgets to recognize 

the fact that one of our Crown corporations netted $114 million 

on a cable deal in Leicester. He forgets to mention the fact that 

there was a $5 million profit made on the sale of Channel Lake 

Petroleum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he forgets to mention that SaskPower has reduced 

the provincial debt this year by $124 million, and he forgets to 

mention that we put over $50 million into the Consolidated 

Fund to deliver health care, highways, and education. 

 

I say to the member opposite he should have a look at what the 

Dominion bond rating agency is saying with respect to the 

future of SaskPower and what’s required for it to survive. Read 

the newspaper. Your selective amnesia is doing the assets of the 

people of this province absolutely no good, and I say to the 

member opposite you’ve got to look to the future . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, France, Denmark, Holland,  

  



1510  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Britain, and the United States have recently written off 71 per 

cent of Guyana’s debt, which stood at 2.1 billion before the 

write-offs. All totalled, these countries have written off almost 

$700 million of Guyana’s debt. With this government’s track 

record, will the residents of this province end up like these 

countries, having to write off the debt? Can this government 

guarantee and can the minister guarantee that this deal won’t 

turn into another giga-Guyana? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I will tell the member opposite 

what this government will guarantee. We’re not going to do 

what the Chrétien government did with the Bi-Provincial 

upgrader and write the deal off at 8 cents on the dollar. That’s 

what we’re not going to do. 

 

I’m saying to the member opposite that this government has 

been good stewards of the Crown corporation assets and we’re 

going to continue. There are some business opportunities for 

these Crown corporations. They have got to move into the 

future if they’re going to survive. 

 

Now those members might want to live in the 1960s and they 

might want to play the politics of the 1960s. This government is 

going to do all measure of due diligence to ensure that our 

assets are . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. All hon. members 

will recognize that the Chair, for obvious reasons, is having 

difficulty hearing the answers being provided by the minister, 

and I’ll ask all the members to allow the question and the 

answer both to be heard. And I’ll recognize the minister if he 

wants to conclude his question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I very much want to 

conclude my answer. I want to say to that member . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I just asked all hon. 

members to allow the minister to be able to be heard and I 

already cannot hear him. I’ll ask all the members to come to 

order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say there are 

some differences between this New Democrat government and 

the Liberal governments, both anywhere in this country and 

nationally. 

 

We are not about to take, as Chrétien did, a bath on 

Bi-Provincial or any other on an 8 cent on a dollar deal. That’s 

the record of that operation. 

 

We will do all measure of due diligence. If, Mr. Speaker, there 

is an investment to be made, we will ensure that that investment 

is protected in the best way possible when and if a decision is 

made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Respite Care 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 

NDP government began closing down rural hospitals under the 

guise of health care reform, the people of Saskatchewan were 

promised a major increase in home-based services to help fill 

the void. 

 

Celine Muller is a constituent of mine who has a six-year-old 

son who has a seizure disorder. He does not walk or talk, is not 

toilet trained, cannot feed himself, and requires 

around-the-clock care. 

 

For four years Mrs. Muller has been going through the process 

of trying to get respite care which would provide her with 

occasional and necessary relief from the stress which 

accompanies caring for someone on a 24-hour basis. 

 

Will the Minister of Health explain why anyone in this province 

must endure four years of attempting to find respite care, a 

process there appears to be no end to? What happened to your 

promise of proper home-based services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I regret to advise you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

House, that the member has not brought this matter to my 

attention. 

 

If the member, as the representative for the family — which has 

obviously got a challenge in terms of the problem of caring for 

their son — if the member would like to bring the matter to my 

attention, I’d be happy to investigate it, Mr. Speaker, because 

one of the things we do want to do is to have adequate respite 

and home care services. 

 

And I want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

doubled the amount of resources going into home care services 

in the last number of years. There was more money in the 

budget for home care, in the budget of March 20. We’re doing 

more than any other province, Mr. Speaker. There can always 

be improvements. I’d be happy to look into the matter if the 

member would only bring it to my attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this matter 

has definitely been brought to the attention of the department 

through the official, Mr. Dwayne Haave, who I presume 

corresponds with the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Celine Muller is frustrated because some people 

are provided day-to-day home care on a regular basis in her 

health district. Yet each time that she has requested home care 

assistance for her disabled son, which would also provide her 

occasional stress relief, Mrs. Muller has been told that home 

care is not a babysitting service. 

 

And her chances of receiving home care services are even 

dimmer because of a recent announcement by the Central Plains 

Health District that it will cut home care services by 2,000  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

hours this year. Is that providing more care, in your estimation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister . . . the minister’s officials have 

indicated through their correspondence that this matter must be 

dealt with by the district health board. However, the local 

district health board indicates respite care . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. Order. The hon. 

member has been very lengthy in her preamble and I ask her to 

put her question directly right now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I would ask the minister to clarify what kind of 

services, what kind of policy guidelines there are in place so 

that families like the Mullers and their disabled son have more 

services and do not get a bureaucratic run-around. What 

commitment are you prepared to offer to this family today and 

others who are in the same situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if the member from 

Humboldt wishes to cut through what she calls bureaucratic 

run-around, I have to say it’s a very short walk from where the 

member sits in this Chamber every day to where I sit. And if the 

member would just come around or ask me to come over there, 

I’d be happy to discuss the matter with the member, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And instead of playing politics with a problem that should be 

worked out, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the member sit 

down with me, bring the matter to my attention, and we’ll look 

into it. Because what we’re doing in this province and through 

the district health boards is doing more for home care and 

respite care than any other province, notwithstanding the fact 

that the Liberal Party is cutting $100 million out of health care 

last year and this year in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker; notwithstanding that, we’re increasing funding for 

home care, for respite care, and other services to the people of 

the province. 

 

But if the member would like to meet with me with respect to 

this matter, I’d be more than happy if the member would simply 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to 

know that the Liberal caucus is listening to our questions in 

Crown Corporations and that the government is praising the 

economic initiatives of the previous administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 

SaskPower. Mr. Minister, we have a few details starting out 

about your Guyana deal. Unfortunately, we have to go to 

Guyana to get that information. So much for your open and 

accountable government. 

 

We now know why the minister didn’t want to talk about the 

GEC bottom line — it’s because the company is a perennial 

money loser, having lost 3 to $4 million U.S. (United States) 

over the last two years. 

Mr. Minister, why should we have to go to Guyana to get 

information about Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money? Taxpayers 

deserve to know exactly where the negotiations are at. Will you 

release the letter of intent that SaskPower has signed with the 

Guyana electrical company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, as is common 

business practice in many business deals, a letter of intent will 

have a confidentiality clause so negotiators have the ability to 

sit down and negotiate what they hope to be a mutually 

agreeable arrangement. 

 

I want to say to members of the opposition, allow the 

corporation, allow SaskPower Commercial officials, to do their 

job. They’re looking at a business arrangement by which they 

will make a recommendation that will come to the board of 

SaskPower Commercial for scrutiny. That hasn’t happened yet. 

 

Allow that to take its course. Allow the board to make a 

decision as to whether or not they agree that it’s a reasonable 

deal. Allow that to happen, and then we’ll make a decision as to 

whether or not we got a deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the net worth of that corporation will be based on 

a number of things. It’ll be based on the profit and loss of the 

corporation over the past. It’ll be based on the ability to 

generate electricity for the people of that province and how 

much can be sold and what kind of a profit level can be 

achieved. Mr. Speaker, all of these things are part of the 

discussions, part of the negotiations. 

 

I will say to the member opposite, I am not about to breach a 

confidentiality clause of an agreement that’s been made by 

SaskPower Commercial with GEC. I don’t do business that 

way. The member opposite may, but I don’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  SaskPower officials may be trying their 

best. Unfortunately, we have to protect the taxpayers’ dollars 

and we have no confidence that SaskPower is doing that with 

all the secrecy surrounding this deal. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. All hon. members 

will come to order. It feels like Friday today. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This deal 

makes no sense. First of all, taxpayers don’t want SaskPower 

risking their money in Guyana. 

 

Secondly, even the most optimistic projections from GEC 

officials show that this is not a good investment. The chairman 

of GEC says he expects a return of $1 million profit in 1997. 

 

So if SaskPower buys half the company, it will be entitled to 

half the profit — that’s about a 2 per cent return on investment. 

You should be buying GICs (guaranteed investment certificate), 

not GEC, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you investing so much taxpayers’ money 

in a company that has such a small potential for return? 

  



1512  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, this is almost 

laughable. Here you’ve got a member of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus who is responsible for this government 

paying $17 million a week in interest on the public debt built by 

them. These business geniuses, with the credibility of goodness 

knows what, come in here describing themselves as the 

protector of the public purse. Well, Mr. Speaker, what a 

turn-around — what a turn-around. 

 

They left the people of this province with the biggest per capita 

debt in this country, — the protectors of the public purse. I want 

to say, Mr. Speaker, this is like putting the fox in charge of the 

hen house, as been said in this legislature before. The people of 

this province have had enough of their kind of business 

dealings. There’s a new administration in here who has taken 

very, very seriously protecting the taxpayers’ dollars. And we, 

Mr. Speaker, will continue to do that in spite of the opposition’s 

attacks on the Crown corporations, and the people who work in 

those Crown corporations. 

 

On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this I 

would suggest is a very shameful display, and a member with 

absolutely no credibility either from the riding or from within 

his political party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that 

sanctimonious message was just brought to you by the 

government that lost $16 million on NST. Mr. Minister, your 

$31 million initial investment is just the start. You’ll probably 

wind up throwing good money after bad, just like you did with 

the NST deal. 

 

The infrastructure of this company is falling apart. Guyana is 

plagued with constant blackouts and power shortages. In March 

a generator at Kaehne field collapsed, plunging the Berbice area 

of Guyana into a four-week power outage. This is the mess Jack 

Messer is getting us into, Mr. Minister. 

 

This company is falling apart. It’s going to cost SaskPower 

millions to fix it up. Mr. Minister, GEC has stated it’s a 

company in crisis. How much more taxpayer money is 

SaskPower going to have to spend to get the infrastructure of 

GEC up and running? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by 

saying what is falling apart is the opposition in this legislature, 

and maybe it is time we adjourn, Mr. Speaker. I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that opposition knows full well SaskPower just 

netted $5 million on the sale of Channel Lake Petroleum in a 

business arrangement that was entered into in 1993 and 

consummated this very year. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also knows 

that on a cable deal in Leicester, SaskTel netted a profit of $114 

million. But he forgets to talk about those kind of positive 

business deals that have been consummated by this provincial 

government and by the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he talks about a $16 million loss. We could do 52  

of those every year — we could lose 52 of those every year, and 

it wouldn’t impact on the public debt if it wasn’t for what they 

left us prior to 1982. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this government has not made a decision on 

Guyana. We will make a decision based on sound business 

principles once the arrangement is put to the board of directors, 

which hasn’t happened. Whether or not we proceed on this will 

be whether it’s a good deal for the taxpayer and the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we frankly don’t need his advice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. 

Minister, yesterday you announced $250,000 for youth outreach 

programs as part of your new strategy to fight child prostitution. 

The problem here, Mr. Minister, is that there is nothing new 

about this announcement. 

 

In fact it seems you are just re-announcing money that was 

already allocated in the budget. I have here the budget edition of 

your Social Services newsletter announcing this funding back in 

March. Mr. Minister, why are you announcing this $250 like it 

is new money when there is nothing new at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, there has been very little 

mystery in the minds of most members in the House that that 

money in fact was dedicated in the budget. Yesterday’s 

announcement confirmed that that money will be in the 

communities, and decisions regarding the utilization of that 

money will be made in consultation with the communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you what good things are happening 

in our communities in this province to deal with issues facing 

children. Mr. Speaker, I’m not a regular reader of the 

Chatelaine magazine, but this day it was brought to my 

attention that there is a significant article in the most recent 

issue of the Chatelaine’s magazine on kids versus poverty. 

 

And what should we find highlighted in this article but one La 

Loche, Saskatchewan, where, as a result of a preschool program 

developed in La Loche through the current Minister of 

Education and the community working together, great things 

are happening for the kids in La Loche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can talk today about the Saskatoon Communities 

for Children, with the work that they’re doing in Saskatoon, the 

inter-agency committee here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, 

communities are pulling together, there’s great work happening, 

and we’re very pleased to be a partner. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we’re 

pleased to hear that there are communities pulling together. But 

what is your government really doing? 

 

Many critics of the plan announced yesterday said that not 

enough has been done on the prevention side — I think I 

brought that to your attention yesterday — to help children and  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

prevent them from getting involved in the sex trade in the first 

place. This shows you have no real new ideas with regards to 

prevention, and also no new money. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems like you’re simply repackaging existing 

money to make it look like you’re doing more than you really 

are. Mr. Minister, yesterday’s announcement does not target 

one new dollar to fighting child prostitution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, just a few short years ago 

in this province, there did not exist, there did not exist a child 

action plan. Didn’t exist. We began the child action plan in this 

province — this government. It began with funding of in the 

neighbourhood of $4 million. Mr. Speaker, the member 

suggests there is no new money in this budget. Mr. Speaker, the 

child action plan has now reached funding of approximately 

$25 million — $25 million. 

 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker, as a result, as a result we find in 

Prince Edward Island, the Charlottetown Guardian, a headline 

which says Saskatchewan . . . “Saskatchewan boosts benefits 

for children.” Right here from the Vancouver Sun — at the 

opposite end of the nation — a headline which reads: 

“Saskatchewan to sweeten benefits for poor children.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, across Canada, across the province, it’s being 

recognized that this government and this province is taking the 

issue of the needs of our children and families very seriously. 

It’s demonstrating this by . . . It’s unfortunate that the only folks 

it seems, Mr. Speaker, who don’t recognize this, sit on the 

opposite side of this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 66  The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 66, The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Act be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 67, 

The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and 

read for the very first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 68, 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 69, The 

Police Amendment Act, 1997, be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, eight grade 

8’s from the Gainsborough Elementary School sitting up in 

your gallery, along with teachers Bev Needham and Pat 

Wolensky. I would like to ask all members to welcome them to 

our Assembly today, and I hope they enjoyed the proceedings 

and I’ll be meeting with them later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to table a response 

to question no. 65 in the spirit of open, accountable, and 

responsible government. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 65 is tabled. 

 

Hon. members, I am advised that His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor is here to provide Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 10:50 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 20 - The Small Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur 

les petites créances 

Bill No. 27 - The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 4 - The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 19 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 14 - The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 29 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 53 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  



1514  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Bill No. 54 - The Education and Health Tax Amendment 

Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 301 - The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central District 

Act 

Bill No. 302 - The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 35 - The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les 

victimes d’actes criminels 

Bill No. 31 - The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 33 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential 

Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à certaines lois 

Bill No. 32 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform) Act, 1997 

Bill No. 21 - The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 30 - The Personal Property Security Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 22 - The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges 

de paix 

Bill No. 7 - The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 5 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 6 - The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 38 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 61 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 8 - The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 52 - The Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1997 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:55 a.m. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55  The Department of Agriculture 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, The Department of 

Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 is a very straightforward 

Bill. What it does is allows the removal of the agri-food 

innovation fund from Swift Current under ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) into the Department of 

Agriculture. It’s just a technical arrangement to make sure that 

that happens. 

 

And I would move second reading of Bill No. 55, The 

Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 13, The 

 Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, as you know last year we announced the wind-down of the 

Ag Credit Corporation. 

 

And what this Bill does is facilitates that wind-down; it gives 

the government some options as far as at the end, at some point 

in time during the wind-down, we can do a few things. We can 

possibly sell the corporation if some group of bankers was 

interested in buying the portfolio. We could move the 

administration of that into the department. So it gives us the 

wherewithal to facilitate the wind-down of Ag Credit out of 

Swift Current. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 13, The 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1100) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and 

Security Guards Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m pleased to 

have with me this morning Darcy McGovern from legislative 

services, and Mitch Crumley, who is the director of law 

enforcement operations. 

 

Clause l 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome to your officials. It’s a pleasure to see those folks 

again. 

 

I just have some clarifications, Mr. Minister. When I spoke to 

this Bill initially and raised some concerns with respect to 

clarifications and some ambiguity with respect to wordings and 

some of the concerns with respect to specifics that we did not 

find addressed in the legislation itself but will subsequently be 

left to regulations. And I appreciate. 

 

And I just would like to mention at this point in time that I will 

be proposing an amendment which will specifically set out that 

the regulations will in fact establish minimum requirements for 

the safety, the communications equipment, and personal 

security measures. 

 

The Bill then as presented would allow for regulations. But it is 

somewhat vague on these particular subjects. What our 

amendment is more specific and clear about, the things is what 

we would like to see and ensure that’s incorporated into the 

regulations. 

 

One of the reasons for the amendment, and I’ll speak to it just 

briefly, is not just that the Bill is somewhat vague and uses the  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

word “may” in instances rather than “shall,” but also, Mr. 

Minister, when you introduced the legislation into the House, 

your speech did not clearly commit to do those things. The 

speech contained somewhat of an unclear statement with 

respect to the increase of safety for security guards. And those 

are some of the concerns that we will address in our 

amendment. 

 

However, before we go into . . . And I realize that will come 

later on. I just have a few questions that I’d like clarifications 

on. My first questions to you, sir, how many security guards are 

there in Saskatchewan currently and how many are in fact 

licensed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are 61 firms licensed to do private 

investigations and security work. There are 908 security guards 

and 237 private investigators that are employed by these 

companies. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you just tell me 

briefly what the current bureaucratic structure is that governs 

these people, and in fact will it be changed as a result of this 

proposed legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think practically, the present Act is 

administered by people within the law enforcement operations 

branch, involving Mr. Crumley, and that we’ll be assessing the 

effect of this Act, whether or not there needs to be more people. 

 

But at this time we don’t anticipate that we would have to 

expand in a great measure, partly because the intention of the 

legislation is to work very closely with the people in the 

industry and also the employees and some of the unionized 

unions that are involved with them in a way that will allow for 

much more self-regulation within the industry with assistance 

from us. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, once again when I 

spoke to this Bill earlier, I’d expressed some concern with 

respect to the very wide-ranging powers given to the registrar. 

Yet it doesn’t spell out what the qualifications the registrar 

himself or herself must have. 

 

And I wondered if you do not feel that it’s important to set out 

qualifications for the registrar, such powers . . . because of such 

powers as revoking licences at will without formal hearings, 

conducting very detailed investigations, and so on. 

 

I wonder if the qualifications for the registrar will be laid out or 

will it be completely up to the discretion of you, Mr. Minister, 

to appoint whom you may think is appropriate regardless of 

qualifications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I want to remind you that this is a very 

serious area because of the broad effect throughout the whole of 

the province. And so anybody who would be appointed to this 

job as registrar would apply for the job and go through the 

normal processes within the department. 

 

And I guess when it has it set up like this, this is an added check 

that the minister actually ends up having to sign the final  

document that hires this person rather than it just being a typical 

civil service job in the sense that it doesn’t have the minister’s 

signature on it. 

 

Now one of the things that we have here is, we have it within 

the same branch of the department that deals with police work 

and policing. And so we have the expertise of those people who 

are lawyers and former policemen, and then we also have 

people who work within the department now who are former 

investigators. And so we have quite a broad mix of people now. 

And that’s why we’re able to come forward with this legislation 

the way we have, because we have people within the 

department who can consult and work with this. 

 

The other thing I would remind you is that there are methods of 

appealing the decisions of the registrar. And those portions of 

the Act are very clear, that people would have the right to 

challenge the registrar’s decisions and then go through the 

proper administrative procedures to have a decision overturned 

if it was inappropriate. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you for that. I guess the concern was that 

there is nothing spelled out as to what would be the 

qualifications required for that specific position in any broad or 

general terms. That was basically the clarification that I was 

looking for. 

 

We see nothing anywhere that indicates a requirement that it be 

a former police officer, that it be a current investigator, or that 

certain qualifications and standards would have to in fact be 

met for someone that’s going to oversee that operation; would 

be able to complement at least with some experience and 

background in that particular responsibility, which would be a 

very serious responsibility, as the registrar with all these 

wide-ranging powers. That was the only matters that I wanted 

to clarify with you, sir. 

 

The minister might further comment to that, but my question 

would have been, sir — and I apologize — would have been: 

will there be any guidelines, will there be anything outlined 

with respect to, for example, the criteria for filling that 

position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well it’s not our intention to put it in the 

Act, but I guess what I would say is that it’s a long tradition 

within the Department of Justice, in fact within the civil service, 

that you hire people who have the skills to do the job. And in 

this particular case, I can’t see that it would be anybody other 

than somebody with that background doing this particular job. 

But it’s not our intention to put that in the Act. But I think 

practically, the person wouldn’t last at this job if they didn’t 

have the skills that are required. 

 

The present situation involved with this particular legislation, 

we have sort of three direct people. One is a former police 

officer, one is a lawyer, and the other is a former investigator. 

Those are the people that are directly in line dealing with this 

legislation right now. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And forgive me for 

sounding cynical, but I guess in broad terms . . . and I  

  



1516  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

appreciate what you’re saying, that under a normal process that 

in fact when there is an appointment to a responsible position 

that the person in power does make the proper choices. But on 

occasion that you may do that, there may be others that might 

not. I guess that was the concern, that if it’s not spelt out or if 

it’s not laid out, it gives a minister the right and the opportunity 

to appoint whomever. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well there’s no intention to treat this 

position anything other than a professional spot. It’s part of the 

public service; it’ll go through the Public Service Commission 

standards. And basically that’s the position that we’re taking, 

because we see this as being an extremely important job and I 

don’t think there would ever be any intention that would create 

a position for some other purpose. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wish you would have 

said, there never will be, instead of, I don’t think there will be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I guess what I would say is as long as we 

are forming government, there never would be. 

 

Mr. Osika:  As long as you’re Justice minister. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Minister, again when we looked at the Bill and spoke to it, 

we found that there was . . . the Bill itself is somewhat vague 

throughout its entirety as it’s set out. There’s a lot of subjective 

language, the very essence of the Bill. 

 

And the reason it was brought forward once again is contained 

in the regulations. And that was the concern that we had; that 

we here in the House are supposed to be passing judgement of 

the value of this Bill, yet we have to do absolutely . . . we have 

to do it sort of blind because we don’t know what’s going to be 

in the regulations. Anything that has to do with training and 

safety is tucked away or will be tucked away in the regulations. 

 

(1115) 

 

Though this is the case in most of the legislation that we see 

presented here in this House, I think it’s even more obvious 

here that some of those issues are important for us to be able to 

examine. Because while you’re busy telling the people that this 

will make it safer for security guards, such as the poor 

unfortunate young man in Saskatoon, we don’t know that; we 

don’t know that here in looking at this particular Bill because 

anything that might make it a safer job will be in the 

regulations. And we have no idea what in fact those regulations 

are going to say, or in fact if they will be brought into place or 

if the appropriate ones will be brought into place. 

 

And I’m just going to ask you that, do you not think it’s 

important in cases such as this, to spell out such important 

detail in the body of the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there’s a bit of confusion in 

your question. One of the things is that, as it relates to some of 

the specific issues that you’ve raised, it’s already law. Under 

the, you know, regulations in The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act there are some very clear rules about working alone  

or an isolated place. And basically you end up having to set out 

— and I can read these for you: 

 

 (2) Where a worker is required to work alone or at a isolated 

place of employment, an employer or contractor, in 

consultation with the committee, the representative or, where 

there is no committee or representative, the workers, shall 

identify the risks arising from the conditions and 

circumstances of the worker’s work or the isolation of the 

place of employment. 

 

 (3) An employer or contractor shall take all reasonably 

practicable steps to eliminate or reduce the risks identified 

. . . 

 

 (4) The steps to be taken to eliminate or reduce the risk 

pursuant to subsection (3): 

 

Which I just read: 

 

  (a) must include the establishment of an effective 

communication system that consists of: 

 

  (i) radio communication; 

 

  (ii) phone or cellular phone communication; or 

 

  (iii) any other means that provides effective 

communication in view of the risks involved; 

 

And then it goes on further to set out other things that may be 

included: 

 

  (i) regular contact by the employer or contractor with the 

worker working alone or at an isolated place of 

employment; 

 

  (ii) limitations on, or prohibitions of, specified activities; 

 

  (iii) establishment of minimum training or experience, or 

other standards of competency; 

 

  (iv) provision of personal protective equipment; 

 

  (v) establishment of safe work practices . . . 

 

  (vi) provision of emergency supplies for use in travelling 

under conditions of extreme cold or other inclement 

weather conditions. 

 

So those are set out in the regulations in the Saskatchewan 

Gazette of October 4, 1996 at page 644. 

 

Now in the Act we are going further, and working carefully 

with the industry. And as you note, in the regulations, as we 

work with the industry, we are going to be creating regulations 

that prescribe the minimum standards, qualifications, and 

training required to obtain a licence to act as a private 

investigator or security guard, or a licence to engage in the 

business of providing investigators, security guards, or an 

armoured vehicle service. And in that discussion, which has  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

already started, there are many areas that need to be talked 

about. And just to give you a bit of an idea of the topics of 

discussion, because I think it would probably answer a lot of 

your questions. 

 

First topic, professionalism and public relations. Then the duties 

and responsibilities of these people: the legal duty, the legal 

authority and responsibility; alarm systems; physical security 

patrol; traffic control; how to deal with explosive devices, bomb 

threats; how to deal with sort of access control with various 

electronic means and others; how to write reports, take notes, 

and give evidence; how to deal with fire detection, prevention, 

and safety; how to deal with patrol procedures; various labour 

issues involved in this business; how they relate to other public 

law enforcement authorities; and how they deal with conflict 

and avoiding conflict; how to deal with the courts and legal 

systems; also first aid issues; self-defence issues; and a number 

of the equipment issues which are referred to in the 

occupational health and safety. 

 

These are all the types of things that are intended to be covered, 

working together with the industry to set up regulations. So I 

think the plan is there and we want to work together with the 

industry. 

 

I think what I would reiterate, and I think I’ve probably said this 

before, is that when we pass legislation we want to set out the 

principles and the clear guidelines of how an industry might 

work. But when you get into all the details and the things that 

may change in consultation with a particular industry, that’s the 

kind of thing we put in the regulations. And that’s how we’ve 

designed this Act. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I appreciate that. And I understand 

that the regulations come after the law. And that’s what gives us 

. . . has given us some concern, that we don’t have an 

opportunity to debate that on behalf of the public, whether those 

are the adequate, proper regulations or not. And I appreciate 

that you’ll have people from the industry, and that leads me to 

my next question. 

 

You indicated a committee would be set up to study, to make 

recommendations on the regulations. Could you please tell us 

the make-up of that committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’ll be pleased to give you quite a 

detailed answer to this question. There’s ongoing consultation 

as we’ve developed the Act and then consultation will continue. 

And we basically have two groups, one in the North and one in 

the South, basically around Saskatoon and around Regina. 

 

The northern group includes these companies or groups of 

people: Flaman Investigations, PADC Security, Robinson 

Investigations, Spectre Investigations, Spencer Investigation, 

Central Security, Argus Guard, Metropolitan Security, Pony 

Express, UFCW Local — that’s the union; the Corps of 

Commissionaires, northern division. Also in the Saskatoon area, 

we had discussions with the Nicolichuk family as we developed 

this legislation. 

 

In the southern area we have ALBA Investigations, Barnes  

Security, Trojan Security, Group of Five Security, Loss 

Prevention group, CR Security, Century Security, and SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 

Vision Security, SaskWest, Argus Guard, Regina Police 

Service, Brinks, Loomis, the occupational health and safety 

branch of the provincial government, and the Corps of 

Commissionaires, south division. There’s also a group that 

we’ve been in contact with called the Canadian Society for 

Industrial Security. 

 

Another thing that I would point out is that Mr. Mitch Crumley, 

who is here, is a member of the national standards council for 

Canada in this particular area. 

 

So what we have . . . these are the kinds of people that are 

assisting us as we develop this legislation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  That’s certainly a broad range and should bring 

a lot of expertise and ideas and suggestions and some good stuff 

out of all this. With that wide-ranging number of people from 

the various organizations, will this be a lengthy process? Or are 

there some strict time lines set that this committee will meet its 

mandate? And I was going to ask you what the mandate of that 

committee — and it’s a seriously large one — what that 

committee’s mandate will be and will there be any strict 

guidelines placed on when these regulations will be in force 

under this particular law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We haven’t set a strict guideline because 

we know the kind of time that it sometimes takes to get this, but 

our goal is the fall of 1997 to have all of the regulations 

complete and the Act wouldn’t be proclaimed until the 

regulations are complete. So we’re looking at sometime this fall 

as our plan. 

 

Mr. Osika: - Mr. Minister, I guess that causes another 

concern, that since that tragic incident in Saskatoon, it’s been 

over a year that some committee, somebody should have been 

working towards the details surrounding the safety features and 

aspect. The process may very well have been started months 

ago, before even coming up with this legislation. 

 

That’s a concern, why it would only be starting now and it’s 

obviously going to take considerably more time to come up 

with those regulations. Would you be able to make a 

commitment here that they will be in place within six months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what I would first do is 

correct the impression you left with your question. Because 

many of the concerns that arose around the incident you talk 

about have been addressed under the occupational health and 

safety regulations and those are already law and they’re there. 

And so much of that has been answered. 

 

But now we’re moving into a bigger, broader area and we are 

working and fully anticipate that by this fall we would have 

everything in place and it would be ready to go. 

 

But we know, given the numbers of the people involved and 

sometimes the discussions that are necessary to get the 

appropriate balance, that it’s hard to set specific deadlines. 

  



1518  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

So I’m not able to give you a commitment of six months, but if 

everything goes well it could be five months. If it’s longer it’ll 

take that extra time. But I think it will be well worth it to get the 

right balance in what we’re doing. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I would assume that you’ve had 

considerable discussion with all the interested parties and those 

organizations that you’ve mentioned that will be forming part of 

these committees. Have you had a considerable amount of 

discussion with these parties up to this point in time? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — I’m not just certain if your question is referring 

specifically to me or to the department, but I mean practically, I 

have met with some of the groups that have had specific 

concerns personally. But most, obviously most of the 

consultations have taken place with the department officials. 

And these have been ongoing for, I guess at least a year. 

 

In addition to all of this discussion that’s going on with the 

proposed amendments that we are making, that we’re 

discussing now, these were sent out to all of the licensees under 

the current Act. So that means that everybody who is presently 

licensed under the existing legislation received a copy of the 

proposed amendments. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I guess that’s . . . If this kind of consultation has 

been ongoing, then at this point in time there may very well 

have been already some ideas for regulations that could have 

been put in place. And has that in fact happened or are we 

starting from square one now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think practically, we can’t put the 

regulations in until we have the Act, but I think we should say 

that we’re building on experience of many people. I mean, for 

example, by including the Corps of Commissionaires in this 

particular legislation. We’re pleased to have them included 

because they have a long tradition of education and training of 

their people, which we think will be a valuable asset in the 

whole business. 

 

And so I suppose if we wanted to try to piecemeal the 

regulations, take little pieces here and there, we could have 

done that. But that’s not how we usually do things. We like to 

try to set out the whole thing, get the regulations together, and 

then the Act will be proclaimed when the regulations are ready. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again. As far as I can tell in this 

particular Bill, Mr. Minister, the Bill will regulate employers 

and not front-line workers and I’m just wondering if you would 

not believe that by administering individual testing and 

individual licensing that you would be doing more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that if you read the 

legislation, it does both. It has the aspect of registering the 

businesses, but then if a person is going to work in this 

business, each individual has to be licensed as well. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Osika:  In subsection 8(2), it appears to clearly state that 

those people employed by others as security guards do not have  

to make application to the registrar. And I wonder if you had 

not considered perhaps to just impose individual licences on 

individuals, develop a government-administered testing 

procedure and make sure that these people are qualified. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think, if you just go, turn the page, page 

9, read the next sentence, it answers your question. It says: 

 

Every person who is engaged in the business of providing 

private investigators or security guards shall apply to the 

registrar in the prescribed form for a licence for each 

employee . . . 

 

So each employee has to be licensed. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Just a couple more questions, Mr. Minister; the 

first one being, there appears to be no requirement in the 

legislation for an agency or an individual to surrender their 

licence upon conviction of a criminal offence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Once again, if you would look in the Act 

itself, section 14, it basically says: 

 

 The registrar may amend, suspend, or cancel a licence on 

any ground on which the registrar might have refused to 

issue or renew the licence . . . 

 

And then it lists . . . So you refer back to section 12, and quite 

clearly it sets out in section 12: 

 

(2) The registrar may refuse to issue or renew a licence 

where: 

 

  (f) the applicant or licensee is convicted of an offence 

pursuant to any Act, Act of the Parliament of Canada or 

regulation made pursuant to any Act or Act of the 

Parliament of Canada; 

 

Which is the Criminal Code, includes the Criminal Code. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you for that clarification. Again it uses 

the words “may” and I can appreciate that it’s as a result of the 

circumstances that may be surrounding that incident. 

 

Clarification perhaps, and maybe I’ve missed it in there 

somewhere, but there appears to be nothing to prohibit 

out-of-province private investigators who come into this 

province on a temporary basis to perform their duties, to obtain 

a licence. He or she doesn’t even have to inform the registrar 

about this or at least . . . again, perhaps I’ve missed something, 

but would that not be a concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If you would refer to section 5 it says: 

 

5(1) No person shall act as a private investigator or a 

security guard without a licence. 

 

And that definition, in section 2, of licence, means a valid 

licence pursuant to this Act. So a person coming in from 

another province can’t act as a private investigator in 

Saskatchewan unless they’ve made the appropriate  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

arrangements to get a licence under this Act. 

 

And that probably wouldn’t be a problem if they’re licensed in 

another province and there’s a, you know, clear arrangement 

with the other . . . But this is how it’s done and it’s quite clear 

you can’t do this job in Saskatchewan without a licence under 

the Act. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, a number of concerns were raised with us, as with 

the member from Melville. And one of the big concerns was the 

issue of the fact that in a number of cases . . . a number of 

clauses, some of the wording as to the implementation and what 

have you seemed to be quite vague; the industry feeling quite 

concerned that some of the wording just really wasn’t clear 

enough and was quite open for interpretation, and it would be 

important to make sure it was a lot clearer. 

 

And you indicated to the member from Melville that you have a 

process in place where there will be ongoing debate as you 

define the regulations regarding the implementation of this Bill. 

I think you also indicated that this Bill would not be proclaimed 

until the regulations were ready to be brought forward. 

 

And in your discussion, Mr. Minister, while you’ve talked 

about meeting with a number of organizations, as you’re 

bringing this Bill forward, does it comply with . . . or are there 

other jurisdictions across the country that have similar pieces of 

legislation in place? 

 

So that when different sectors in the industry, looking at coming 

to Saskatchewan, they will be coming on the basis of providing 

a service here or maybe even setting up a security section of 

their different business in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

they would know that the amendments and the clauses and the 

regulations being set up in this province would basically follow 

guidelines that we do have in other jurisdictions of Canada. Or 

is this something quite new in addressing the concern that has 

arisen as a result of the tragic incident in Saskatoon? 

 

I’ve thrown a number of things out there for you to address, but 

I just want some clarification. Because certainly the industry 

and a number of groups in the industry, do have some concerns 

yet. While they want to see some guidelines and see certainly 

regulations and legislation address some of the issues that arose 

as a result of the Nicolichuk affair, they are concerned as to the 

process that is followed to date. I’m wondering if you could 

respond to some of those questions and concerns. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  You’ve asked a number of very good 

questions, and I think the most important one is how this fits 

into the national scheme. What we’re doing here . . . we’re not 

the first ones doing this. In British Columbia they already have 

legislation which includes these provisions around training, 

which are the, sort of, the new part of it, and setting some 

standards around training. 

 

But we know that some of the Maritime provinces are in the 

same . . . are in the process, just a little bit behind us, to have  

this further definition of the training and requirements to work 

in this industry. And one of the advantages of having Mr. 

Crumley on the national standards council is that he is able to 

hear from the other people who are representatives across the 

country what progress is being made. So we are not first but 

maybe second in this process. 

 

We know what British Columbia has done and the industry 

knows the kinds of things that are being done in British 

Columbia. And that will be included in the discussion as we are 

preparing the regulations. 

 

I think that for us in Saskatchewan, clearly the Nicolichuk 

situation ended up focusing attention on this. But I think 

practically too, right across the country there have been some 

concerns which the industry has attempted to address, and then 

some of those worker organizations and the unions that are 

involved have wanted to address. 

 

And so what we have here is our, I guess, Saskatchewan way of 

doing this. But clearly the plan isn’t to be way out of whack 

with the rest of the perspectives across the country. And the 

goal is that we will provide the best training and education for 

the people who do this job and the best system we can that 

allows the industry to do the job that they need to do as well as 

protect the workers. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when you talk about training, what 

are you specifically referring to? Are you going to . . . is the 

department going to design a training plan? Or are there going 

to be some guidelines set in place that each individual company 

then will be able to follow, and will they then be allowed to 

train their own personnel? 

 

Or is this a provincial program that every company is going to 

have to have personnel or individuals that are working for them 

go through, a provincial training program that’s out of their 

control. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that in British Columbia they 

went forward with a mandatory school that was set up in one 

place and everybody had to go to that. And there were a number 

of complaints that that was the process that’s set up. Here in 

Saskatchewan we know that the Corps of Commissionaires 

have a good training program now and so it’s not our intention 

to in any way cause a problem for them. 

 

We know that some of the larger companies have training 

programs that are very effective and we don’t want to cause a 

problem there, but we know that some of the smaller companies 

maybe don’t have the resources to set up their own training 

programs. So we would be encouraging the industry, or 

members of the industry, to work with SIAST to have the 

appropriate courses that would allow whoever takes the courses 

to pass an exam which would be set through the . . . under the 

Act. 

 

Mr. Toth:  What you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is we’re 

basically, through regulations, going to set up some standards; 

that there will be training programs offered; that there are 

certain groups and sectors in the province already that do have  

  



1520  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

training programs in their own individual enterprises. 

 

The other issue I guess, is for companies that are already 

operating and maybe don’t have that training program that you 

talked about. And while they may feel that they are conforming 

to what they would have in their own mind — a set of 

guidelines — if they don’t quite comply with the guidelines that 

will be set down in the legislation and through regulations, is 

there a time period that would allow them then to bring their 

standard of . . . and level of training and expertise within their 

specific operation up to the guidelines that are set here? So that 

we don’t put them in jeopardy of possibly losing contracts that 

they’re already into and allow them to come up to speed over a 

period of time? And that way not taking away from the 

contracts they’re already entered into and therefore losing 

business and possibly losing opportunities down the road to 

enter into business transactions because they weren’t available 

at the time they were under contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that what we are planning to do is 

make this as seamless as possible. We don’t want to disrupt the 

industry. So the plan would be that the training would be a 

requirement for new people, but for the existing people, that we 

would continue consultation with the industry to allow them to 

get up to standard, to use your words. And the whole plan then 

would be that we know that experience is a good teacher, and so 

that there may be some people who are quite experienced who 

haven’t taken the course but they maybe teach . . . would help 

teach the course based on their experience on the job. 

 

There are also transitional provisions in the Act, if you look at 

the end of the Act, which allow for some of this movement. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, or 

Deputy Chairman, just for the sake of other members, for the 

minister, and my colleague, the member from Melville, we do 

have a number of amendments, and I haven’t got into 

discussing some of the issues regarding the amendments 

specifically. I think when we get to the different clauses, we can 

certainly address them. 

 

But so that your officials get a chance to review them and the 

member from Melville, I would ask that amendments be passed 

out to you and you can take a look at them before we get into 

those specific areas of discussion. 

 

The other question I was going to raise regarding training — for 

companies that do have a pretty good training program already 

in place, Mr. Minister, would you be looking at possibly 

including them in some of the training, and offering the service 

to smaller companies that don’t really have the wherewithal or 

the personnel to conduct the training, provided the training 

certainly falls within the guidelines that you intend to bring out 

under the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that there will be standards that 

will be set, and if people can deliver that training course, then 

— and they can meet the standards — well then that would be 

appropriate. The idea is to make this as cost effective a training  

program as possible. 

 

I would point out that SIAST already does have a security 

officer basic training course that they do teach, which is a 

course that runs three hours a night for once a week for 13 

weeks. And it’s the kind of . . . there are some opportunities 

already. 

 

For example, if there was need for security officers out in your 

constituency, for example, and if somebody wanted to set up a 

course, well I would think there would be an ability to do that in 

conjunction with people within my department, and also 

working with the industry. 

 

The Deputy Chair:  Why is the hon. member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce a guest, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and my 

thanks to the Minister of Justice and the member from 

Moosomin for this courtesy. 

 

I notice sitting in the west gallery someone that all of us will 

recognize, Ken Dueck, who was a page with us last year. And 

he tells me he’s just finished his university classes and has just 

come to spend a little time and see whether we’re behaving or 

not. 

 

So I welcome him and ask all members to join in that welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 50 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. As I indicated 

earlier, Mr. Minister, there are a number of areas with some 

specific issues that were raised with our caucus by the 

individuals representing the Securities Commission and 

businesses. And I think rather than going through them fairly 

general right now, we’ll raise them as we enter into 

clause-by-clause debate on this, and we can address them then. 

Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Section 12, 

this section uses — and this is one of the issues that was raised  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

by the individuals we’ve met with — uses, and they felt, some 

words that were quite vague, like integrity, and prejudicial to 

the public interest, which do not give specific guidelines to 

members of the industry on how to conduct themselves. 

 

And they feel the government should take the initiative to set 

out such guidelines in the regulations rather than leaving them 

to the discretion of the registrar. I think the member from 

Melville mentioned some of this in his debate earlier on. 

 

And therefore we’d like to propose an amendment to clause 12 

of the printed Bill: 

 

. . . by adding, immediately after the word “íntegrity” 

where it appears in subsection (2)(c), the words “in 

accordance with the regulations”. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d just like to say I think I understand the 

intent of the amendment, but I don’t think it’s necessary and so 

I’ll be opposing it. 

 

And the reason I say that is that in the regulations section, 

section 51, we have the ability to set out rules about cancelling 

licences or dealing with all of those things. As well, with the 

industry, we’re going to be working on a code of professional 

conduct. And that’ll be . . . that’s set out in the regulations. And 

I think it’ll address the issue that I think is being raised here. 

 

So our response would be that we would be opposed to this 

motion. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, this . . . in clause 13 here, 

this clause gives the registrar complete discretion to issue 

licences on any terms he sees fit. And the industry would like to 

see specific guidelines and industry standards put in place. And 

therefore they’ve asked that we address this and we’re 

proposing this be amended to allow the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to set regulations establishing licensing criteria. They 

feel that they have a greater input and involvement and feel that 

there would be . . . they would have more say. And therefore, 

we would like to: 

 

Amend clause 13 of the printed Bill by striking out 

clause 13 and substituting the following: 

 

“13 The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall issue 

regulations establishing the terms and conditions by 

which the registrar may issue or renew a licence.” 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Once again, I think this is something that 

we can already do under the existing Act. And if you look at the 

section 51(a), it allows us to define the terms and conditions in 

the regulations, which is, I think, exactly what you’re wanting 

us to do, by defining those words. And clearly the plan would 

be to set out methods in the regulations which would give  

guidelines for the registrar. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Chairman. What you’re telling me, 

Mr. Minister, is that in another section and in regulations that 

you will be addressing this concern — that indeed the concern 

that’s been raised — will be addressed in another format. So 

that the individuals who have raised the concern certainly can 

feel that their voice has been heard on this issue? 

 

I think the concern here is that, while you talked about a lot of 

consultation, the feeling was there were a number of issues 

where they felt that things weren’t spelled out clearly enough, 

and it was important to have that there. And I just want a clear 

understanding on that line, that indeed this is one issue that isn’t 

just washed under the . . . or flows under the river — or the 

bridge — without even really being looked at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I can give assurances on that — that 

there’s no intention to do that at all. And practically, what we 

want to do is set up the system in a way that allows the registrar 

some discretion to deal with particular facts of a particular 

situation under the framework of the Act and the regulations. 

And ultimately, if there’s a disagreement over that, it would go 

through the appeal procedures, and decisions could be dealt 

with that way. 

 

But there’s no intention to set up a person here who isn’t 

abiding by the terms and conditions of the regulations in the 

Act. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Mr. Toth:  In clause 14 here, the phrase that has the industry 

somewhat concerned is the term that says “. . . no longer a fit or 

proper person . . .” And the industry feels this is too vague a 

reason as a reason given for revoking a licence. And they feel it 

should be a clearer definition and that it should come in 

compliance with the regulations. 

 

And on clause 14 they would like to see the clause 14: 

 

Amend clause 14 of the printed Bill by adding, 

immediately after the words “no longer” where they 

appear in subclause (c), the words “, in accordance with 

the regulations,”. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I would just clarify that the same 

comments I made about the previous amendment apply here. 

Once again it’s a term that’s in the Act. There is the power 

under section 51(a) to do what you’re talking about, which is to 

define what “fit and proper” might be, and that would be done 

in consultation with the industry. 

 

I think practically, what you’re also talking about is the code of 

ethical conduct and how that interplays with the Act and the job 

of the registrar. I think ultimately you end up having to give the 

registrar some discretion to deal with the specific circumstances  

  



1522  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

that might arise, but clearly that would be done under the 

umbrella of the Act and the regulations. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Chair, just one question of the 

minister. Mr. Minister, you’ve again indicated clause 51 kind of 

covers it. And if it isn’t a problem, does it create a problem . . . 

or why should it create a problem just to have it clearer even in 

section 14, through the amendment, rather than having to move 

to section 15 . . . or 51, pardon me, in regards to this item? 

 

It seems to me that that really doesn’t change the clause but just 

makes it clearer and a better understanding for the concern 

that’s out there. And I guess the feeling is we should have it 

identified up front rather than going to an all-inclusive clause 

51. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I have a very simple answer 

for you. The Leader of the Third Party stood up the other day 

with a big book and it had a lot of words in it and he was 

complaining about a lot of words. We think what you are 

adding is a redundancy because the power is already there. We 

do it in one place for the whole Act so that we don’t have to use 

those words every time. Therefore the Act is only 14 or 15 

pages long . . . 14 pages long, instead of 23. That’s why we do 

it. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Toth:  I just have to bring to the minister’s attention that 

a couple of word changes doesn’t add a lot to the Act. It just 

brings it a little clearer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would just say that if you added these 

words every time you had a word that you had some question 

about, it would add a substantial length to the Act. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 14 agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. In discussing 

this with the committee — and here’s one I think the minister 

would have to agree with me on — I believe it’s deleting a 

couple sections, and that would certainly cut down on the 

regulations. 

 

Members of the industry object to the proposals that their 

licences could be revoked without a hearing, and this has the 

potential of unnecessarily disrupting the business activities of 

the companies and the lives of the employees. And so therefore, 

they’re suggesting we delete a couple sections. And we: 

 

Amend clause 16 of the printed Bill: 

 

  (a) by deleting the words “Subject to subsection (2) to 

(4),” where they occur in subsection (1) and 

substituting the words “Subject to subsection (2)” 

 therefore; 

 

  (b) by deleting subsections (2) and (3); and 

 

  (c) by renumbering subsection (4) to be subsection 

(2). 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I do not agree with this amendment and 

I’ll just explain why. This relates to the emergency powers of 

the registrar to address a problem that arises. And a simple 

example is, if we were notified by the public that a security 

company that’s licensed here was all of a sudden handing out 

guns to its employees, we would want to have some kind of 

immediate power to step in and stop that business. 

 

The other thing is, subsection (3) of section 16 says that there 

has to be a hearing within 15 days, and probably sooner. 

 

But this is to protect the public; that’s why it’s here. And there 

may be situations that arise where some immediate steps have 

to be taken. And I think there would be a fair outcry if there was 

some great abuse of the people who run one of these businesses 

and there was no way to step in and do something. 

 

So that’s what this is and we want this in here. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

Mr. Toth:  Again this section gives the registrar the power to 

investigate persons related to a complaint against the security 

company. The industry feels that this is unfair and gives the 

registrar the power to investigate their personal lives. And I 

think we’ve had this concern raised in a number of other 

circumstances even outside of this specific piece of legislation. 

 

And they would like to see the amended . . . clause 17 be 

amended by: 

 

. . . 17 of the printed Bill by deleting the word “person” 

where it appears in subsection (2)(a) and substituting 

the word “company”. 

 

It seems that it’s only fair that the company be investigated, not 

the person. And that’s the concern they have, is that it relates to 

an individual rather than the company providing the service. 

And that’s why they would like to see that term “company” 

added over the word, person. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Unfortunately I do not agree with this 

amendment either, and the reason for it is that we have 

legislation in Saskatchewan called The Interpretation Act, and 

when the word person is used in legislation, that includes 

person, partnership, company. So that word there, even though 

it says person, means company. 

 

So there’s no necessity for this amendment. And I think that 

relates to the next two amendments that you’re going to 

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

 propose. So we’re opposed to this amendment. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I did have two further amendments and basically 

they are along the same lines. I will submit them so they can be 

reviewed all at once. But I guess the concern is, while the 

minister says that generally speaking when we have the word 

person referred to and he’s suggesting company, that opens up 

the door for interpretation. And that’s the concern, the concern 

being that while the minister interprets person to mean 

company, the fact is that will an individual, will the registrar, 

interpret it on the same regards? 

 

And I think that is the major reason that the concern is with the 

word, and it would seem that it would be a lot clearer to put 

company rather than person. Following what the minister has 

said, it just makes it a little clearer, a clearer determination of 

what that term really means. And that’s why it’s been brought 

to our attention. We bring it to the attention of the minister. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — For the hon. member for Moosomin, 

you can move one amendment at a time. I understand you have 

moved one. The two subsequent . . . the subsequent pieces of 

paper we have no way of dealing with at the Chair. They’re not 

a motion, not in the form of a motion, and we have one motion 

before the committee at the time. Should the hon. member wish 

to move them as amendments, they will be in order when we’re 

done the first of the amendments. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. I realize I could have 

read them here. And basically they’re saying the same thing for 

the two different . . . three sections of the clause there. And I 

would just, basically to move the process along, I just handed 

them in. I could have read them all at once. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I appreciate that. We’ll still require you 

to move them one at a time after we deal with this first 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Just to further clarify and deal with the 

concern that seems to have risen. If you look at section 17(1) — 

and it sets out where and in what situations the registrar can 

make an investigation — you’ll note that the investigation can 

be into any matter respecting: 

 

(a) the administration of this Act or the regulations; or 

 

(b) the provision of any security guard, private investigator 

or armoured vehicle service. 

 

So those are the only areas that they can deal with. 

 

Then in subsection (2), “For the purposes of an investigation 

. . .” — and the investigation is what’s described in (1) — you 

can look at “the business affairs of the person . . .” 

 

It’s specifically related to this Act. It’s not sort of a broad-based 

investigation into all of the business affairs of a person. It’s 

only as it relates to the administration of this Act. 

 

I think that the way the legislation is drafted covers the concern 

that you’re worried about. So we’re opposed to the motion. 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 17 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 18 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have one more 

section here, one more amendment to this Bill, before we get to 

one that the member from Melville has. 

 

In section 23 . . . The industry has several concerns about this 

section. For starters, this section does not allow them as 

portraying themselves as doing anything connected with the 

police. As they point out . . . In our discussion with them they 

point out, security services generally have close working 

relationships with the police services and clients are entitled to 

know if a particular service has a good relationship with the 

police or not. 

 

However in this clause their more pressing concern is section 

23(b) that prevents them from advertising whether or not they 

are bonded. Obviously it is in the public interest to know if a 

security service is bonded and licensed. And therefore they 

would like to: 

 

Amend clause 23 of the printed Bill by deleting 

subclause (b) in its entirety and renumbering subclause 

(c) as subclause (b). 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well we’re opposed to this motion as well 

and there’s a simple reason — the existing Act has this exact 

provision. So this is not new; this is the existing law right now. 

 

And the reason it’s there is, all people who do this work have to 

be bonded, and so it’s a consumer protection issue. If you have 

people advertising that they’re bonded, it doesn’t really add 

anything to their designation because everybody who does this 

work has to be bonded. And so we’re opposed to the 

amendment. And basically it’s the same provision that we have 

now. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 24 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1215) 

 

Clause 51 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Very briefly, our 

amendment is different from this particular Bill in two respects. 

Our amendment says that the minister shall make regulations 

within six months; the Bill says the minister may make 

regulations. Our amendment specifically merely sets out that 

regulations will establish all the minimum requirements as we 

discussed. I so move. 

 

  



1524  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 51 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 52 to 54 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to thank my officials 

who have been here plus all of the members of the industry who 

have assisted us in this legislation so far and we look forward to 

further consultation with them as we develop the regulations. 

 

And so it’s now my pleasure to move that we report this Bill 

without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d like to 

certainly thank the minister and his officials. While we didn’t 

get agreement on any of our amendments, based on what the 

minister was saying we understand that they are addressed in 

different forms. 

 

And so we trust that just bringing it to the attention of the 

minister, that the industry and a number of security companies 

in the province that had some concerns with the Bill, certainly 

will be able to understand, and that by working together we can 

come up with a piece of legislation and regulations that 

certainly brings some security to this industry in our province as 

it provides a major resource and a business and provides a 

service to many people in the province. 

 

So thank you to the minister and his officials. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like to 

add my voice of thank you to the minister and to his officials 

and to echo what my hon. colleague from Moosomin has 

indicated. 

 

We look forward to seeing the regulations and seeing that the 

law, when it does go into place, will have the desired impact on 

a very important industry in this province of ours. Thank you 

again. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the Leader of the Opposition on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 

you and to all members in the House, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like 

to introduce a number of people in the gallery who’ve been 

sitting and waiting patiently all morning. And I’d like to 

recognize a number of people who have worked very hard for 

the association of technologists and technicians. Many of these 

people have served as past presidents or are currently involved 

in the organization. 

I’d like to introduce — and if they could all rise very quickly — 

Brian Cobbledick, who is the current president; Neil Johnson, 

Dan Crites, Jim Brandt, Ron Smith, Moe Zimmerman, and Bob 

Turner. 

 

I’d also like to introduce Jamie Briltz. Jamie is the current 

executive director and registrar of SASTT (Saskatchewan 

Applied Science Technologists and Technicians). Welcome to 

the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Chair : — Why is the member for Arm River on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. McLane:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understand in 

our gallery today, we have a couple of people from Hawarden. 

Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, of course Hawarden is in the 

constituency of Arm River and that would make them my 

constituents. So I would ask all members to give a warm 

welcome to them, and I’d ask them to stand and be recognized. 

Norm and June Feltis are here from Hawarden and I’d ask the 

members to give a nice warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  While I’m still on my feet as well, there’s 

another gentleman in the Speaker’s gallery today. He’s already 

been recognized by my colleague. This gentleman also is past 

president and comes from my home town, and even though he 

may have been just a tad younger than I am, he had brothers 

that were about my age and we kind of grew up together. So it 

gives me pleasure today too to welcome Neil Johnson here to 

the Assembly and ask the members to give him a welcome on 

my behalf. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My 

officials with me this morning are, to my immediate left is the 

president of the corporation, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation), Mr. John Law; and seated behind 

Mr. Law is our legal expertise, Leslie Krug. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, and to your officials, welcome. I have a couple of  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

comments to make, Mr. Minister, before we get into some 

clarification that I require. 

 

First of all, I guess it’s the original introduction of this Act goes 

back, I think, to about March 17, so we’ve been at this one for 

awhile and we’ve had a chance to hear from not only the people 

that are affected within the technicians and technologists group 

but from others as well. And as I’ve stated before in this House, 

Mr. Minister, I think that the fact that we have a very mobile 

and fluid labour force and the fact that people are moved from 

one part of the province to the other to secure employment 

makes this Act a critical move. 

 

I’m also very pleased that we see standards and guidelines that 

are going to be in place to serve the public safety, number one. 

And I think secondly, they will serve the professional interests 

of all of the members of the Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians. So I think that is a very positive 

move, Mr. Minister. But when we’ve had the chance to look at 

some of the sections, Mr. Minister, we have some, I think 

technical questions that we’d like to pose for clarification 

purposes. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me if a similar Act of legislation has 

been passed in any of the other neighbouring provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To the 

member opposite, I want to first of all supplement his 

comments by indicating that there has been a significant amount 

of time that has passed since the Bill was first introduced into 

the House. And certainly as the member opposite knows, that 

this piece of legislation has been looked at and worked on, I 

believe since about 1980, has been the request of the 

Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians. 

So a great deal of time has passed as this Bill has . . . as work 

has proceeded to bring this Bill to fruition, hopefully this 

afternoon. 

 

The question that you asked specifically is which provinces, 

outside of Saskatchewan, have this Bill proclaimed. And they 

are in Ontario, Quebec, and British Columbia currently. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you’ve 

indicated, there’s been a strong lobby of not only months but 

years in terms of getting recognition, right to title for the group 

of technologists and technicians. Do you see, Mr. Minister . . . 

have you had any complaints raised to you by the public that 

would have been dealt with by this Act over the last few 

months, few years, that now that this Act would be able to 

handle as concerns raised by the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think it would be fair to say to the 

member that in the short space of my tenure, which is about a 

year and 18 months or 19 months, that I haven’t had particular 

concerns that have come forward to me directly in relationship 

to people who work in this professional area suggesting that 

maybe the kinds of work that they undertake are not the 

standard or are not the quality. 

 

But I think what’s important to recognize here is the 

designation of the title of the individuals who work within the  

profession so that we can keep those kinds of separations in 

mind into the future. And that’s really what the whole issue of 

title protection is all about. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just for 

clarification, I understand that this Act will actually have 

far-reaching effects on a number of people in the technologists 

and technicians area. Do you know, within a particular range, as 

to the number of people that will be affected in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well there are, Mr. Chair, to the member, 

about 1,800 technologists, technicians, who are practising 

across the province. And of course, as you indicate, they’re 

involved in a variety of different areas of responsibility. And as 

I outlined earlier and can outline again, in areas like 

environmental monitoring and analysis, quality control and 

analysis of construction sites, geo-technical investigation of 

proposed sites, corrective maintenance and safety inspection of 

chemical, medical equipment. 

 

So they’re currently of course employed in a vast variety of 

employment opportunities across the province. We have them 

working in our cities, they work in our mines, certainly work on 

many of our environmental sites. So we find this particular 

discipline working in many, many environments across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if I 

could refer you to clause no. 8 in the Bill which is entitled, 

public appointees. You indicate there that the minister or the 

order in council, which is cabinet, after consulting the 

association, may appoint two persons. 

 

Two questions related to that, I guess, Mr. Minister, is why did 

you feel that this was necessary to have cabinet appoint; and 

then secondly, what guidelines and what criteria is there around 

the consultation process that you wish to put in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The way in which the Bill is designed is 

consistent with what you would see in other professional 

designated legislation. And of course what would happen here 

is the consultation of course would be with the body that’s 

applying for the designation. 

 

And what we would see here of course is the . . . in this case 

SASTT would provide us with the names of which they would 

wish to see on the board. And of course we would then take 

those nominations from them. They would provide that to us 

and through order in council then we would make those 

approvals, based on their recommendation. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, the only criteria though that I 

did see there is that the person must be a resident of 

Saskatchewan. Are you looking for any specifics? Does it have 

to be a member of the technologists and technicians 

association? Does it have to be someone who was involved? 

What kind of guidelines do you expect the people to have, 

before they are submitted as names by the association? 

 

(1230) 

  



1526  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well as I said earlier, Mr. Member, that 

what we would be expecting of course is that the list of names 

would come really from the professional body. They would 

provide that to us. And in their submission of those names, I 

expect we would be looking for then, on their guidance, the fact 

that those individuals would have the kinds of expertise and 

skills that would be necessary to serve in that capacity. And 

having received that from them we would, in all likelihood, 

support that position and make those designations through order 

in council then, based on that recommendation. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Clause no. 18, Mr. 

Minister, deals with registration, and it refers to fees, etc. Do 

you have any idea as to what the approximate cost will be for an 

applicant to be registered with the association? Will that be 

something that you will control, or will that be in the control of 

the association’s executive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The control of the fee, Mr. Chair, would 

be that of the association. And I believe that those registration 

fees currently would be set at $125. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In clauses 24 and 

25 we have reference to disciplinary actions that may be taken 

for unprofessional conduct, I guess is the best way to describe 

it. Mr. Minister, can you give me examples that would show the 

range of disciplinary action that may be levied against a 

member of the association because of this unprofessional 

conduct? What would be the range of disciplinary actions that 

could be taken? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well there would be in my opinion a 

variety of different responses that I could give to that, but I 

think the range would be significant. It could be from a 

suspension of an individual from the work that they’re currently 

doing; they could certainly be placed on some type of 

probationary periods; or in fact they could be relieved of their 

duties . . . would be the, I think, the range of kinds of actions 

that they could take against a particular member of the 

association. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple of 

concerns have been raised around clause no. 40, and clause no. 

40 of course is the report of termination of employment. This 

clause imposes upon an employer the responsibility of reporting 

the member of the association to the association for firing, I 

guess, for leaving employment. 

 

And my question . . . the concern that has been raised to me, 

Mr. Minister, is whether or not this may be seen as a bargaining 

chip by the employee who has been terminated, in respect of 

further employment in another province or in another concern. 

 

Could you clarify why that provision would be important in 

terms of the employer having to report the dismissal of an 

employee to the association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think, Mr. Chair, the responsibility, of 

course, in terms of the conduct of the individual who’s 

registered under the association, the association would have 

certainly an investment in knowing that the people who are  

registered members of their association in fact are practising in 

a fashion that would be acceptable to the public. If in fact you 

had here an individual who was not performing to that 

particular capacity, it would be I think, prudent for the 

association to know that that type of an individual in fact is 

employed and is a member of the association. 

 

And what this part of the legislation really assures here is that 

the employer then would provide that kind of information 

notice to the association, and then the association of course 

would then act as the legislation is crafted. 

 

And so as much as it is to ensure that you have people who are 

involved in the association who meet the sort of the standard 

expectations that are set by the association, so is that of public 

protection. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, my 

final question is around three of the last four sections, and 

they’re all very similar of course. They deal with consequential 

amendments to other Acts. And there has been some concern 

expressed by the other professional groups that are affected — 

of course we’re talking about the architects and the engineers 

and the land surveyors. 

 

For clarification, Mr. Minister, I see the Act as of course a right 

to title legislation that grants the professional status to this 

group. The concerns raised by the other people seem to indicate 

that there is this possibility of description, job description, and 

the change that may occur in their particular interest. Could you 

clarify what the three consequential amendments will do to 

those three particular groups? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well clearly the member is correct that 

there has been, and I’ve received from three of the other 

professional organizations, some concern raised around the 

consequential amendments as they relate to the issue of title 

protection. 

 

I think what’s important here to recognize is that this piece of 

legislation clearly only demonstrates that this is title protection. 

Really, what that means is that it recognizes that there are 

people who do work related to the services of architects and 

engineers and land surveyors. These are the groups that have 

expressed the concerns and this is where the consequential 

amendments will lie. And they of course practice . . . may not 

require of course the same kinds of expertise and don’t. 

 

And really what this legislation is intended to do here is it has 

no attachment at all to that of scope of practice. The Bill 

provides protection to members of SASTT, and has no impact, 

in our opinion, on the scope of practice for all of the other 

related professions. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, just a 

follow-up I think to the last concern raised by the member from 

Canora. And that is most organizations we have chatted with 

. . . And certainly when the legislation came forward we 

certainly didn’t have any opposition to it. We felt it was 

certainly imperative that regulations and professional 

recognition of technologists and technicians was brought  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

forward. And I think most people agree and we felt an 

agreement with it as well. 

 

However as recently as May 8 . . . or May 7, which was just a 

couple of day ago, where it was brought to our attention that 

some concerns the land surveyors had were brought to our 

attention and the feeling that this legislation may interfere with 

this industry. Now if I understand you correctly, you’re saying 

that really it doesn’t interfere; it doesn’t create a problem for 

them. 

 

And I think it’s imperative that that is made clear — that the 

legislation just enhances, and may even enhance their industry 

and their sector as well. And I think it’s imperative that there be 

a clarification on this. 

 

As I understand, on April 4 you received a letter from President 

Putnam, outlining some of the concerns and . . . where he says 

he wrote to the Hon. Clay Serby, minister responsible for 

SPMC, expressing concern about the lack of consultation which 

had occurred — and I think that was one of the concerns they 

had — and restating our opposition to the Bill. 

 

Now this may be even before your involvement as minister. I 

think some of the earlier correspondence went to Mr. Mitchell. 

Similar letters went to the minister from the presidents of the 

other two associations. And the response which we received on 

April 16 was essentially that the Bill followed the model that 

had been developed by the Department of Justice and that we 

need not be concerned. 

 

The issue is certainly that they raise, down . . . further 

paragraph: 

 

One of the most poignant points raised by President 

Putnam was that the proposed amendment to our Act 

would give members of SASTT, none of whom are 

currently employed in the survey industry in 

Saskatchewan, more status in the Act than the members of 

the association of certified survey technicians and 

technologists. 

 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what you have done to date to 

address this concern. And just to make it clear that if what I 

hear from you today, this certainly doesn’t take away from their 

certification and their certified survey technicians and 

technologists. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I appreciate, Mr. Chair, the member’s 

question, because I think that throughout the process, and any 

time that you’re bringing forward professional legislation of 

this type, that we want to make sure that in fact the consultation 

process has been well concluded and ensured. 

 

And I think through the examination of some of the work that 

I’ve seen done on this particular piece there was fairly 

substantive, in my opinion, consultation with all of the groups. 

However, I think any time that you can do a better job of 

ensuring that that’s done, that’s important for us to continue to 

realize. 

 

I know that as late as . . . From the information that you’ve been 

certainly speaking of, as late as the end of April, what I’ve had 

is my officials from Saskatchewan Property Management in 

particular, the president of the corporation, sit down with the 

professional organizations that certainly have raised the issue of 

whether or not there’s been due diligence on process. And it is 

my opinion that in conclusion of where we are today, that some 

of that has now been achieved. 

 

I guess what I also want to reiterate here again is that this is not 

about scope of practice for the Saskatchewan Association of 

Science Technologists and Technicians. It’s not about that. 

There will not be any really intent here; there’s no intent at all 

in this language of the Bill to provide any scope of practice for 

this particular group of individuals. And as I’ve said, this is 

only about title protection. And that’s really the process that 

we’ve undergone — the bringing forward of this legislation 

from the beginning. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m certain, as we see 

by the evidence of the individuals in the gallery here, that there 

are a number of people certainly interested. And I think your 

Bill is attempting to bring in some clarification and allow for 

the professional regulations and professional recognition of 

technologists and technicians. 

 

And I know that there has been a fair bit of consultation. I think 

as I’ve indicated earlier, it’s just important that all sectors of the 

industry at least be aware of the fact that if they do have 

concerns, that they’ve been adhered to, that they’ve been raised, 

and that the legislation doesn’t certainly create a problem for 

one sector over the other. 

 

I think it’s important that this type of legislation come forward. 

And so I can just rely on the fact that your officials and you . . . 

you and your officials certainly will be working together with 

the land surveyors to let them know how they fit into this and 

that this will not interfere in their industry. 

 

And I don’t have any further questions. And I’d like to thank 

you and your officials for being here to respond to the questions 

and concerns. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. As I was indicating, 

I’d like to thank the minister for his responses this afternoon 

and to your officials for being here and helping us understand 

the Bill further; as well as the public to understand the quality 

of this type of a registration. Thank you. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials please. 

  



1528  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Chair of committees, I would like to 

introduce Kirk McGregor, the assistant deputy minister of 

taxation and intergovernmental affairs, and taxation policy 

analysts Arun Srinivas and Eric Johnson. Arun is behind me 

and Eric Johnson is behind Mr. McGregor. Welcome to the 

Assembly. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This Bill is a fairly 

recent addition to the Assembly, and I’m wondering if the 

minister could just give more of a clarification as to the intent 

of the Bill 65, The Income Tax Amendment Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Let me just say briefly if there are more 

questions of detail, you can ask. 

 

In summary, this Bill introduces the extension of the 

manufacturing and processing tax credit for used equipment, 

which was not there prior. It was identified to us as a 

disincentive for people who were bringing in used equipment 

instead of new equipment for manufacturing purposes; and then 

some technical detail in the Act just to bring our rules in sync 

with constantly changing federal rules in the income tax area. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So, Mr. Minister, based on that comment is this 

Act then just isn’t ongoing, it addresses some concerns there. 

It’s not something that will have to be addressed on an ongoing 

basis? Are we addressing this as a one-time change to conform 

to federal regulations? Is that what I understand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Yes, that’s the correct interpretation. On 

the tax relief side, of course, it’s part of the ongoing 

consultations we have done with the business community in 

Saskatchewan in trying to keep our manufacturing sector ahead 

of those in the rest of Canada by keeping our tax rates the 

lowest in Canada. 

 

With respect to the income tax provisions — let me just read 

the details of them: administrative improvements are set out in 

amendments to section 3; provincial and foreign tax credit and 

new provisions would set out the provincial taxation of mine 

reclamation trust funds, section 7.5; to deal with tax avoidance 

transactions, section 7.6 and 53.1; and delegate limited 

remission authority to the Minister of National Revenue, section 

32.1. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair:  I thank the minister and the officials for their 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the members 

opposite for their questions and for their cooperation. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair — Will the minister introduce his official? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair, with me is Drew Johnston, 

who is with the health planning and policy development branch. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just before I do that 

I’d like to thank Mr. Johnston for his assistance. And I’d also 

like to thank the opposition for their cooperation in amending 

the Bill we recently passed and amending it in this Bill. It’s 

very helpful to us in dealing with the psychologists and the 

opposition is aware of the negotiations that have taken place in 

that regard. And with that, I’d like to move the Bill without 

amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1300) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and 

Security Guards Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 18  The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With us today is 

Mr. Con Hnatiuk, deputy minister of Social Services; Mr. Bob 

Wihlidal, who is the director of our budget management branch; 

Mr. Richard Hazel, who is the executive director of family and 

youth services; and Mr. Phil Walsh, executive director, income 

support. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, 

rather. Welcome, Minister, and welcome to your officials today. 

 

If I may, Mr. Minister, I would just like to start my questioning 

today with a little bit of clarification that I would appreciate 

surrounding the welfare fraud situation. From some of the 

questions that have transpired in this House in the last couple of 

weeks, my understanding is that right now the province is not 

monitoring welfare fraud through verification workers at all. Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No. No. Absolutely not, Mr. Chair. We 

are dealing with the issue of abuse and fraud with a group of 30 

verification officers who are placed in every region of the 

province, who are at work on a daily basis. And much as the 

result of their work over the last number of years, we’ve seen a 

significant decline in what some would describe as welfare 

fraud. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay, thank you. You’ve mentioned that there are 

30 verification workers throughout the province. Could you tell 

me how much money has been spent on those measures, the 

verifications workers, in total, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we don’t have the, sort of, the 

total. Each of the verification officers would be of course a 

salaried employee of the Department of Social Services. We can 

get the salary ranges there and multiply that by the 30 

verification officers. 

 

But I can report we have tracked and monitored this very, very 

closely since the verification officer program was put in place 

some years ago now. It is calculated that we have saved 

between 3 and $5 for each dollar invested in a verifications 

officer’s salary. 

 

So it’s been a good return to the department, and therefore a 

good return to the taxpayer and a good return therefore to 

people who require those funds; that they’re now being directed 

to the people in real need as opposed to going to some who may 

not be in that same circumstance. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, Mr. Minister, I 

would certainly appreciate a cost outline of the salaries of those  

verification workers if you could forward that to me in the next 

while. 

 

And I would like to move right now to some questions 

surrounding the programs that are in place in the province, or 

will be put in place in the province, to serve needy people. With 

the new federal money that is being pumped into the child tax 

benefit and basically additional benefits from the working 

income supplement . . . or for the working income supplement, 

can the minister tell me how much money that the province will 

be saving? I think you’ve indicated that the money that you will 

be saving will be redirected into other programs for children. 

 

So could you tell me how much money you estimate will be 

available for those other programs because of these savings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, as the member will know, the 

commitment made by the federal government is to inject a new 

$600 million into a national child benefit beginning July, 1998. 

The WIS (working income supplement) changes which have 

occurred now, will become part of that in July ’98, which then 

would represent at that time, if the federal government moves 

on its commitments here, that would indicate for the nation a 

commitment of $850 million. If we prorate that to 

Saskatchewan, that would represent, on an annualized basis, 17 

million that would be available for our purposes. 

 

However, because the commitment has been made to begin July 

1998, in that first year of course we wouldn’t see the full benefit 

in that year. And so the dollars in 1998, in our budget year 

’97-98, will be smaller because the program — unless we can 

move to get it going earlier — would be something less than 17 

million. And then we know there are going to be some start-up 

costs for the new programing and we’re in negotiations with the 

federal government now about how those monies will be 

accounted for. 

 

Once the program is in place and those federal dollars start to 

flow, we have made the solid commitment to the federal 

government, as we expect the federal government would want 

us to, that each and every one of those dollars, the dollars that 

we are able to save, will return back to children and families in 

need in our province. 

 

We’ve also been saying quite consistently, with the federal 

government, while this serves as a down payment — as the 

federal government has described it — we would want to see 

the road map to take us to the, at least 2.2 billion that everybody 

across Canada agrees is required for this program. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can appreciate your 

directing the comments to the 17 million that will begin flowing 

in July of 1998, etc., but I think both of us need to talk about 

and clarify the fact that I certainly have read in documents 

coming to us from the federal government that there is 195 

million in July of this year, 1997, that will be directed to all the 

provinces in Canada. 

 

So when we break that down, it should come to, I’d think, a 

very significant amount for Saskatchewan by July 1997. And 

that’s supposed to be transition money. Are you using that  

  



1530  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

money or have you been given some absolute indication by the 

federal government that you are going to be getting that money 

in July, 1997? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just so the member is very 

clear. The program that has been amended by the federal 

government, the WIS, the working income supplement, 

beginning July is not money that comes to the province of 

Saskatchewan. That is a program that’s delivered to individuals 

in our province. It’s not money that comes to the province that 

would be in any way available for us to compensate any 

expenditures we have. That is a program that provides, I think 

it’s between 40 and $50 to working. . . to support working 

families in our province. 

 

But that money is not coming to the provincial government — 

that’s coming straight to the citizens of our province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  From what you have said in the past few weeks, 

that the province will be putting money towards an income . . . 

enhancing the working income supplement, what I’m gathering 

here then is if the province is doing that and the federal 

government is doing the same through working income 

supplements, that there should be a significant increase in the 

cheques of people that are working — those people that have 

children. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, the member is correct. We have 

made changes, announced them — and they were initiated May 

1 — to provide new benefits to families who are eligible for the 

Saskatchewan Family Income Plan. That’s based on the number 

of children; it’s a per child benefit per month based on income. 

The money that we have dedicated to that purpose is 

brand-new, brand-new money. 

 

Now the federal government has made a change with the WIS, 

but we recognize that this . . . we’re talking here about $195 

million across Canada — across Canada. So if you divide that 

to all of the provinces, all of the people who are supported by 

that program, it is some increase, but it’s not a large increase 

because of the change in the WIS. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

just take you in a bit of a different direction here. And Social 

Services has come under some criticism from the Provincial 

Auditor in his spring report. Mr. Strelioff points out that Social 

Services made $43 million in payments to community-based 

organizations last year. And I quote from what I’ve read, that 

the programs receiving the money do not clearly set out the 

department’s operating objectives. 

 

Can the minister respond to that comment for me, please? 

 

(1315) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we recognize the concern that 

the auditor raised and have accepted his concern, and so what 

we have done in response to that concern is to now clarify, I 

think in a fashion that the auditor will approve of, we’ve 

clarified those contracts with our funded agencies so they will 

meet his concern and a concern that we felt was well taken. 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I’m glad there was some clarification 

but I would directly like to know what is being done to improve 

the reporting mechanisms with community-based organizations 

that are receiving department funds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 

question. In response, these sort of . . . these three at least, we 

have now amended the contracts so that the contracts clearly 

state the objectives that we have, and so that clarity is now 

achieved. 

 

We have for some time, but it’s being completely regularised, 

so that there’s a regular evaluation that goes on at the 

community or regional . . . at the regional level. And to assist, 

in addition to sort of the more formal evaluations, we are now 

having very regular meetings of our regional staff people with 

the funded organizations to ensure that the objectives are being 

met. And I can say to the member that even in just very recent 

times, where we felt there was some real difficulties in a 

circumstance, we’ve moved to terminate the funding. 

 

So the process I feel is very accountable, and we believe will be 

seen so by the auditor. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

mentioned that there are — I believe your words here were that 

there are regular meetings to ensure that the objectives are being 

met, and that there are reports coming back from the 

community-based organizations to you. Are these being 

documented, those reports? Will they be down on paper so that 

I might be able to have a look at them and concerned citizens 

subsequently having a look at them? And how regular are those 

meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair. The answer is yes. We 

keep the documentation, and they’re available for scrutiny. And 

I forgot to mention earlier of course that we also received from 

our community-based organizations, the audited statements 

from the auditors. But yes, we do keep record of the evaluations 

and they’re available. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I would appreciate if I could receive 

those on a consistent basis please. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, how regular are the meetings that your 

department has with these . . . how regular are the meetings? Is 

there a specified amount of time whereby the organizations and 

your department has got to have meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, this will vary. I think as the 

member will understand, this will vary rather widely. There are 

some community-based organizations that have been funded by 

Social Services or by the province for many, many, many years. 

They have a long track record. They are solid and they’re just 

widely regarded and accepted. The kind of evaluation in that 

circumstance and the opportunity to meet will, understandably I 

think, be less frequent than in some other examples. 

 

Now there may be other examples of newer programs or 

services or where there has arisen some difficulty, where the 

meetings may be occurring as frequently as once a week. These  

  



May 9, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

meetings are usually held by our community service 

consultants. In fact on occasion, well very often I’m involved in 

such meetings myself. I’ll be attending annual meetings, annual 

meetings on a regular basis, of community-based organizations. 

So the frequency will vary a great deal. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I find that 

the same concern as far as reporting back and ensuring that 

objectives are being met and that these plans are actually 

working is true for the child action plan. Now I do want you to 

know that I admire any endeavours that the government is 

doing with helping children, through any plan, as long as the 

plan in fact is reportedly and proven to be working. And I 

believe that we’d have to ensure that we have got a constant 

two-way reporting, I guess I would say, happening, to ensure 

that these programs are effective. Because monies can be used 

in certainly other ways if programs are not being effectively 

reported. 

 

In the case of the child action plan, we always see an outline of 

who is getting what. And you have provided me with those 

papers that give me an indication of what the organizations are, 

and I thank you for that. But how do you know that the 

objectives on those . . . that you have set out for the child action 

plan with different communities are in fact being achieved? 

There’s 250 of them and are they regularly reporting back to 

you and are you satisfied to their effectiveness at this point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I, and I think the senior 

officials of the department, are indeed satisfied that we have the 

processes in place to do appropriate evaluation. 

 

I just want to say that I share with the member entirely the view 

that we want to ensure that when we’re investing precious 

dollars into programing for children or families under the child 

action plan or indeed in anything else we do in the department, 

that we are achieving the goals that we share and that monies 

are not finding their way into areas that are not serving as we 

would hope they would serve and so on. 

 

Now with the child action plan, and as the member pointed out 

the numbers of programs and projects that are happening, it has 

meant some real diligence in having to evaluate and watch. 

Some of the programing of course is relatively new — six 

months, a year — and so we want to give some of the programs 

an opportunity to function a sufficient period of time that you 

can do an accurate and appropriate evaluation. 

 

But I do want to say to the member, we share her view entirely 

that when we have these resources to provide to our 

communities we want to be sure that they’re doing what we 

hope they do. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I know that that’s one thing I would 

appreciate, along with the Provincial Auditor and so on, is a 

continual reassurance that we know that the child action plan is 

working, that it is effective, and it is doing what it was set out to 

do. And so I hope there is close monitoring going on with that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the government says it’s redesigning social  

assistance by putting in place a plan to alleviate child poverty, 

and Social Services is pledging $13.8 million to initiatives for 

children in need. But what they don’t elaborate on is that there 

has been a $5.04 million increase in the Social Services budget 

. . . decrease, rather, in the Social Services budget which has 

come at the expense of seniors and social assistance recipients. 

 

Income security . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  How do you figure that? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Like this. Income security and support, that’s the 

total of SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan), FIP (Family 

Income Plan), and SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) for seniors, 

has dropped $17.4 million from the last year. Payments to SAP 

recipients has decreased by $20.7 million and payments to poor 

seniors has remained the same, around 14 million. So my 

question is, where has all the money gone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there’s quite an easy 

explanation here. The money that has been dedicated to meeting 

the needs of some of the 18- to 21-year-olds in our province has 

now been shifted to post-secondary education for the Youth 

Futures program. And so their support in our pilot in Prince 

Albert around the Youth Futures program will be monies that 

they used to receive under the welfare system, now will receive 

their basic living allowances and support under the Youth 

Futures program, because we believe that we need to encourage 

and assist our young people into training and education and so 

on through a different program. So some of that money goes 

there. 

 

The rest of that money has gone into Post-Secondary Education 

and Training to provide for the provincial training allowance, 

again providing basic supports for individuals who will be 

improving their education in post-secondary training. And so 

some of the money has gone to the Youth Futures program; the 

other has gone to the provincial training allowance. That’s the 

difference. 

 

So if you tracked over to Post-Secondary Education, you would 

see that money in that budget now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recognize that the 

money is in that budget, but I also recognize from what I’ve 

heard before that Post-Secondary Education training programs 

are going to be developed over the next two to three years I 

believe is what I heard. And so the great amount of money that 

has been cut from the Social Services budget, from income 

security and so on, seems to be a larger amount of money than 

what the government will be expending this year on training 

programs. 

 

The pilot project in Prince Albert I have been told, is a pilot 

project and is being developed. And I think in this House the 

last time I had a chance to ask some questions regarding this, 

the indication was given to me that that would be probably 

developed over . . . maybe within the next six months. And so 

again we have a time period here where, within the framework 

of the year, where there’s not a great deal of money being used 

as compared to the money being taken out of this budget for  

  



1532  Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1997 

this year. 

 

So I would like the minister to reconcile the fact that it’s not 

possible to use as much money as has been stripped from Social 

Services for training programs and this pilot project within this 

year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Chair, I differ. I differ in my 

opinion. That in fact that is exactly how we have crafted and 

calculated the budget, recognizing that the programs wouldn’t 

be beginning the day the budget was announced but in the 

course of the coming year. 

 

The officials within the department, who have done this for 

years, indicate that this is the appropriate transfer of monies to 

fund these new programs as they are up and running. We’re 

here talking about a total transfer of about $20 million from the 

SAP budget over to these programs. And I would hope that the 

member wouldn’t argue that the money should be left in the 

SAP budget. We should be trying to develop these new 

programs. We think these are better mechanisms to deliver 

these basic supports to young people and people who want to do 

training. 

 

But what is even more I think important is that not only have 

we transferred those amounts from the welfare budget, from 

social assistance over, post-secondary is adding resources of its 

own. And so there in fact will be greater resources available to 

those people under these new programs. 

 

Ms. Julé:  There is a number of questions surrounding this 

whole issue of training, etc., for people that are on social 

services that would be entitled to training. We haven’t really got 

an indication of the number of seats and spaces that will even 

be available to accommodate the number of people that will 

suffering from decline to themselves in assistance through this. 

 

And so I really feel quite concerned about the number of people 

there that can’t get into training programs immediately that 

would benefit of course from that. But when there’s a great deal 

of money cut from income security that’s shifted over, it’s got 

to mean that there are people out there that are going to be 

struggling. Because they can’t get into training programs and 

still the money is not available for them to live in a fairly basic, 

healthy life style. 

 

I would like to thank you for your answers today. And we will 

be continuing with our line of questioning, it is my hope, within 

another session with Social Services estimates. But at this time I 

would like to take my seat and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

what? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Recognize the clock. Call the clock. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Oh, I don’t know what you mean . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And I guess I would like to call the clock. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It being past the normal hour of 

adjournment, the committee will now rise, report progress, and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  It now being past the hour of 

adjournment, I want to take this opportunity to wish everyone a 

good weekend and to enjoy some of the spring weather with 

your family and friends. This House now stands adjourned until 

1:30 p.m. Monday afternoon. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:30 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1505 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1505 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1505 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1505 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 1506, 1513 

  Krawetz.......................................................................................................................................................................... 1506, 1524 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1520 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mothers’ Day Tribute 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 

 30th Anniversary of Melville Motors 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1506 

 Emergency Preparedness Week 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1507 

 Tribute to Mothers and Families 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 

 Prince Albert to Host Major Sporting Events 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1507 

 Ranch Ehrlo Society 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 

 Labour Force Increasing 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1508 

 Volunteer Award 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1508 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 

 SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 

  Lautermilch ................................................................................................................................................................... 1509, 1511 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 

 Respite Care 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 

 Child Prostitution 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 66  The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

 Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1513 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 

 

SECOND READINGS 



 

 Bill No. 55  The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

 Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 

  Osika .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1514, 1523 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1519 

 Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1524 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1526 

 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

 Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

 Bill No. 18  The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1528 

 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

 Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1528 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Social Services  Vote 36 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1529 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1529 

 

 


