



















































Hansard: April 22, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1053 

 April 22, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3  University Tuition Fees 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was speaking when 5 

o’clock interrupted our little conversation. I am delighted, now 

that we have reconvened, to stand up on behalf of 

Saskatchewan’s university students. Basically what I’m saying 

is I’m delighted to stand up on behalf of our provincial future 

because a province that is going to succeed in the next 

millennium is going to be a province that has a very, very 

well-educated, well-rounded workforce and a well-educated 

citizenry. We owe that to our collective future and, if I might be 

so bold, to our collective retirement when the time comes — 

one at a time. I am so proud of the member for Regina South for 

moving this motion, and the reasons I enunciated earlier, but I 

want to recap them just briefly this evening. 

 

It’s somewhat of a hardship for a university student to go to 

university. It’s hard on the student to put together the money 

and it’s very difficult often for the families to help out as 

families in Saskatchewan will do to the best of our abilities — 

trust me, I know of what I speak, having had two of our 

children attending university. Things that cause a hardship are, 

of course, tuition fees, where at the University of Regina tuition 

fees are heading to $2,640; room and board I estimated would 

be about $3,200 for that time period; transportation about $600; 

entertainment $800; books — earlier I said 500, and everybody 

tells me that I’m incredibly low when I say $500 for books — 

but I’ll stick with the 500 just for the sake of creating this 

argument and knowing that my costs are low. Of course you’d 

need a telephone to call home to mom or dad or both, if you’re 

so blessed, and that’d be another roughly $400 by the time you 

get everything done. That adds up, Mr. Speaker, to over $8,000. 

 

Hardship, if I can describe it that way, for university students. 

While they’re spending that money on their education, and their 

and our collective future, of course they’re not working at a 

career job. They’d likely be working part-time at a relatively 

low-paying job that wouldn’t come anywheres near to meeting 

these expenses. The reality for university students today is that 

they graduate with a degree, go out and get a career job, and 

what they’re saddled with is a debt that’s the equivalent of most 

people’s mortgage payment — those of us who still have a 

mortgage. 

 

University students graduate, immediately start their career 

employment with a mortgage payment, and no house. Then they 

have to rent or purchase. And of course there’s transportation, 

and there’s furnishing of whatever their accommodations are, 

and so on. It’s just an unreasonable burden for us to expect it to 

ever grow. That’s why tuition fees are an important part of the 

equation. 

 

I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government in its last 

budget has done everything we humanly can. We increased the 

education funding for K to 12 from 542 million to 550 million 

— that's 8 million more. 

I bring that education in only so that you can't say that the other 

education, the post-secondary education, got all of the gravy 

and the rest of the education got nothing. In post-secondary, the 

funding went from $351 million last year to $386 million this 

year — a $35 million increase. Total increase for education — 

$43 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with that, we're asking in this motion that the universities 

in Saskatchewan recognize that we have 100 per cent filled in 

the vacuum left by the federal government in their withdrawal 

of funding. We filled it in 100 per cent plus some more for 

capital — plus some more for capital. So we want the 

universities to acknowledge that and re-look at tuition fees, try 

and keep the tuition fees as low as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now while the provincial government, while we were doing 

what I've just described in increasing our funding to universities 

and the education system, generally speaking, I pointed out and 

I point out again, the federal government, 1990-91 according to 

the Estimates book, the 1990-91 Estimates, you find this on 

page 8 of the Estimates book is the 1991-92, but the year I'm 

referring to is 1990-91. The total receipts from other 

governments: $1.499 billion. That’s $1 million shy of a billion 

and a half dollars — that in the year 1990-91. 

 

What’s the situation when you go to the Estimates today? The 

Estimates for 1997-98, page 16, total transfers from the 

Government of Canada: $650 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fact describes a cut in six years, a reduction in 

federal government transfer payments to the province of 

Saskatchewan, of some $849 million. Do we wonder why it’s 

difficult to fund education? Do we wonder why our universities 

struggle with things like paying the salary of their people, why 

they struggle with tuition fees? Do we wonder why we struggle 

maintaining health care, social services, highways? — $849 

million cut, Mr. Speaker, and it is frustrating to put it mildly. 

 

I am so proud of the people of Saskatchewan for the job they’ve 

done in making our economy grow, in helping things get better 

that . . . it’s because of the million people in Saskatchewan that 

we are in the situation we are where we’ve been able to increase 

funding for education and post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that says it all, and I will allow other 

members to participate. I’m most anxious to hear what other 

members, particularly those on the other side, have to say to this 

motion that we are hoping the Saskatchewan universities 

recognize the provincial government’s decision to back-fill 100 

per cent of the federal cuts to universities and to increase 

funding for capital costs at universities by $6.8 million in the 

coming year. 

 

And we hope therefore that the universities will cancel tuition 

fee increases. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that the universities 

take a good, hard look at this, and I’m sure they will do 

everything they can to live certainly within the spirit. I wish 

them well in those deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



1054  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

really delighted to also take part in this debate this evening. 

We’re discussing universities, and we’re discussing education. 

 

Personally I didn’t go to university, but I have had 5 children 

who have been through the system for the last 10 years. And I, 

like the previous speaker, know the costs involved in attending 

university. Tuition fees and the books and the travel and room 

and board — you’ll be very lucky if you can get away with 9 or 

$10,000 a year depending on which university classes you’re 

going to. 

 

And then there’s the additional problems that lots of students 

have, especially ones that don’t live in the city, in Saskatoon or 

Regina. Travelling homes on weekends is — or whenever we 

can talk them into coming home is — it costs money. 

Telephone calls cost lots of money. I think that in rural 

Saskatchewan, although we have many advantages, the 

disadvantages when it comes to go to university, we have the 

cost of the whole system as being a major one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was . . . just before I move on, I would ask if 

the government had ever considered one of the proposals that 

we put forward in the last election, and that was to discuss using 

the interest that students use on the student loans as a deduction 

when they do work in this province. I think that having an 

opportunity . . . giving our kids an opportunity to work in the 

province should allow them some breaks when they’re working 

here. It wouldn’t be a lot of money, but it would show some 

commitment to our students from this government, and I think 

it’s something they should consider. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the last hour or more, we’ve been listening to 

the members opposite talking about the federal cut-backs and 

problems of the funding from the Liberal government has 

caused to our students, and basically I’m tired of hearing it. I 

know everybody on this side of the House is tired of hearing it. 

I’m sure that everybody in TV land is very tired of hearing it as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had the member opposite talking about the 

money that came forward from the revenues that the provincial 

government had. In 1992-93 the provincial revenues in the 

Estimates books was four billion four hundred and ninety-one 

thousand dollars. In the ‘97-98 Estimates we have five billion 

and seventy-three thousand. Do you know that that’s $481 

million more . . . $581 million more than when they first came 

into power? That includes the transfers. 

 

Now I don’t know why we have to divide everything up and 

decide whether we’re going to categorize things, because every 

day in the House we hear people, this government, talk about 

not having targeted taxes. We throw all the money into a pot 

and divide it out. 

 

You’ve got over $500 million each year more to spend now 

than you did in ’92 and ’93 and you’ve decided not to spend it 

on education. You’ve decided to spend it on any place but rural 

Saskatchewan and education. 

 

So I’m sorry, I’m not listening to this any more. And I think 

people out . . . that are watching also are saying tonight we have 

. . . this government has decided what their priorities are and 

education is not one of them. 

 

Our expenditures in ’92-93 was just over $5 billion, and this 

year it’s about the same amount of money. We also hear about 

the interest that we’re supposed to be . . . that we pay on our 

debt. In 1992 they paid 760 million and this year we’re paying 

765 million — that’s interest. That’s not a big difference. 

 

We have more money being brought in this year than we did 

three years ago, four years ago, and we’ve only . . . and there is 

not a large difference in the interest. So when we talk about the 

money that this government has to spend, they have decided, 

they have chosen, where to spend their money, and I know that 

it’s not in education. 

 

The provincial government, when they made their choices about 

their expenditures, we saw cuts to agriculture. We see huge cuts 

to municipal government. We see cuts to highways. We see cuts 

to tourism except when it comes to casinos — I guess there’s no 

cuts to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that we’re discussing tonight states that 

the universities should be looking internally to help students 

cope with the funding . . . or the tuition increases. Well I 

wonder why the government doesn’t accept any responsibility 

at all for some of these cut-backs, not only in education but in 

many other areas as well. 

 

Today I talked in the House about issues regarding education in 

rural Saskatchewan. We talked about school closures and of 

course we were delighted that . . . or I’m delighted that Weekes 

School is still open, but we have schools and places like 

Annaheim and Englefeld that are scared every day and have 

been for the last year that their school would not remain open. 

 

But I don’t think this government understands the relationship 

between economic development and the need for an atmosphere 

that’s actually going to promote growth. I think the atmosphere 

that this government doesn’t understand is that business has to 

prosper in an environment that does not rely on government 

grants, government hand-out, and government decisions. We 

can make it if the government stays out of our way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this province was settled just 90 years ago, 

the pioneers that came out here had some priorities. Most of the 

things they had to do for themselves. But there was some things 

that they knew they had to work together for and that was for 

hospitals, for schools, and for roads. Everything else they didn’t 

. . . they could do themselves. And now and 92 years later, 

we’re seeing that those three basic, essential things that started 

this province are things that are no longer seen as responsibility 

or a major responsibility of this government. We see increases 

to things like the Department of Economic Development. 

Seems very strange to me when we know and the government 

members keep stating that they have . . . that businesses can . . . 

will be creating the jobs. We don’t have to have government out 

there trying to buy jobs or create jobs. All we have to do is 

allow people to have it happen. 

 

  



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Englefeld counted on the Minister of 

Economic Development to make the Minister of Education 

understand that in order for small business, or businesses 

period, to operate in Saskatchewan they had to work together. 

We don’t have any . . . it isn’t a compartmentalized thing where 

we have Education and we have Economic Development — it 

all works together. We have to see everybody work hand in 

hand and I don’t believe that the government understands this. 

 

We have government actually seeming to go out of their way to 

ignore what we . . . some of the concerns that we’ve brought 

forward. And I really wish that the members opposite would see 

that out in rural Saskatchewan, we are struggling to make sure 

that we do survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I of course hope the universities find a way to 

decrease the tuition for the students, but I also believe that as 

members of the legislature, we must stand up for the students. 

And not only ones going to university, but the ones out in 

public schools and that we should . . . that I hope this 

government really shows a commitment to students and funds 

education throughout the whole province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

very pleased to enter this debate tonight. I think I may end up 

speaking quite extensively because this issue of university 

funding really affects my constituency in Saskatoon very 

directly inasmuch as the university community is in my 

constituency of Sutherland. 

 

The basic motion that we’re discussing tonight has to do with a 

desire expressed by members of the Assembly gathered here 

tonight that the Saskatchewan universities in Saskatoon and 

Regina would recognize the provincial government’s decision 

to back-fill 100 per cent of the federal cuts, and because the 

federal government . . . the provincial government is 

back-filling these cuts that the university system would forgo 

large tuition increases that have been projected for students this 

coming year. 

 

I must say that I have to give a lot of credit to the administration 

at the University of Saskatchewan for the rigorous examination 

of their expenditures and their budgetary priorities that they’ve 

undertaken these last months. Many people will know that the 

government commissioned a MacKay report, a minister’s 

special representative in the person of Harold MacKay, to assist 

in the process of renewing our university communities in 

Saskatchewan, given the reductions in federal funding that 

we’ve seen last year to the tune of $47 million, and similar 

decreases in federal funding for post-secondary education again 

this year. 

 

This has really necessitated that not only the universities but the 

province itself come to terms with the future of our university 

system, engage in some proactive planning to see how we will 

deal with this financial crisis. 

 

The university community itself, led by the president of the 

university, Dr. George Ivany, undertook a very rigorous, 

extensive review of their academic programing and 

expenditures. This was contained in a report called The 

Programme Audit and Framework for Evaluation of 

Programmes. 

 

They, in undertaking this review, looked at their budget. They 

looked at where they could cut. They looked at cutting back on 

faculty. The university has an ageing faculty. They looked at 

what they could do to undertake and encourage early 

retirements in the academic community. They looked at where 

they could cut funding for support staff and for auxiliary 

services in the university, where they could secure cost recovery 

for extension programs, for example. And as a result of this, 

came up with a framework based on this audit, to deal with the 

anticipated, the announced cuts in funding for Saskatchewan 

universities. 

 

And we need to say, so that the public is very clear about this, 

that it was the Government of Saskatchewan that announced 

last year decreases in funding for the universities — 3 per cent 

cuts announced by the province because of the $47 million in 

transfer cuts from the federal government for post-secondary 

education, as I’d indicated earlier. 

 

So we have a situation here where we have two levels of 

government cutting back: the province cutting back on the 

university funding because of cut-backs to the province from 

the federal government. What we now have mercifully for the 

university system is a maintenance . . . a decision by the 

Government of Saskatchewan to maintain university funding at 

$168 million, not only for this academic year but for the next 

academic year as well. And this is very good news for 

Saskatchewan's university system — stable funding for 

Saskatchewan's universities from the provincial treasury. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  But I want to say to the public of 

Saskatchewan that this is not only stable funding for ongoing 

operating programs. In addition the university will receive an 

additional $10 million to support efforts in revitalizing the 

university communities. In specific terms, this $10 million will 

be used to fund capital expenditures over the next two years. 

 

Another dimension of this funding will be used for 

infrastructure within the university community, in addition to 

capital projects, infrastructure projects, to renew technology 

such as the computer networks on the university campuses and 

to enhance the application of technology in the university 

communities so that learning and teaching and administration 

can be supported by current technology. That in itself will 

amount to $4 million over the next two years. 

 

And then another $3 million will be allocated for what's called 

special initiatives that are related to projects and programs that 

were identified by Mr. Harold MacKay in the MacKay report, 

which will help also to revitalize the university community. 

 

And so we have a situation where in spite of ongoing, 

successive cuts in federal funding, the province of 

Saskatchewan has pulled back from its decision to cut the   



1056  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

university grants and has decided to honour our commitment to 

the university to build it and sustain it. And I think there’s a 

happy coincidence here, I dare say, Mr. Speaker, and that 

coincidence is that undergoing the audit that I talked about and 

looking at the framework of where the university community 

wants to go in the future as a result of the cuts that had been 

announced last year, I think the university community is a lot 

stronger in terms of — and focused — in terms of where it 

needs to go and where it wants to go to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan young people and the economy of the province 

over the next number of years. 

 

The only concern at this juncture — and this is what the 

resolution is all about this evening — is that in honouring the 

commitment to fund the University of Saskatchewan and in 

adding incremental funding for capital programs that the 

university itself is asked by this Assembly and the members 

who are debating this issue tonight not to raise tuition fees as 

they had projected in their framework and in their audit of their 

financial circumstances. 

 

We’re asking that the university community continue their 

reflection on their circumstances in light of the new 

dispensation that they’ve received from the province. In the 

light of the assurance over the next two years that funding will 

remain stable and that there will be increased funding for capital 

costs and for technological programs, that the universities 

would work diligently both in Saskatoon and in Regina to see 

that tuition fees on the poor students do not increase 

inordinately. I think this will result in a real opportunity for the 

— as I say — the university to clarify its own mandate, to 

renew its faculty, and to collaborate in applying technology to 

learning on both campuses here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The federal government, as we know, has reduced funding to 

post-secondary education. The simple fact of the matter is that 

we have replaced part of that funding for 1996, and we’re able 

to replace 100 per cent of it for 1997. And the universities say 

this is good news, and I say this is good news, for the university 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  And I want to commend Dr. Ivany for the 

work that he and the faculty and staff of the university 

community have done over these last months in the face of 

federal cuts; the work that they’ve done to maintain their 

standards of research and teaching, their commitment to 

academic excellence, and the role that they have focused on in 

terms of their relationship to the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Many people would not understand the vital role that the 

University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina play 

in our provincial economy. In Saskatoon it’s estimated that the 

impact of the University of Saskatchewan on the Saskatchewan 

economy is in excess of $800 million annually. This is a very 

significant part of our provincial economy. Even more 

important, it’s a very significant part of our future since we’re 

dealing in large measure with our youth. 

 

(1930) 

 

And that’s why we’re asking, in this motion tonight, that the 

university systems recognize the provincial government’s 

decision to 100 per cent back-fill federal cuts to the universities 

and also to increase capital funding for the two campuses in the 

coming years, and that they hold the line on tuition fees for 

Saskatchewan young people. 

 

This is a cooperative sort of approach that has characterized 

Saskatchewan government and Saskatchewan people at their 

best over the years, working in partnership, working in the 

context of often difficult decisions that come from governments 

in Ottawa. And this is just another testimony to the character of 

Saskatchewan people to — in the face of the adversity that they 

have known — to hunker down, reflect on their future, seek 

some redirection and redefinition of the tasks at hand; and lo 

and behold, provincially to come up with some reasonable 

increases for university funding and to address the problems 

that are there and to start to rebuild our province and the 

university communities. 

 

So I’m very pleased that there’s been a change in circumstances 

here in Saskatchewan with response to post-secondary funding; 

that there’s been a change in the province’s relationship to our 

universities and I commend them for the efforts that they’ve 

made. And we look for good things to happen as financial 

security from the province is now established once again. 

 

So with that, I will take my place and wish all students as they 

conclude their exams a lot of hard work in the next few days so 

that they conclude their year in a good fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased as well at this time to enter into the 

debate on a motion and on an issue that is very, very important 

to the, not only the people of Saskatchewan, not only to the 

opposition, but as the government members have indicated, to 

them as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned about the fact that there is 

an ever increasing burden on students in Saskatchewan — an 

ever increasing financial burden that includes more than just 

tuition fees. And as my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena 

pointed out to begin with, I think when we start to look at the 

overall picture of university education in Saskatchewan, we 

know that we have two very, very high-quality universities that 

exist within the province. But when we start to look at the 

student that enters the university program, we must remember 

that students from all across Saskatchewan are subject to very 

differing costs. 

 

We know that people from rural Saskatchewan automatically 

must incur a high cost for room and board. There’s 

transportation costs, as my colleague has pointed out. So when 

we talk to students, we hear, yes there’s great concern about 

tuition fees and the fact that they are increasing. But we also 

hear about the other costs, the kinds of things that the students 

must incur on a regular, daily basis. Those are of grave concern   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

to us as well, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to say a little bit 

more about some of those fees that the universities are 

responsible for that students pay. 

 

Two words that my colleagues used, Mr. Speaker, that I think 

are very, very important for students in the province — they 

were “affordable” and “accessible.” Those two words I think, 

are very important to students. Over the years of course, we’ve 

seen at both universities, we’ve seen program restrictions based 

on quota systems. We know that the number of students that 

could enter a particular college or a particular program was 

restricted, and the restrictions usually were met by looking at of 

course the grade average of an individual, looking at various 

other factors that came into play. 

 

What we’re very concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is that indeed 

the education that people need is affordable. The kind of 

education that we’re seeing in terms of university education I 

think has even become more and more important with the 

release of some very important statistics. 

 

One document that was released last week, Mr. Speaker, by The 

Saskatchewan Training Strategy was a graph that showed how 

very, very important university education is in respect to just a 

high school graduation or for that matter maybe not even the 

completion of high school. And I found it very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, to compare the years 1991 to the current 1995-96 year 

for which these statistics are available. The difference between 

a university graduation and some high school training in terms 

of the ability to secure employment was a difference of about 

15 per cent. That was the kind of situation that people faced if 

they didn't have a university degree and they were looking for 

employment. 

 

Now we take a look at that graph, Mr. Speaker, for 1995 and we 

see that the ability to secure employment for someone who is at 

the university graduation level versus someone who has some 

high school training is nearly 50 per cent — 50 per cent 

difference, the ability to secure a job. Now I think that speaks 

very, very highly of the university program that we have in 

Saskatchewan and the fact that it must continue to be 

affordable. It must continue to be accessible. 

 

My colleagues have made reference to the MacKay report, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to make some comments later on about 

some of the recommendations in the MacKay report. But one of 

the things that I found very interesting about that report last 

year was the fact that the two universities that we have in 

Saskatchewan are depended upon by the people of 

Saskatchewan; so much so that indeed there is a reason and 

there is need for the two university systems to continue to exist. 

 

But one of the recommendations that Mr. MacKay pointed out 

very, very clearly was that the university community must be 

ensured that they have long-term funding commitment from this 

province. Now that's a statement that I think we must take to 

heart, Mr. Speaker, in that when the government of the day 

decides that funding must be increased or decreased, they are 

dealing with the budget of a third party, in this case the two 

universities. 

 

Budget has announced some increase, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the amount of money that will be within the university's control. 

But I want to point out to the members opposite that there is 

increase for capital funding. And yes, it is not enough for 

capital funding because we know that there are many facilities 

at campus that require upgrading, require improvement, or for 

that matter require totally new construction. 

 

But the thing that has been pointed out, Mr. Speaker — very 

much so by the people that we’ve talked to — is that there is no 

new operating money. What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there was an announcement last year that there would be a $5 

million cut for post-secondary education institutions — the two 

universities — this year. Universities over the course of the last 

year have been looking at that scenario and have been trying to 

cope with that. And they have looked at various means. 

 

We’ve talked to the two presidents and they have had meetings 

within colleges; they have had meetings within departments; 

and they are looking at restructuring and reorganizing, and thus 

becoming more efficient and being able to save some money. 

But the end result, Mr. Speaker, is that all this budget has done 

is reinstate the cut that was projected. In other words, there is 

no new money. All we’re seeing is the return to last year’s level 

of funding for operating. 

 

I want to point out a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. And I note 

that the members opposite — I think it was the member from 

Regina South — who indicated that, you know, there has been a 

lot of downloading from the federal government to this 

provincial government. We do not dispute that. 

 

We are looking at the fact that the federal government must — 

must — get its house in order, Mr. Speaker. Financially, 

Canada must get its financial house in order. And we’re starting 

to see that. We’ve gone from a $42 billion deficit, I believe, 

down to one that may be projected in that 16 to $19 billion 

range. We see spin-off. We see economic spin-off for the 

province of Saskatchewan in that we have lower interest rates. 

And we see mortgage rates that have dropped now to a level 

that seemed to be more that the people can afford. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in 1994 the grants that 

were paid by this government to post-secondary institutions 

totalled $293 million. The estimate for this year, Mr. Speaker, is 

270 and that’s with an increase of $13 million. So you see, Mr. 

Speaker, since 1994 to today we have seen the grant to 

post-secondary educational institutions drop by $23 million. 

 

So is it little wonder that there has been an increase in tuition 

fees by the universities? I don’t support increases to tuition fees 

because the university requires some special programing or 

some need. But this is a third party. This is a group that is 

responsible for a balanced budget. 

 

I’m sure members opposite who have sat on school boards, or 

town councils, or city councils — have a responsibility to 

deliver a balanced budget — you take a look at the revenues, 

and you have a look at your expenditures, and in the end you 

are responsible for coming up with a balanced budget. 

  



1058  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

What the universities have had to deal with in the last couple of 

months is the fact that the knowledge about a proposed decrease 

in their grant was not there. In fact that decrease has become 

revenue neutral for operating. 

 

Now we’ve had the opportunity to talk with Dr. Wells from the 

University of Regina, and Dr. Ivany from the University of 

Saskatchewan. And I noted very interestingly from Dr. Wells 

that he said that as far as the operation of their campus, they 

have a brand-new building that they’ve just opened — a terrific 

building, a great addition to the University of Regina. There is 

no new operating money as far as paying the costs of operating 

that building. There are increases to the various staffs, whether 

they’re professional staff in terms of the professors and all the 

other people that instruct or whether they’re members of CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees). 

 

Those kinds of salary increases have taken place. There is no 

new money. And I quote Dr. Wells when he says: “We have no 

increase in the provincial grant but we do have higher costs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the various press releases 

over the last month and a half, I note that Dr. Ivany from the 

University of Saskatchewan stated — back at the end of March 

when the budget was out and he had a chance to look at it — 

and he said that universities cannot do without some kind of 

tuition increase. The quotation that he used was: “We can’t 

afford to wipe it out.” 

 

Now I think very, very, very clearly we know that universities 

originally — after the announcement of last year of the $5 

million cut — universities were looking at tuition fee increases 

of 10 per cent. And I think there was a lot of panic. Students 

said that was too much. How were they going to handle a 10 per 

cent increase when indeed other costs are rising as well? So 

when there has been a reduction or a change in the level of 

funding by this provincial government, universities are still left 

paying all those additional costs that I’ve indicated. 

 

The University of Regina states that the total operating 

expenditures for this year will increase by about 4 per cent to a 

total of $84.6 million. So as a result of not getting any increase 

in operating revenue, the fact that there are expenditures that 

have increased — those salaries, cost of the utility rates 

increases, all the little things that add up in the end — there is 

still a need for a 6.5 per cent increase. That is an increase that 

has produced for them a balanced budget. And I might add, Mr. 

Speaker, that the University of Regina president and the board 

of governors is very pleased that indeed this is the eighth 

consecutive balanced budget. And we know that there were 

many difficulties. There were many difficulties prior to eight 

years ago when the University of Regina incurred deficits and 

those deficits were things that to a degree weren’t in their 

control. 

 

(1945) 

 

I note one of the other recommendations in the MacKay report 

that talks about student enrolment projections. And I understand 

that years ago there was a situation where the projected 

enrolment never materialized and all of a sudden the 

plan that was in place resulted in deficit budgeting. I hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that this fall when we see student registrations at both 

campuses — both University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan — that indeed that kind of situation doesn’t 

occur again because we do not need to have a deficit financing 

at either of our institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point, Mr. Speaker, is that we have to look at, of 

course, university tuition fees and university costs in the whole 

picture. And I note that back in the early part of February we 

had a report that was released that indicated provincial averages 

of tuition fees. I was quite pleased to see that Saskatchewan was 

in the bottom four as far as the tuition fee costs. That means that 

Saskatchewan students are getting a better deal than in some 

other provinces if we look at the cost of tuition. 

 

One other point, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very glad that having a 

son who’s in grade 12 and is possibly looking at a university 

education that indeed we have two very good, efficient, and 

quality universities here in Saskatchewan. Because if we are to 

send our children to a university outside of this province, 

because indeed we don’t have an adequate system here in 

Saskatchewan, it will be a further cost to parents. And those are 

the kinds of things that we fear for in terms of what might 

happen to the students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at the comments of the 

university presidents and the university board of governors and 

the reaction to the budget this year, the reaction to the budget 

last year, and of course the analysis of what the universities are 

doing, I want to make the point here, Mr. Speaker, that both 

universities have reacted the same way, in terms of the board of 

governors. They have said that tuition hikes are unavoidable 

because of rising costs. They have not received any new money. 

And as a result of not receiving any new money, they have 

looked at other things to ensure that there is a balance, that 

indeed a 10 or 11 per cent increase in tuition fees has been cut 

to 6 per cent — still high but has been cut to that amount. 

 

We talked to Dr. Ivany, and we found out that the University of 

Saskatchewan is attempting something outside of the 

boundaries, not only outside of the boundaries of Saskatchewan 

and Canada, for that matter, but internationally as well. There is 

a move right now by the University of Saskatchewan, and it has 

been one that has been in progress for awhile, is that they would 

like to increase the number of foreign students that take 

education and university training in Saskatchewan. 

 

What this does, of course, is bring in a source of revenue. We 

know that Saskatchewan students receive a subsidized 

education. We’re also informed that the cost relative to what the 

student pays and what the total cost is, borne by the whole 

system, we’re getting into that 30 per cent range. Thirty per cent 

of the actual cost is borne by the student in terms of tuition fees; 

the rest is picked up by the taxpayer in general. Now when we 

start to get university applicants from other countries who are 

paying the full cost, we know that that of course becomes a 

source of revenue. 

 

One of the things that is also occurring at the University of 

Saskatchewan and I found this rather interesting in my   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

discussions with the dean of the College of Education, Dr. 

Jacknicke — the dean indicates that what will be occurring in 

this year and will be gradually phased in is that the number of 

students entering the college will be restricted. There will be a 

very specific quota and in fact their goal is to move to strictly 

post . . . not post-graduate, but after there has been some 

university training in one of the other colleges. 

 

He indicates and I quote, Mr. Speaker . . . that possibly the best 

way to indicate what he has said is to give you this quote. It 

says that: 

 

This is all in response to budgetary constraints. The 

funding has been inadequate over the last number of years. 

Now some kind of restructuring and downsizing is 

necessary to meet the budget crunch. By September of 

1998, only the post-academic program will exist in the 

college. 

 

So you see, universities have been aware that there was a 

projected cut, and they looked at rising costs, and they knew 

that of course revenues may not be stable. And as a result 

they've talked about what they can do differently. We see the 

College of Education in the University of Saskatchewan who is 

looking at doing something different. Will it save them some 

money? I think the dean is very hopeful, and what it will do of 

course is restructure how post-secondary education and the 

training of teachers occurs in this province. 

 

One other new program that we noticed, Mr. Speaker, was from 

the U of R (University of Regina) and I think this is an example 

of the two universities getting together and seeing who can best 

deliver this program. We see that the petroleum engineering 

program might be reality for the University of Regina. Dr. 

Wells has indicated that after discussions with the . . . between 

the two vice-presidents of the two institutions, it is determined 

that the University of Regina would be the best place to begin 

an engineering — a petroleum engineering — program. 

 

Now that's great news. That's great news for people in 

Saskatchewan. We have a growing petroleum industry. We 

have one that is expanding I think, and only the future knows 

how large it may become. And we can train these people right 

here in Saskatchewan and have quality people trained here, at I 

think a reasonable cost. So I take my hat off to the University of 

Regina for beginning a program like that. 

 

One of the other things that we found interesting as well is the 

fact that Regina is noted for the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) training depot. The heart of the RCMP 

training program in Canada is here in Regina. Now there is a 

program that may be put in place between the University of 

Regina and the police training association, and that program 

may be right here in Regina that will be under the coordination 

of the University of Regina. 

 

Also I think meeting the changing needs, looking at costs, 

looking at the fact that to train police officers we don’t need to 

send them to Vancouver or to Toronto. We can do it here in 

Saskatchewan and in that way probably save some money. So 

another accomplishment by the University of Regina. 

The area of agriculture biotechnology, Mr. Speaker, is so very 

important to Saskatchewan residents. And I think the kind of 

program that is in place at the University of Saskatchewan is 

one that is first-rate. We see that there are great 

accomplishments in the area of biotechnology and I think that 

the people of Canada will benefit from the advancement in the 

area of biotechnology. There will be changes in that field, as the 

university has indicated. Some of the programs that have been 

in place in the area of agriculture training and vocation 

agriculture training, those are constantly changing. They’re 

keeping up with the times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the same time of course, they’re incurring additional 

costs. And those costs must be paid by various sources, either 

through government grant or through tuition fees that the 

students will pay or through some other partnership method, 

Mr. Speaker. So the university funding is not a very simple kind 

of thing. It’s not just a grant situation that says here’s the grant 

and you administer it. I think the universities do a good job in 

terms of evaluating what they must provide and try to do the 

most economical job that they can do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that is very relevant, that is 

very relevant today is the MacKay report, as it’s referred to in 

the university realm. The report that was released last fall, Mr. 

Speaker, I think very clearly indicated that, firstly, there are two 

very good quality universities in Saskatchewan — there’s a 

need for both of them; and the other thing that was very clear, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the two universities must be autonomous. 

 

And I know that in speaking with the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education last night during estimates, he 

reiterated that position, said that yes, there is a role for 

government to play in terms of ensuring that somewhere down 

the road that maybe there is a need for government intervention. 

 

But he wasn’t thinking that way, and he was saying, that’s a last 

resort. We know the universities are very capable. We know the 

institution is very capable and the board of governors that direct 

them. 

 

So the kind of situation that we’re looking at, Mr. Speaker, is in 

this motion that we have before us tonight is indeed a bit of a 

contradiction. What we’re saying to the universities on the one 

hand is, we appreciate the fact that you are autonomous, that 

you are planning, that you are planning a good educational 

program in terms of delivering quality university training and 

education. But on the other hand, if you’d make a decision that 

is contrary that the government will try to interfere. 

 

And I don’t think that that is something that the universities 

appreciate, and I know that when we have the ability for the 

universities to set tuition rates, they must spend countless hours 

trying to determine what is the best for their students. We know 

that the enrolment, the enrolment numbers, may vary by the fact 

that tuitions will be up. And I’m sure that they’ve taken that 

into consideration as well. 

 

So when I see the editorials, Mr. Speaker, that have been in the 

papers in the last couple of weeks . . . and I note the editorial   



1060  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1997 

from April 1 of the Leader-Post and the reaction there in the 

editorial, Mr. Speaker, it says that: 

 

Any other attempts to get the universities to reverse the 

increases would be stepping onto dangerous ground in 

terms of university autonomy. 

 

That’s the reaction of someone who has written that editorial 

saying, it’s fine for the Minister of Finance to say last year I 

told you that you were going to get a 3 per cent or a $5 million 

cut. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Speaker, that $5 million cut, because the 

two universities share in that $5 million, that’s distributed not 

on an equal basis. And I want to make that point for those who 

would be interested, that indeed over $3 million of that money 

would have been cut from the University of Saskatchewan, and 

I believe it’s about 1.4, 1.5 million from the University of 

Regina. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, when we start to look at what the 

MacKay report has said as well, he’s indicated in his report that 

there is no way that we can get around an increase in tuition 

fees because rising tuition is consistent with nationwide trends. 

So I think in terms of what Saskatchewan tuition rates have 

done, in terms of where we’re moving for the future, I don’t 

think that we have out-of-the-ordinary increases. 

 

As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, we were in the bottom four, and 

I know that other universities across Canada are facing 

increased costs as well, and I’m sure some of their tuition fees 

will be going up as well. 

 

One of the other things that was highlighted in the MacKay 

report — and I had the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 

also make reference to that last night — is the re-evaluation of 

block funding. And in fact there is going to be a government 

commission, study, that’s going to take a look at block funding, 

take a look at how grants are provided to universities. Whether 

or not we have an even system of distribution based on 

colleges, based on the costs of providing that education — those 

are the kinds of things that must be considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course the most important concern that we have 

is not whether or not the university professors are going to have 

an increase in terms of salary or whether or not the building is 

going to have, you know, new windows in it. The most 

important thing is the concern that the students of the province 

have raised. 

 

Tuition fee increases are a concern to us. There’s no question. 

But we must look at it and see that whether or not the cost of a 

university education becomes so expensive that it is no longer 

affordable and accessible to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2000) 

 

Students have been . . . I’ve met with a number of students, and 

they have been telling me that they would like to have the 

re-examination of the student fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I found it very interesting that the University of 

Regina has released its budget; as I indicated before a very . . . a 

balanced budget; eighth consecutive balanced budget. And 

they’ve indicated increase in several fees areas. And I think this 

is of great concern to me as well. When I look at the tuition fee 

increase of 6 per cent, and then I see that we have for instance 

— and I’ll name a few of the fee increases — application fees, 

the fee will increase from 35 to $50. That’s slightly higher than 

6.5 per cent. The service fees for a full-time student will go 

from $30 per semester to $40 per semester. The recreation and 

athletic fees will also increase from 25 to $35. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what I’ve heard from many students in 

my area is that tuition fees are a known thing. They’re not a 

surprise when you get there because that fee has been set. What 

does become an overburden for many students, Mr. Speaker, 

are these fees. These additional fees that students find out as 

they enter the university picture and all of a sudden there’s a fee 

for recreation use, there’s a fee for the service use, and those 

kinds of things begin to be a bit of a problem. 

 

The other concern that students have raised, Mr. Speaker, is 

around the actual cost of materials and books at the university. 

And I think it is here that the university does have some control. 

The board of governors and the president probably do have 

some control here. 

 

I think all of us have heard about someone who has been forced 

to buy a brand-new $150 text for a particular class at university, 

and it is used for one semester, and then the professor decides 

that that class or that particular text is no longer relevant and 

says we’re going to be moving to another text also worth 

another $150. 

 

I’ve heard that from so many students, Mr. Speaker, that said 

the investment in terms of costs and materials . . . and I know 

. . . I believe it was the member from Coronation Park was 

indicating that materials and books are in that $500 

neighbourhood. That is very low, Mr. Speaker, because those 

costs are rising. They are rising very dramatically. And students 

are finding those costs to be a very, very serious burden. 

 

Post-secondary education is so essential to developing 

Saskatchewan’s future, Mr. Speaker. When we look at the kinds 

of . . . the ability to secure a job if one has a post-secondary 

degree, a university degree, we have to ensure that the price of 

getting that education does not deter people from seeking out 

the training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with rising costs of education, it is very important 

of course that students have adequate access to financial support 

programs — student loans, Mr. Speaker. I think what’s been 

bothersome to many, many students, Mr. Speaker, is that 

because they’re in a four- or a five-year program and when you 

start to look at the cost of a year of university being anywhere 

from 8 to $10,000, students are coming out of a university 

training program after four or five years with 40 and $50,000 

student loans. And the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that as my 

colleagues have pointed out — and I know that the members of 

the government have also this as a great concern — is whether 

or not there is a job available, whether or not there is a job   



April 22, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

available at the end of such a training. 

 

We’ve had some changes to the different programs, Mr. 

Speaker. But those kinds of things that have occurred in the 

area of student loans by the federal government in terms of 

providing an additional repayment plan, in terms of extending 

the time that students have to repay, have been met very, very 

favourably by students. Students have comments by saying that 

it has been difficult to secure a job, and as a result, with these 

changes, they are very, very pleased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there is so much to say about the 

post-secondary education and the university training in this 

province, I want to say to the member opposite that a third 

party, a university board of governors, has taken a good look at 

whether or not they want to see tuition fee increases. Those 

increases are dictated by a number of reasons. As I’ve indicated 

to the members, there have been no changes to the actual 

operating revenue to the university, neither the University of 

Regina nor the University of Saskatchewan. There are very few 

other changes that the universities can do. They have made 

significant changes in terms of costs, in terms of reducing some 

expenditures that they have control of. 

 

But as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, there are many things that 

they do not control. They do not control the costs of operating 

buildings. They do not control those hidden things that they 

have no control over. So as a result they have reduced possible 

10 or 11 per cent increases in tuitions to 6.3 or 6.5 depending 

upon which university. Are we, as an opposition, in favour of 

tuition fee increases as an example? No, we’re not. But when 

we have an autonomous body deal with that kind of a situation 

and propose those changes, I’m sure that they have not done so 

lightly. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 

debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:08 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3  University Tuition Fees 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1053 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1054 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

 

 


