



















































Hansard: May 20, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1801 

 May 20, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to present petitions on behalf 

of people from northern Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

develop a plan that will address the housing needs of 

northern residents in a timely manner. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lists of people, signatures, are from residents 

of Ile-a-la-Crosse and Turnor Lake. I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on behalf 

of the good citizens of the town of Kamsack: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise today to present petitions from concerned 

citizens of Saskatchewan, citizens concerned about the 

government’s change to The Labour Standards Act and the 

hardship it has caused. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to recognize the hardship which 

this failure to inform affected parents and employees has 

caused, and immediately develop a program to compensate 

all affected by the mistake. 

 

The petitioners are from Elstow, Allan, Colonsay, Dundurn, and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the hardships caused by this 

government’s failure to properly inform either parents or 

babysitters with respect to regulations under The Labour  

Standards Act. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to recognize the hardship which 

this failure to inform affected parents and employees has 

caused, and immediately develop a program to compensate 

all affected by this mistake. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Those who have signed these petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 

from communities such as Birch Hills, Spruce Home, Prince 

Albert, Meath Park, and a number from the city of Saskatoon as 

well as the community of Watson. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition signed by citizens of northern Saskatchewan 

on the issue of northern housing. I’ll read the prayer for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

develop a plan that will address the housing needs of 

northern residents in a timely manner. 

 

This petition is signed by several hundred northern residents. 

They come from Ile-a-la-Crosse, St. George’s Hill, Buffalo 

Narrows, Beauval, and La Loche, and one petitioner who 

simply identifies himself as NDP (New Democratic Party). Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on 

behalf of the citizens of Big River: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to recommend to the provincial 

government that it keep the Big River Forest Nursery in 

operation; and implement a buy-Saskatchewan seedling 

policy for government departments, Crown corporations, 

and forestry companies in receipt of taxpayers’ support in 

the form of government grants, loans, or tax incentives. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . Deputy Speaker, we have 

hundreds of signatures from Big River. We got some from 

Victoire, from Debden, from Saskatoon, and we have petitions 

from all throughout the land. And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions as well 

to present on behalf of Saskatchewan people, and the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping, invoking 

the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to enact 

banning all stripping in establishments where alcohol is  



1802  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

served. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present these petitions on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people. From all over Saskatchewan these 

petitions come from. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning for the following: 

 

To cause the government to develop a plan that will 

address the housing needs of northern residents; 

 

To establish a task force to aid the fight against youth 

crime; 

 

To support the creation of regional telephone exchanges; 

 

To protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area by declaring it 

an accessible and protected wilderness area; and 

 

To enact legislation banning all stripping establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I want to draw your attention and that of the 

other members in the Assembly to the west gallery, where there 

is a group of students from Balfour Collegiate in Regina — 67 

students. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Pat Maze. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this group after the question 

period. And at this time I would ask the members to join me in 

extending them a very warm welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to the members of the Assembly today, a group of 

concerned citizens that have had a big problem with 

reassessment and with SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency), Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This is only part of the committee that was formed in my home 

town to deal with this problem. I’d like to introduce them to 

you: Debbie Koptie; Margaret Bruner; Carm Tate; Al Westburg; 

Jack Dawes — and Jack, by the way, is a farm director on a 

local radio station out there; Joan Wilson, who is a councillor in 

the town of Saltcoats; Walter Farquarhson, who . . . Walter, by 

the way has been our United Church minister for many years 

and with some distinction is the past moderator of the United 

Church of Canada; Jim McCallum; Andy Sawkey; and Ms. Sara 

Marcel Pelletier. 

I would like the Assembly to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  To you and through you, I just want to 

join the member for Saltcoats in welcoming our guests here. As 

some of you may know, I was born and raised there and 

Saltcoats has a long tradition, a long tradition of sending good 

members to the legislature. The last one we’re not so sure 

about, but I wanted to . . . Just a joke. 

 

I just want to join with the member, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming 

people from Saltcoats here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Through you and through you to the House, I would like to 

introduce 32 grade 6 students from the Redvers School sitting 

in the east gallery. Teachers with them today are Ginni Nielsen 

and Heidi Nielsen. And chaperons, we have Blain Millions, 

Gayle Carlsen, Karen Dangstorp, Rita Parker, and Marilyn 

Garnier. I would ask all members in the House to welcome 

them here today and I look forward to meeting them after 

question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce 23 grade 9 students from Sandy Bay that are in your 

gallery. Accompanying the students is the teacher, Ina Fietz 

Ray, who is also the mayor of Sandy Bay, and also the 

chaperons, Denise Ray, Charlene Larson, Flora Wagner, Nathan 

Ray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to say a few words of welcome in 

Cree. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just on 

behalf of the Liberal caucus, I wanted to add to the Minister of 

Northern Affair’s welcome to the special guests. I also want to 

say hello to the mayor of Sandy Bay, Ina Fietz Ray, is also the 

Co-Chair, I believe, of New North. And I’d like to welcome her 

and her group to the Assembly as well. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, just to be sure that our 

visitors from Sandy Bay feel most welcome, I also want to add 

my words of welcome to them and to the chaperons that have 

accompanied them, and of course the mayor of Sandy Bay, a 

progressive northern community. And I look forward to joining 

the group following question period for some discussions. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce in the east gallery a member of my constituency, 

Marcel Pelletier, who’s with us today in the gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Closure of Big River Tree Nursery 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 

Assembly I presented petitions signed by over 600 residents of 

Big River calling for the provincial government to recognize the 

devastating effect that the closure of the Big River Tree Nursery 

. . . and the effect it’ll have on people’s livelihoods, the local 

economy of Big River and area. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the closure of this nursery is indicative of 

this government’s failure in three major areas: jobs, the 

environment, and northern development. This government 

constantly states that its number one priority is jobs; yet the 

closure of this nursery will mean the loss of 16 full-time and 

over 100 part-time jobs which will severely impact the local 

economy of Big River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government states that it is working with the 

people of Big River to come up with a solution to an economic 

situation this closure has put their community in. So far this is 

not happening. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Big River are 

asking this government for mediation services to look at and 

exhaust all possible avenues whether this facility could be 

expanded and diversify the function of the nursery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Big River are looking to the 

members opposite to take a leadership role in the negotiations 

of the future of the Big River Nursery. I believe that it’s time 

that this government make a meaningful commitment to the 

creation and preservation of good jobs in this province and to 

protect our renewable resources. Appointing a mediator to 

explore all possible options for the Big River Tree Nursery 

would be a good place to start. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise in the House and speak about some very 

exceptional news that was reported in Saturday’s Leader-Post. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a testament, this news story, to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the leadership that has been provided by 

this provincial government. Simply put, in 1996 Saskatchewan 

led all provinces in economic growth. Saskatchewan led all the 

provinces in growth, with an increase in gross domestic product 

which was 3.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, while the national average 

was 1.5 per cent. 

 

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, for comparative purposes, to quote 

some numbers for the House and for yourself. In Saskatchewan  

the GDP (gross domestic product) was up 3.3 per cent. In 

Manitoba it was up 2.9 per cent. In Alberta it was up 2.6 per 

cent, down from the previous year. In mighty Tory Ontario, up a 

whopping 1.3 per cent. Liberal New Brunswick, up all of 1.9 

per cent. And as well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan led all 

provinces when provincial growth is measured on a per capita 

basis. Saskatchewan growth rate was 2.7 per cent while the 

national average was .3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, somebody is doing something right and I 

want to congratulate the farmers, the workers, and the 

employers in Saskatchewan for working together and for 

working with the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

climate making it possible for this kind of economic growth to 

take place in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Air Ambulance Award 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the air ambulance service 

has been a vital part of our province’s health care system since 

1946. Since it was established, it has provided crucially needed 

transport from rural and remote locations for critically ill or 

injured people in need of specialized medical attention. And it 

has helped to save the lives of more than 35,000 people. 

 

As you know, the government recently announced the addition 

of a second plane to the air ambulance fleet. 

 

The Piper Cheyenne 3A can go almost anywhere in the 

province in 30 minutes to an hour and can even transfer patients 

to specialized treatment centres outside the province. The new 

plane’s larger cabin will allow us to transport up to two patients 

at a time — for example, a mother and a newborn child. 

 

Fast planes are one thing however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

unquestionably they are important. But it is the professionalism 

of the men and women in our air ambulance service that really 

deserves recognition. 

 

The International Northwest Aviation Council Achievement 

Award recognizes outstanding achievements in aviation. This 

award will be presented to Lifeguard at the council’s annual 

conference this summer. No group of people could be more 

deserving, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I ask you to join me in 

congratulating the professionals of Lifeguard for this overdue 

recognition. Thank you. 

 

Artist Rosa Gebhardt Recognized 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize a constituent of mine, Rosa Gebhardt of 

Humboldt. Mrs. Gebhardt is an artist who makes bauer 

malereri, a German word which literally translates as a farmer’s 

painting. She is a native of the Black Forest region in Germany 

and bauer malereri goes back to her childhood — however you 

pronounce the word. 

 

The art form got its start in the 1600s when the common people 

wanted to add a little extra to their furniture and their homes,  



1804  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

but couldn’t afford the luxuries of the upper classes. 

 

One of Mrs. Gebhardt’s specialities is wood-turned plates 

portraying themes from the Prairies, including the 

Saskatchewan lily, wheat stocks, and other prairie sights. Her 

plates can now be found around the world, in no small thanks to 

an order from the protocol office which is in charge of 

providing gifts to visiting dignitaries. 

 

Congratulations, Rosa Gebhardt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Cathedral 

area of my constituency has been likened both to Kitsilano and 

Greenwich Village, and I think that’s a compliment to both of 

those places. 

 

But for the sixth year in a row we invite all members of the 

public and this legislature to join us this week for the Cathedral 

Village Arts Festival. It began yesterday and continues through 

Saturday. 

 

Each year the festival produces a new and exciting array of 

artistic, literary, dramatic, and culinary opportunities. It’s a 

celebration of arts but also community, because everyone leaves 

their houses and congregates on the sidewalks and the 

community halls, the businesses, and joins in celebrating a 

release from the shackles of winter. But as well a 

reacquaintance with friends and neighbours. 

 

Some highlights include award-winning poet Lorna Crozier, 

Saskatchewan singer Connie Kaldor, guitarist Jack Semple, and 

for the first time this year, a daily offering of drum 

performances which contribute to the heartbeat of the festival. It 

culminates in a street fair and concert on Saturday — 13th 

Avenue is where it’s at. I urge you all to explore and enjoy. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Day Poster Challenge 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 

president of the Canada Day Committee for Saskatchewan 

announced the winners of the Saskatchewan Canada Day Poster 

Challenge. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to announce that Janel 

White of the Schell high school in Holdfast took the second 

place award for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there were 3,092 

posters from 141 schools in Saskatchewan received, and some 

30,000 entries from across Canada. 

 

The provincial and territorial finalists each win a trip to Ottawa 

to be with Prime Minister Jean Chrétien on July 1 to celebrate 

Canada’s 130th birthday. Once again, Mr. Speaker, 

congratulations to Janel White of Holdfast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Addition to Hudson Bay Hospital 

 

Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the past number 

of years this government has been working to enhance health 

care in this province so that Saskatchewan can continue to have 

the best health care system in the world despite the massive 

cut-backs courtesy of the government in Ottawa. This 

government has dedicated itself to preserving the fundamental 

principles of universal health care. We are committed to 

providing the best possible service to Saskatchewan people in 

partnership with health boards and local communities. 

 

Proof of that commitment and that partnership is occurring in 

Hudson Bay. It was recently announced that the Hudson Bay 

Hospital will receive renovations and addition of a nursing 

home wing to the existing facility. 

 

The project will allow space for the operation of 

community-based programs such as public health, home care, 

mental health, addictions counselling, acute care, respite and 

palliative care, along with others, to be administered from the 

centre. This will allow a better coordination of services to the 

community and provide residents with easier access to health 

care. 

 

I want to congratulate the Pasquia Health District, the 

community of Hudson Bay, and the many people who have 

given their time and energy to ensure this project’s success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Owner of Ambulance Service Marks 40 Years 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Having fast, 

efficient, and compassionate ambulance care in our province is 

very important to all Saskatchewan residents. Our health 

districts enjoy some of the most dedicated professionals who 

commit themselves to providing enhanced emergency medical 

service. 

 

One of these dedicated people is Mike Dutchak, owner and 

operator of M.D. Ambulance in Saskatoon. Mr. Dutchak has 

been involved in the ambulance business for 40 years. He has 

given selflessly to developing emergency medical services in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1957 he created with his own station wagon Blaine Lake’s 

first ambulance service. Since then he and his family have 

developed services at Rosthern, Spiritwood, Prince Albert, and 

Saskatoon, which not only serve these communities but the 

surrounding areas as well. 

 

Mr. Dutchak has been instrumental in developing the EMT 

(emergency medical technician) course in Saskatchewan and the 

paramedic training program, the First Responders program, and 

enhanced medical dispatching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for 40 years Mr. Dutchak has worked to create 

world-class ambulance care in our province. I want to commend 

him for his years of commitment and support for the ambulance 

profession. It was appropriate that earlier this year  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

he received the 1997 volunteer recognition award from the 

North Central Regional Recreation Association. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Protection Services 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Social Services criticizes me for raising the issue of 

child deaths, demanding that I put forth evidence on which I 

base my suspicions that children in the system may be dying of 

abuse and neglect. Well, Mr. Speaker, in a letter to me from the 

minister last March he states, and I quote: 

 

Between 1991 and 1995, 14 children died from violent 

abuse or neglect in Saskatchewan. In seven of these cases 

their families were receiving services from the department. 

 

Yet on Friday last, the minister stood in this House and stated 

there have not been charges of abuse or neglect. Can the 

minister please explain which of his statements is true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the 

member in correspondence, as I’ve indicated in the House, 

when there are charges of abuse or neglect, those charges are 

investigated. If it results in criminal investigation, those 

investigations will be undertaken by the police. 

 

If any member of this legislature or any member of the public 

has specific knowledge of a circumstance where there is neglect 

or abuse, it is our duty by law to report that to the Department 

of Social Services, or I suppose to local policing authorities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, this is precisely why we are calling 

for a public review. Mr. Speaker, the minister knows the 

Saskatchewan’s child death review policy is inadequate or he 

would not have quietly set up the interdisciplinary committee to 

review the full scope of child deaths in Saskatchewan this year. 

 

In writing, the minister says that there have been cases of 

children dying from abuse and neglect even though the freedom 

of information response I received does not list this as a cause 

of death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the process is fatally flawed. And further mistakes 

could put more children at risk to a violent death. Given all of 

these facts, will the minister open up the child protection and 

child death policies to a full-scale public review? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, let me repeat. In 1991 we 

believe it needed some change. We reviewed the circumstances 

of how child death is reviewed in our province. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve done that. We are always, always seeking improved  

mechanisms — hence the interdisciplinary committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member suggests we need a large and very 

expensive judicial inquiry, it seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

would consume a great many of public resources — resources 

that we’re trying to devote to the care of children and their 

families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I repeat, Mr. Speaker, if the member has some specific 

knowledge of cases that are not being investigated and if she 

would care to report those specifics to the department, we will 

follow up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes, there have been cases . . . (inaudible) . . . that tragic deaths 

of children in our province. They are investigated, Mr. Speaker, 

and we are trying on every front to strengthen families, to 

strengthen homes, and make life safer and securer for all 

children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saltcoats Reassessment 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, frustration and discontent over reassessment is 

simmering to a boil in the town of Saltcoats. The Nipawin 

Journal hit it right on the mark in the May 14 editorial, and I 

quote: “It’s just another black mark on the government’s poorly 

planned reassessment exercise.” In the case of Saltcoats, SAMA 

has admitted it made a mistake, but so far the error has not been 

corrected. 

 

Just to show you how unfair the whole process really is, at a 

March town hall meeting the CEO (chief executive officer) of 

SAMA publicly stated that SAMA has used one lot sale, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, just one lot along the lake to base their values 

on. 

 

Will the minister explain to the residents of Saltcoats why she is 

refusing to help resolve the matter? Because by not stepping in, 

the NDP government is basically telling residents their concerns 

really don’t matter and that SAMA is always right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, the government has a minority representation on the 

SAMA board of directors. It’s an arm’s-length agency. We’re 

responsible for the legislation but only three out of the nine 

members on the board of the directors are appointed by the 

government. The others are elected in a democratic process by 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities)and 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) — the local 

government organizations. 

 

They told the local governments and finance review 

commission in the early ’80s that they wanted to own the 

assessment system, that they didn’t want it to be a government 

function. So there it is; it’s independent of government. 

 



1806  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Notwithstanding this, as a result of some letters and phone calls 

that I’ve had with people from Saltcoats and from people from 

Saltcoats and others, I did hold a meeting last week with the 

chairman, Mark Thompson, over the weekend actually. 

 

And I’m told that the process is unfolding as it should; that 

there was a court of revision that was held on May 6 and 7. And 

there was one of the 50 appellants who asked for a two-week 

referral. That will be held . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

just once take a leadership role and do the job that you were put 

in place to do. Mr. Speaker, the government said the people 

have the right to appeal; well over 50 people have already done 

so and quickly found out that even this process is flawed. 

 

Residents say that SAMA has treated them with contempt, has 

been condescending and arrogant, and had resorted to 

intimidation. Residents are disgusted with this treatment, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There has even been talk of a tax revolt. When 

normal, law-abiding citizens are considering breaking the law in 

protest, you know that they have been pushed to the edge, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Will the minister commit to take some time today and meet with 

the Saltcoats residents who have gathered in the gallery to 

discuss the way of resolving this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, sometimes they say the 

government interferes too much. Now they’re asking for 

political interference in an issue that is not political. And when 

the member opposite says that this situation is reaching the 

boiling point, I hope that he’s not responsible for lighting the 

burner under that fire by stirring up the situation. 

 

As I said before, there will be due course. There will be one 

more appeal to be held when all 50 appellants have been heard. 

The court of revision will write their decisions. And if there are 

wrongs to be righted, that is the point at which it comes. And 

anyone who had to pay a fee to have their appeal heard, if their 

appeal is even partially successful, will have it refunded. 

 

That’s due process. It’s always been the due process. And it’s 

being accorded to the residents of Saltcoats. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, we all know that SaskPower has 

signed a letter of intent to purchase half the Guyana electrical 

company for a reported $22 million U.S. (United States). Last 

week, the minister in charge of SaskPower indicated that a 

decision will not be made until we’re assured we have bought it 

for the cheapest possible price. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the unsuccessful bidders in this venture has 

shared with the Liberal opposition its evaluation of the entire 

electrical utility in that third-world country. The study pegs the 

total value of the GEC (Guyana Electrical Corporation) at $16 

million U.S. 

 

Can the minister in charge of SaskPower explain why he’s 

willing to spend $22 million to purchase half the utility when an 

independent study has estimated its total worth to be only 16 

million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s no 

secret that there were six companies from around the world who 

had put forth a proposal with respect to narrowing down and 

developing a process whereby negotiations could take place for 

the partial sale of that corporation. 

 

I haven’t got the documents that the member from the 

opposition party has, but quite clearly it’s from an unsuccessful 

proponent, which would, I would suggest, indicate the reason 

they may have wanted to share with members of the opposition. 

 

What I am saying to the members of the opposition in this 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that if and when a decision is 

made to enter into an agreement to purchase a portion of GEC, I 

can assure the member it will have been done after the 

appropriate evaluation of those assets will have been made, and 

those assets will have been under major scrutiny before any 

decision is in fact made. 

 

Now if the member wants to share the information he has with 

me, I’m certainly more than willing to look at it. But I can 

assure you and assure members of this House, before a decision 

has been made, we will assure that it is the correct decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, there are a number of legitimate 

questions about SaskPower’s decision to sink millions of 

precious tax dollars into a venture that appears risky to say the 

least, and given this government’s $16 million gigatel fiasco, 

the people of Saskatchewan deserve some answers. 

 

The fact that SaskPower is prepared to spend more than 

one-half of the Guyanese electrical company than it is worth in 

total makes no sense whatsoever. Two independent studies — 

this one and now the Price Waterhouse — have suggested 

you’re paying too much. 

 

Mr. Minister, common sense seems to have gone by the 

wayside. You’re like a gambling addict who can’t seem to stop 

throwing away good money after bad. To top it off, you’re 

using taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Will you table all the documents relating to your bid in this 

House today to justify the purchase of the Guyana electrical 

company? If not, will you make a commitment to get out of the 

deal? 

 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, we’re not into the deal. We are into a process 

whereby we have signed a letter of intent that would lead us 

perhaps to negotiations on a finalized settlement for a purchase. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite, I can understand the 

passion that he has and his feelings towards the Crown 

corporation utilities. I understand that, given his philosophical 

background. 

 

I won’t dwell on that, Mr. Speaker, only to say that this 

government is not hidebound by any political philosophy with 

respect to a business deal that we may enter into. It’s either 

going to make economic sense for the people of Saskatchewan 

who own that corporation, or it’s not. If it makes sense, we’ll 

certainly look at the purchase and finalizing a purchase. If it 

doesn’t make sense, the fact of the matter is we won’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed Venture in the United States 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 

going to say, ring-a-ding, ring-a-ding, where did Lily go, but 

I’m not sure. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. If the member has a 

question for the minister, the member must address the minister 

respectfully, the minister responsible for whatever position 

she’s in. That kind of language is very unparliamentary and I 

would say to him to . . . 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Liberal opposition has received a number 

of unsubstantiated reports that SaskTel losses in the NST fiasco 

may be higher than $16 million. 

 

To determine if these reports are true, we contacted SaskTel’s 

private sector partner in Vancouver. However, Ian Robertson, 

the president of N S. Telcom Group, said he is prohibited from 

making any public statement because of a confidentiality clause 

between the company and SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Robertson tells us that he is prepared to waive the terms of 

the confidentiality clause. Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister 

or her designate open the books on this money-losing venture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, I understand that a lot of the research done by Dr. 

Melenchuk is unsubstantiated, so it doesn’t surprise me that 

what you’re bringing here is in fact unsubstantiated. 

 

What you might want to do — and just a word of advice from 

somebody who’s been around here a long time — is to hire a 

researcher who would get you substantiated documents and  

information to bring to the House. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the issue that you 

talk about — you should remember that a project called the 

Chunnel that was stalled in its production in the recent years 

was solved and brought to fruition by a group of young men 

and women from SaskTel, who were called in to help complete 

the project that had stalled out because of technology that they 

needed and SaskTel was able to provide. 

 

You’ll know that we made, SaskTel made, over a $100 million 

on the Leicester project in England. And I want to say to you if 

you include the basket of projects that SaskTel has been 

involved in around the world, you will see that it’s a very, very 

successful . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well to 

the Deputy Premier, I can send him a letter if he likes, after 

question period, substantiating what Ian Robertson has said; 

and I will do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition believes it’s important that 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan know the entire story behind the 

NST money loss and how many of their tax dollars were 

actually lost in this lame-duck venture. Mr. Robertson has 

indicated to us that there are certain investment decisions made 

by SaskTel management which his company disagreed with. 

Given the fact that the people of Saskatchewan are in fact 

shareholders in the Crown company, they deserve to know the 

entire story behind this venture. 

 

Will the minister . . . for once, will you be honest with the 

people of Saskatchewan, and will you waive the confidentiality 

clause so all of the facts surrounding the NST fiasco are in the 

open; as they should have been in the first place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

when he asks the questions will know full well that he has as 

many hours as he wants to ask questions in the Crown 

Corporations Committee. And the minister has answered, I 

think in a very appropriate way, the issues that you have raised. 

 

But what we will be watching is that individual member, when 

Crown Corporations Committee comes up, to see how much 

time he personally spends in the committee asking questions 

when the press may not be sitting there. 

 

And we will decide whether or not he’s sincere, or whether this 

is more political grandstanding in order to try to make a point 

and try to cause problems and grief for many, many men and 

women who make their living working for one of the most 

productive telcos anywhere in North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



1808  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Silver Sage Casino 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, despite 

assurances from your government that there was enough casino 

business for everyone, it is now clear that Casino Regina is 

driving the Silver Sage Casino into the ground. Your casino 

strategy was supposed to create jobs, but the closure of this 

casino would put 240 people out of work. 

 

Madam Minister, is the Gaming Corporation seriously 

considering striking a deal that would result in the closure of 

the Silver Sage Casino and the loss of 240 jobs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Regina, as 

in other sites where there was already existing casinos when we 

signed our casino agreement, we guaranteed that they would 

maintain their revenues at the five-year average. The 

discussions with Silver Sage in Regina have only been about 

the maintenance of their revenues. And whether they choose to 

operate or not is a management decision that they will make, 

but we have held to our end of the bargain, which is to 

guarantee those revenues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, the Regina Exhibition 

Association is very concerned about your government reneging 

on its commitment to ensure 2.2 million in annual profits for 

Silver Sage. This isn’t too surprising, given your government’s 

tendency to break promises regarding gambling revenue, like 

the 10 per cent one on VLTs (video lottery terminal) to 

municipalities. 

 

Madam Minister, the exhibition association is worried about 

your government arbitrarily reducing the $2.2 million 

commitment at any time. Considering profits at Casino Regina 

have already fallen to less than 4 million, it might be awfully 

tempting for you to bail out of such an agreement. 

 

Madam Minister, if you enter into an agreement with Regina 

Exhibition Association to ensure that they will receive $2. 

million a year, will you put that commitment into legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

exhibition has been at the negotiating table, as we have, and 

there has been no suggestion that they would ever get less than 

they were promised. And I would just ask them to stop 

worrying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

David Milgaard Case Review 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, the 

Ontario government recently provided compensation to 

Guy-Paul Morin after DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) testing 

proved he had been wrongfully convicted. 

 

Will you be providing compensation to David Milgaard if DNA  

testing shows he spent 23 years in jail for a murder he did not 

commit? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this matter will be 

reviewed when all of the evidence has been reviewed by the 

latest review in this matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Apology for Remarks About Reform Leader 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for . . . oh the deputy minister, I guess, Deputy 

Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, at least one of your members 

continues to defend comments comparing Preston Manning to a 

Nazi. You made the member for Regina South apologize. You 

made the Minister of Justice apologize. Why can’t you control 

the Minister of Agriculture and make him apologize as well? 

Mr. Deputy Premier, the Minister of Agriculture is providing no 

explanation and no apology for remarks defending the offensive 

comments made by the member from Albert South. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, are you going to make the Minister of Agriculture 

apologize or do you support his defence of the other members’ 

comments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

opposite, who continues to fly the flag for the Reform Party 

here in the Assembly, I believe that the remarks made by the 

Member from Regina South, which started your questioning, 

the apology was made here and I believe it was accepted. 

 

But what I want to say to you while you’re flying the flag for 

the Reform Party, why don’t you be honest and say that the 

Reform Party is also willing to do away with the Canadian 

Wheat Board, which is in their document and you can read it 

and find out. And secondly, introduce American style Medicare 

in Canada as well. 

 

If you are going to take their side and demand apologies, why 

aren’t you at least honest enough to tell us what the Reform 

Party stands for when you come here and ask questions on their 

behalf in the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Premier. Mr. Minister, if 

you want to talk about the federal election, well let’s talk about 

it. It isn’t exactly going according to plan though for you, is it? 

 

The NDP here in Saskatchewan are running the federal NDP’s 

campaign and they seem to be running it straight into the 

ground, is where it’s going. According to the latest poll in The 

Globe and Mail the NDP now is projected to win one seat 

nationally. 

 

That’s a direct result of the kind of intolerant comments that the 

members on your side of the House have made. The member  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

from Albert South, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of 

Agriculture, and even, and even the federal NDP leader has said 

that if you vote for the Reform Party, it will result in a civil war. 

Talk about intolerance. 

 

Mr. Premier — Mr. Deputy Premier — are you going to show 

some leadership and put an end to this kind of gutter politics? 

Will you start by demanding an apology from the Minister of 

Agriculture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, now that we’re into 

the federal election, I want to go out on the limb just a little bit 

and say that when you look at the numbers, when you look at 

the numbers in The Globe and Mail that you’re talking about, 

and realize that the prediction there was that the Liberals will 

win 186 seats across Canada, the Tories 50 seats; one thing I 

would be willing to bet is that we’ll win more seats in 

Saskatchewan than the Tories even though they may win 50 

seats in Canada. And we’ll win more than the Liberals even 

though they are predicted to win 186. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard from the 

Justice minister that the delay in releasing the Kuziak report . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I’m having a little 

problem hearing the hon. member from Melville. I would ask 

the House to come to order. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I started 

out, we’ve heard from the Justice minister that the delay in 

releasing the Kuziak report is tied to a department policy of not 

releasing information that could influence a federal election 

campaign. Yet the former Justice minister says he is not aware 

of any such policy. It appears the government is playing games 

with taxpayers and essentially taking away their right to make 

an informed decision. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s obvious we have two cabinet ministers 

at odds over policy. So I was hoping to go straight to the top for 

an answer today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to ask the 

Premier or his designate, which is it? If there is a policy, may 

we see it? If there isn’t, will the Premier then explain why the 

report is being suppressed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s clear 

that the member is grandstanding. I say that with the great 

respect that he knows I have for him. I say it because — I say it, 

notwithstanding that respect — because during the estimates of 

the Justice department the other evening — last week, I think it 

was — this subject was canvassed very, very thoroughly. And 

he understands perfectly well what the Justice minister meant 

when he said what he said. 

 

Now the fact is that the Chief Electoral Officer enjoys a high 

degree of independence from the government, from all 

members of this legislature, and I think the member would 

agree that that’s appropriate. And it would be quite wrong for 

us to interfere with that independence by starting to order this 

person around. 

 

Now if the member feels free to do that, I invited him last week 

to pick up the telephone and phone him, and I would be glad to 

know whether he did that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  To ask if it’s appropriate to ask for leave 

at this time to introduce a guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to the members for providing me this opportunity. 

 

I’d like to introduce a former member of this Legislative 

Assembly who is seated behind the rail, Alex Taylor, who was 

the member for Kerrobert-Kindersley, I think the riding was 

then called, elected in 1971. It’s a pleasure to introduce Alex 

Taylor because he and I were elected at the same time, in the 

same election. And we also entered cabinet at the same time 

with the Blakeney government in 1972. 

 

Alex Taylor made a major contribution as minister of Social 

Services while he was a member of this House. He made an 

important contribution to his constituency and I know that at the 

present time he’s doing very important work as a minister of the 

United Church here in Regina. 

 

And I’d like to ask members to join me in welcoming a former 

member of the Legislative Assembly, Alex Taylor, back to the 

House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 229  The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 (Indians off-reserve) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move first reading of Bill No. 229, The Education and Health 

Tax Amendment Act, 1997, short title (Indians off-reserve), be 

now moved the first time . . . be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be a 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 230 — The Farm Security Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I  



1810  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

move first reading of Bill No. 230 entitled An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, be introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be a 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 232 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 1997 (Appointments 

Review Committee/“ARC”) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill No. 232, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997, short title 

(Appointments Review Committee/ARC), be now read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be a 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 237 — The NORTHERN Act 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I read that Bill No. 

237 entitled The New Organized and Rigorous Transportation, 

Housing, and Economic Renewal of the North — The 

NORTHERN Act, be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to make a 

motion which would extend the assignment of Mr. Speaker, 

who is currently in Ghana, until the end of the week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extension of Leave of Absence for The Speaker 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Lloydminster: 

 

That an order of the Assembly dated May 1, 1997, made 

with respect to the participation of Mr. Speaker at the ninth 

Commonwealth parliamentary seminar in Ghana, and 

post-election seminar for newly elected members of the 

Ghanaian parliament, be extended to May 23, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I now request leave of the 

Assembly that we would proceed directly to private members’ 

public Bills, second readings, to consider Bills No. 227 and 

then Bill 236, and to vote both of those Bills off. 

 

Furthermore, I request leave, following the voting on those 

Bills, that we proceed directly to government business for the 

remainder of the day’s sitting. 

 

Leave granted. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 236 — The Chief Electoral Officer 

Accountability Act 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have been 

eagerly awaiting my opportunity to speak to this proposed 

legislation. My private members’ Bill would bring about much 

needed change in The Election Act in order to give 

Saskatchewan’s Chief Electoral Officer the independence he 

needs to carry out his duties as efficiently and as effectively as 

possible. 

 

Currently he reports to Executive Council, and I am gravely 

concerned that this relationship may be inhibiting him from 

performing his duties to the fullest of his capability. We all 

know that the long-awaited Kuziak report is now ready, yet the 

Chief Electoral Officer has decided not to release the report 

until after the federal election. 

 

Now that problem arises from this decision, that it was based on 

the advice of officials in the Saskatchewan Justice department. 

The delay in releasing the report and the obvious interference 

by the Justice department clearly shows that such legislation is 

desperately needed. We need that report to be released to the 

public now — today and not later. 

 

I have said it before and I will say it again. Using the federal 

election as an excuse to withhold the report smacks of political 

manipulation. The people of Saskatchewan have the right to 

know the results of his review now. And this government has a 

responsibility not to get in the way of the release of this 

information. 

 

We all know what developments in the past few years led to 

this investigation. Last year we all found out about questionable 

aspects of political fund-raising in which it was revealed that 

the Tories and the NDP were receiving hundreds of thousands 

of dollars in secret donations. There was not detailed 

information provided by the PC metro council trust fund nor 

from the Tommy Douglas House corporation. 

 

Insufficient information may also have been provided by 

constituency associations that had raised large sums of money 

on behalf of their respective candidates. 

 

The Kuziak investigation probed into the practices that were 

carried out under The Election Act of 1978, which stated that 

anyone who raised money for a party or a candidate was 

required to disclose the identity of the donors, and the amounts 

they gave. 

 

It is imperative that we know if all these laws were being 

properly followed so that the correct adjustments can be made 

as soon as possible. With the parade of former members of the 

House through Saskatchewan courtrooms, it is absolutely the 

duty of this government to restore public confidence in our  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

system of government, and that includes fund-raising practices. 

 

(1430) 

 

That is why the investigation was launched in the first place. It 

is only appropriate that the results of that investigation and that 

report be released now — today. This government has a 

responsibility to restore public confidence. But when it 

suppresses reports that might prove to be embarrassing, it is 

being disrespectful to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 

entire political process. I have proposed this legislation in order 

to avoid such embarrassment in the future. 

 

Bill No. 236 would enable the Chief Electoral Officer to report 

directly to the Legislative Assembly, as does the Ombudsman, 

the auditor, the Children’s Advocate, and the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. 

 

Because our electoral process is the basis of our democratic 

system, it is absolutely imperative that we take the steps 

necessary to ensure that the Chief Electoral Officer is allowed 

to properly scrutinize and monitor the electoral system without 

any interference, or threat of interference, from a cabinet. 

 

Bill 236 sets out to do just that. How can any government 

members argue against giving the Chief Electoral Officer more 

power to do what he is supposed to do? I just don’t understand 

it. Why would government members resist serving the people of 

Saskatchewan to the best of their capability? We have seen how 

the long arm of cabinet tries to influence even those outside its 

exclusive jurisdiction. 

 

Take for example the shameful attack on the Provincial Auditor 

that was led by the minister responsible for SaskPower. 

Because the Provincial Auditor reports directly to the 

Legislative Assembly, he could not delay the release of the 

auditor’s report. But once it was released, the minister did 

everything he could to discredit the auditor’s findings. 

 

I believe this carefully crafted attack was launched simply 

because the minister did not agree with the auditor’s findings 

and his criticism of SaskPower’s reporting methods. 

Saskatchewan people have a right to know exactly how the 

reconstruction fees are being allocated. 

 

This attack, carried out by the minister and supported by every 

NDP member sitting across the floor . . . because they somehow 

now feel that they are beyond reproach. They attempted to 

undermine the credibility and the autonomy of the Provincial 

Auditor even though they had so vigorously defended the 

auditor while they were in opposition. At the same time the 

Provincial Auditor was struggling with the hazy accounting 

methods of the Tory government, and the NDP opposition 

rightly defended him and his right to fully examine and report 

on the accounting methods of government. 

 

Now when it no longer suits their purpose, they conveniently 

forget the arguments they presented on behalf of the auditor’s 

position, and instead try to undermine him. This is absolutely 

shameful. This NDP government is not beyond reproach. It is 

not beyond valid criticism. It must answer to the people it  

serves, yet all we see are more and more examples of its blatant 

and flagrant arrogance. 

 

Day after day the Minister for Municipal Government stands in 

this House and refuses to acknowledge the devastation her cuts 

to revenue sharing are having on Saskatchewan communities. 

She even had the gall to say that all is well in municipal land. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, things are definitely not well in 

municipalities right now. Reeves, mayors, and administrators 

and councillors are struggling to find enough money to carry 

out the basic maintenance and projects that are needed this year. 

Many people outside of the major urban centres are extremely 

concerned that they are not included in the future funding plans 

of this NDP government. 

 

Communities have cut services to the bone in an effort to 

maintain control over the mill rate, but many have been forced 

to announce increases this year. But when we raise these 

concerns on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the minister 

arrogantly denies that there’s any problem with funding or 

assessment. How can she fix a problem if she fails to 

acknowledge that it even exists? 

 

We know that there is a problem with youth crime in 

Saskatchewan. Thousands of cars have been stolen, vandalized, 

throughout the province. We the official opposition suggest an 

establishment of youth crime task force. The minister scoffs at 

our suggestions. 

 

There are other critical problems with Saskatchewan’s justice 

system, as have been highlighted with the Milgaard, Latimer, 

and Martensville cases. Yet the Justice department failed to 

give Martin and Wilson an extensive mandate in their review of 

the operations of Saskatchewan Justice. These high-profile 

bungled cases were not even mentioned in the final report. 

 

Once again, how can the Minister of Justice fix a system 

plagued with problems if he does not admit that the problems 

even exist? It’s nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but pure 

arrogance. 

 

The irony is that the officials in the same Department of Justice 

are also advising the Chief Electoral Officer against releasing 

his report. They influenced the final report of the Martensville 

review by refusing to give it the mandate it desperately needed. 

Now the Department of Justice is also affecting the timeliness 

of the Kuziak report. The Justice officials made this 

recommendation even though the minister responsible for The 

Elections Act agrees that the report should be released as soon 

as possible. 

 

Who is running the show over there? How can people have 

faith in a government that is saying one thing that should be 

done yet is advising exactly the opposite action? 

 

The Chief Electoral Officer needs to be autonomous. Even the 

Premier agrees. In a Star-Phoenix article from June 8 of last 

year, the Premier himself said he did not know why the 

government refused to grant the Chief Electoral Officer greater 

independence and promised to reconsider the matter. I quote: 



1812  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

The premier acknowledged that the idea of making the 

Chief Electoral Officer an independent officer of the 

legislature has got lots of merit to it. 

 

He goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

I think this is an issue which needs consideration and 

revisitation as well. I don’t rule it out. In fact this 

legislation may fulfil the recommendations made by the 

chief current electoral officer, Mr. Myron Kuziak. 

 

He recommended making the Chief Electoral Officer an officer 

of the legislature. He noted that the same officers in Quebec, 

Ontario, Manitoba, and British Columbia are all independent of 

cabinet. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have saved the government some 

of the work. We have drafted legislation that would do just that. 

The Premier agrees the electoral officer needs more autonomy. 

The current electoral officer agrees that the position should be 

accountable to the legislature and not the cabinet. 

 

Once again, Bill 236, An Act to ensure the Accountability of 

the Chief Electoral Officer to the Legislative Assembly . . . and 

to amend The Election Act is essential to making 

Saskatchewan’s electoral system more fair. 

 

The electoral system is the basis of our democracy and it must 

be operating correctly and legally. The overseer of this system 

must have the independence he or she needs to ensure that that 

has happened. This legislation would create that independence 

and would help to restore public faith into our system of 

government. 

 

I ask the members opposite in government to really think about 

who they are here to serve — themselves or the people of this 

great province of ours. Supporting this legislation would show 

that they are at least interested in effectively serving the people 

of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, 

in a province which desperately needs to raise the level of 

public respect for the democratic process, the Kuziak report is 

another tawdry chapter in the erosion of that public confidence. 

We had the spectacle in the House last week of the Minister of 

Justice saying, well there’s a policy that we don’t issue reports 

that may be an embarrassment during an election campaign. 

The former minister of Justice says he’s aware of no such 

policy. 

 

My question is, if there is a policy, let’s see that policy 

directive. Let it be placed before this House so that it may be 

debated and examined. 

 

My question also is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is a 

long-standing policy, that the Justice department suppresses 

reports that could be an embarrassment to the government 

during an election campaign, what other reports have they 

suppressed over the years? If this is a long-standing policy of  

our Justice department, then when else has it been used? What 

other reports have been kept back during an election campaign 

if this is a long-standing policy of the Department of Justice? 

 

If it’s not a long-standing policy of the Department of Justice 

that we don’t release reports that could be embarrassing during 

a campaign, then why is it coming out now? Let’s see the 

Kuziak report. Let’s take one small step back on the long road 

to restoring public confidence in the integrity of our system. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister says the Chief Electoral 

Officer is independent. He can’t direct him. But that’s not what 

the Chief Electoral Officer says. He says the only reason he’s 

not released the report is because that’s what the Justice 

department has told him to do. 

 

So while the minister is claiming the Chief Electoral Officer is 

independent — and that’s what my colleague from Melville is 

saying we really need — the Chief Electoral Officer is claiming 

no such independence. He is saying: I’ve got the report; it’s all 

done; it’s ready to be released but the Justice department tells 

me I shouldn’t release it. Some independence. 

 

If the Minister of Justice seriously wants to restore a bit of 

confidence in himself, in the government, in the democratic 

process, then he will encourage the Chief Electoral Officer to 

release this report. The only reason he can think of for not 

releasing the report is, oh we wouldn’t want to influence the 

election. 

 

Well let’s examine that for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

last time Canadians heard any argument as ridiculous as that 

was when former prime minister Kim Campbell argued that we 

shouldn’t be discussing social policy during an election 

campaign. Now the Minister of Justice, of all people, argues 

that we shouldn’t have a report on the integrity of fund-raising 

for political purposes in this province during a campaign 

because the voters might read it and they might draw some 

conclusions from it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a free and democratic process involves 

more than just being able to cast a ballot on election day. The 

democratic process also presumes an informed electorate, an 

electorate that will be given the information, tools, with which 

they can come to a right decision on the public affairs of this 

nation. The democratic vote assumes free and open discussion 

on the basis of freely available information. A democratic vote 

is meaningless in a society which suppresses information. 

 

(1445) 

 

Marking our ballot is done in privacy, but it is not supposed to 

be done in the dark, in a cloak of secrecy. Secrecy yes, as to 

how we mark it, but not secrecy as to the information as to how 

our public officials have conducted themselves so that we can 

come to a judgement on them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gets more bizarre by the moment. This is 

a report on provincial fund-raising. We are in the midst of a 

federal election. What is the connection here? There is no 

connection, save one. There is absolutely . . . We’re talking  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

about elections in different jurisdictions; we’re talking about 

fund-raising for political purposes by Saskatchewan provincial 

parties. We’re now in the midst of course, of a national election 

campaign. No connection at all, except that the official agent 

for the provincial NDP, during the years under investigation, is 

now a federal NDP candidate. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not my place to allege any 

impropriety on the part of Dick Proctor, and I wish to say that I 

do not. But I do say this — if there is no impropriety on the part 

of Dick Proctor, members opposite should be extremely anxious 

to have this report open and public. It is the only thing now 

which can exonerate the cloud which hangs over the process. 

 

I am certainly not going to say there is anything wrong, but if 

there is nothing wrong, then friends opposite should be 

clamouring for the release of this report before June 2. And if in 

fact — if in fact — there is by anyone some improprieties 

which are being held back from the electorate before the June 2 

election, then I say in all seriousness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any 

minor, temporary advantage which may be gained through the 

suppression of that report today will be infinitely outweighed by 

the spectre that will haunt those who try to suppress this report 

and deceive the electorate in the long haul. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I end where I began. For a hundred 

different reasons and on a hundred different fronts and in a 

million different ways, the members of this House need to take 

a step to restore public confidence in the political process and 

in their political leaders here in Saskatchewan. It has been 

eroded in many ways and for many different reasons. The 

Kuziak report, being held back and denied to the voters of 

Saskatchewan lest, lest, it become an embarrassment during the 

campaign, is just one more way — one more way — in which 

we are doing our bit to fuel cynicism. One more way in which 

we are thwarting the growth of public confidence in the 

political process. 

 

Let’s try and turn the tide. Let’s take one small step towards 

integrity, towards openness, towards decency. Let us join 

together, all members of this House, for the release of this 

report. This is not a partisan appeal, this is an appeal to put 

nation above party, to put principle over politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the many years that 

I’ve been in this Assembly, when a member stands up and says 

that this is not a partisan appeal, you can be rest assured that it 

is in fact a partisan appeal. Let me just make that very clear, Mr. 

Speaker, in speaking to the Bill before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the history books of Saskatchewan are 

written and they talk about political interference, I think that 

there will be significant chapters in there dedicated, I think first 

of all to the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, with its record in 

the 1960s of the infamous gerrymander which occurred as a 

result of the Ross Thatcher government, the Liberal Ross 

Thatcher government, telling the returning officer of the day 

how to draw up the constituency boundaries so as to favour the  

political party of the day. 

 

That is one of the black chapters in Saskatchewan history, Mr. 

Speaker, which stands and is fact and is part of the record in 

Saskatchewan, and is a black mark — is a black mark — on 

government and in that case on a Liberal government in 

Saskatchewan. This Liberal Party that is here today shows all of 

these same traits that Ross Thatcher displayed in those days. 

 

We heard it here in question period today, where we have a 

process with respect to assessment where that if property 

owners are not happy with the assessment that is being handed 

down, there is a court of revision procedure that is there for 

them to pursue. But in question period we heard today, we 

don’t care what’s happening in the courts, we want you to 

ignore the due process. We want you to ignore the law, and we 

want you the government to politically interfere in that process. 

That’s what we heard today, Mr. Speaker. Political interference 

in the ’60s, political interference today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Same old party. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Same old party. And we’ve heard it also 

with respect to Crown corporations. They say we don’t want the 

arms-length relationship that we had with Crown corporations, 

we want day-to-day political interference in this Assembly. 

That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let me just make it clear that the political . . . or that the 

Liberal Party has a long history of political interference. Not 

unlike the Devine Conservatives when they were in power, their 

soul mates, who also had a very checkered history when it came 

to accountability and political interference. I mean their history 

was very black, very bad on that point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP government has moved to restore integrity, 

accountability, to the whole question of the electoral office and 

boundaries. One of the things that we did, Mr. Speaker, unlike 

the Liberals who try to . . . who did interfere with the 

boundaries process, what the Tories who also sought to direct 

how political boundaries should be drawn up here in 

Saskatchewan; is that we set up an independent — independent 

— Electoral Boundaries Commission. I might say, headed by a 

judge who was a former Liberal leader. But we felt very 

comfortable with that approach because we believe in 

independence, we believe in openness. We believe in that type 

of independence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We acted in that way to restore some creditability and to restore 

some independence to that process. We’ve also appointed a 

Chief Electoral Officer and said to him, we want you to behave 

more independently than has been the case. 

 

And now when he behaves independently, they don’t like it. 

Just like the old SAMA approach. We don’t like the way that 

the laws are structured, we don’t like the way the process is 

moving independently of us here in the Legislative Assembly, 

so we want you the government to interfere. Or in this case, we 

want you the Legislative Assembly to interfere. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer is acting,  



1814  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

behaving, independently. He has the right to do so. We will 

await for his report when he feels it’s appropriate to make it. 

Although I might say that the minister responsible has publicly 

indicated that he would like this report made public, but the 

Chief Electoral Officer says that he’s prepared to proceed 

independently and to table this report when he sees fit. 

 

Now the Bill in question, Mr. Speaker, the Bill in question. I’m 

not necessarily opposed to the notion that at some point that we 

move the appointment of a chief electoral office out of the 

government itself and into the Legislative Assembly and to 

make that person an officer of the Legislative Assembly. I’m 

not necessarily opposed to that suggestion itself. And I’m 

prepared to take a good, hard look at that at some future point. 

 

But I might say that the Bill itself does this issue no justice. The 

Bill is insufficient and incomplete. It says it should be 

appointed by the Legislative Assembly but doesn’t deal with the 

question of how that person should be funded. 

 

Should it be funded also as other independent officers of the 

Legislative Assembly, or should it continue to be funded 

through the government? As this Bill is silent on that point, and 

my guess is that if you’re going deal with this issue, you need to 

deal with it in a more complete form, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think that the legislation is insufficient, and I think more 

importantly, it sends out the wrong message. That when you 

have an officer such as this acting independently, saying I’m 

going to release the report when I think it’s appropriate — the 

first act of the Liberal opposition, a knee-jerk response, saying, 

well we don’t like now what you’re doing, although we’ve been 

satisfied in the past and therefore we didn’t see fit then to make 

you an officer of the Legislative Assembly. The first point we 

don’t like what you’re doing, now we want to have political 

interference by the Legislative Assembly. 

 

That is what the Liberal opposition is saying. 

 

So I think it sends out a very bad and very wrong message at 

this point, to say that we don’t agree with what you’re doing 

today, so now we want to change the terms of your 

employment. We were happy with what you’re doing before 

and we didn’t see the need then to change the terms of your 

employment. 

 

Well I think that these issues need to be discussed not when you 

have an issue such as this before us, Mr. Speaker, because it 

sends out the wrong message. I think that if the people want to 

bring it back at some appropriate point, Mr. Speaker, I’d be 

prepared to take a look at it. 

 

But I think the Bill is, as I said, not only insufficient and badly 

drafted, but I also think it sends out the wrong message, which 

is the message that we’ve been getting from the Liberal Party, 

and that is one of continuing political interference — whether 

it’s to do with assessment, whether it’s to do with Crown 

corporations, or today, with the chief electoral office. 

 

We know that they stand for political interference. That’s their 

history. That’s their record as a party now. We don’t agree with  

that and we’re not going to support this Bill at this time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Is the member wishing to close 

debate? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The hon. member from Melville, as 

the mover of the motion, is about to close debate and I must 

warn all members of the Assembly if they wish to speak on this 

that they do it now. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve listened 

quite intently to what the government member was saying with 

respect to our Bill; that is should be . . . that it was incomplete. 

We have similar legislation, as I mentioned, for the 

Ombudsman, for the Children’s Advocate, for the auditor, and 

the member opposite has the audacity to say that the legislation 

would not be complete. 

 

And accusing the Liberal opposition of calling for political 

interference. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not asking the 

government to interfere. We are asking this government to clear 

up the confusion that’s been created surrounding the Kuziak 

report. We have divisiveness within . . . disagreements within 

cabinet ministers with respect to whether or not there’s a policy. 

And we’re told by one there isn’t; the other one says there is. 

And people are totally confused. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the people that 

will read and have seen or listened to this debate will definitely 

understand and recognize the utter disdain and arrogance that 

this government has for the people of Saskatchewan for not 

being allowed access and be privy to a report that was initiated 

. . . an investigation that was initiated almost one year ago, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The report should have been released two 

months ago. It’s been sitting and waiting to be released, but on 

the advice . . . 

 

Talk about interference. Talk about interference. The 

interference comes from the Justice department officials who 

advise the auditor not to release the report. For what reasons? 

The people have a right to know why. The people have a right 

to know why. Is there a policy of that nature in place? If there 

is, let’s see it. If there isn’t, let’s clear up this controversy. 

 

Let’s have that report released to this House before the end of 

this session so we can debate that report in this House and again 

pour some fire on the fires of cynicism . . . pour some water on 

the fires of cynicism that have been created because of the 

arrogance — the utter disdain — by this government for the 

electorate in this province. 

 

(1500) 

 

The division bells rang from 3 p.m. until 3:03 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

Yeas — 15 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Draude Osika 

Bjornerud Belanger Hillson 

Julé Aldridge Boyd 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Mitchell Tchorzewski Johnson 

Whitmore Goulet Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Teichrob Koenker Trew 

Bradley Lorje Renaud 

Nilson Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Jess Langford 

Murrell Thomson  

 

Bill No. 227 — The Saskatchewan Health Bill of Rights 

and Responsibilities Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

recent poll by the NDP conducted indicates that 62 per cent of 

people in Saskatchewan believe that health care services will 

deteriorate in the near future. 

 

I don’t know about the members opposite, but I wasn’t 

surprised in the least at the number of Saskatchewan people 

who have no idea what to expect from this government when it 

comes to health care services. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker. All 

families, rural families in particular, have experienced hospital 

closures, bed closures, loss of emergency medical services, and 

much more. And the problem is there seems to be no bottom 

line. 

 

Last summer my colleague from Moosomin and I toured 

different areas of the province. There were many, many 

concerns aired by the local people, administration heads of 

health care facilities, nurses and other medical professionals, 

doctors, town administrators, mayors, and others. 

 

These meetings had nothing to do with what political stripe 

anyone had. People just simply came to express their thoughts. 

Instead, they had everything to do with real concerns from real 

people about the problems within our province’s health care 

system. 

 

Yes there was a good deal of criticism how . . . over how the 

members opposite have handled health care reform, and there 

are many good ideas and proposals from local people in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, one message came across loud and 

clear. People all across Saskatchewan wanted to know where 

the bottom line was with respect to health care services in this 

province. How far can a government cut back in funding and 

still expect communities to deliver health care services? 

 

They said if they knew the answer to these questions they could 

make whatever adjustments are necessary and develop a 

long-term plan, rather than having to work in a type of crisis  

management system that they have to now. That’s exactly the 

position the NDP across the way, who claim to be the defenders 

of medicare, have forced on local communities — crisis-style 

management. 

 

The PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus has asked people to 

do something about it . . . has asked the government to do 

something about it. We’ve asked you to outline a long-term 

strategy and guarantee long-term funding when we asked the 

government to outline what health care services the government 

is obligated to provide, the funding to provide these services 

and in a timely manner. 

 

Instead of addressing this concern, the NDP keep saying that 

Saskatchewan’s system is the best in the country and they will 

take care of it. Well maybe the NDP should look at their own 

polling to see how Saskatchewan people feel about health care 

services in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 227 would alleviate these problems, 

implementing a health care charter of rights and 

responsibilities. This legislation could go a long way in 

addressing the concerns of Saskatchewan families and the 

future of health care. It says, after public consultation, advice 

from medical professionals, municipal officials, guidelines 

must be set. These guidelines include such rights as: 

 

(a) access to 24 hour emergency services within a specified 

distance; 

 

(b) access to a specified . . . number of acute care beds 

based on community population; 

 

(c) access to a specified minimum number of long-term 

care beds based on community population and number of 

seniors; 

 

(d) access to necessary surgery within specified time 

frames; and 

 

(e) access to an impartial body to have complaints about 

the health care system investigated and adjudicated. 

 

There are some basic guidelines that could . . . These are some 

basic guidelines that could be adjusted after the consultation 

process is in place and completed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, given all the benefits of this health care 

charter of rights and responsibilities, the NDP refuse to support 

our Bill. Instead of outlining for all Saskatchewan people the 

rights and responsibilities within our province’s health care 

system, they would rather leave the majority of families 

concerned about what’s in store for them and their 

communities. They would rather ignore the advice of their own 

constituents, their own polling, and their own consciences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP were truly concerned about the future 

of health care in this province, if they were truly concerned 

about the well-being of the people they serve, they’d be lining 

up to vote for this Bill. 

 



1816  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, you notice the title of this Bill speaks of rights, 

but it also speaks of responsibilities. It clearly outlines who is 

responsible for funding health care services to Saskatchewan 

people and who is responsible for administering those services 

and what each and every citizen in this province can expect 

from its government. This way we would all know what 

responsibilities fall onto the provincial government, the 

Department of Health, health district boards, health care 

providers, and health care recipients. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no more crisis-style management, no more 

62 per cent of people worried about health care services, no 

more treating rural people differently than those that live in the 

cities, no more unfairness, and no more uncertainty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d genuinely like to see each and every member 

of this Assembly support this important piece of legislation. I 

would genuinely like to see the Saskatchewan families rest at 

ease about the future of health care services in this province, 

because they have so many other difficulties to deal with in 

their lives. I would genuinely like to see that Saskatchewan 

become the first province to provide a health care guarantee in 

writing to each person in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support this legislation, and 

in doing so improve the lives of thousands of people all across 

this province. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s certainly a pleasure for me to stand up and support my 

colleague from Kindersley in the introduction of this Bill and to 

make a few comments as to why I feel this Bill is so important 

and why we would bring it forward at this time. 

 

As my colleague mentioned, the Leader of the Third Party, last 

summer the member from Kindersley and I had the privilege of 

going to a number of communities and meeting with interested 

personnel, not only from the health field, the people interested 

in health care, givers of health care, but certainly community 

folks, leadership in the local communities, and people from 

actually different walks of life who have some real concerns 

about health care and its effects on each one of them. 

 

And certainly there are concerns about the number of health 

care cuts that have been taking place. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what we saw was indeed disturbing. Mr. Speaker, we heard of 

stories of elderly people sent home with their IVs (intravenous) 

still intact because there just wasn’t any room for them in — I 

was going to say there wasn’t any room in the inn, we all know 

that story . . . but certainly this is something that a number of 

people in the province of Saskatchewan are beginning to feel as 

well. 

 

We heard of people in critical emergency situations driving 

over an hour to reach acute care facilities and in some cases not 

making it there alive. Mr. Speaker, we have heard as well of 

individuals who were in an emergency situation, were in 

transport and in an ambulance, and then from their local centre 

while they were stabilized were . . . had to sit or wait in that 

emergency vehicle while it was determined where it would be 

best to send them as a result of the lack of beds that may have  

been available in certainly the two larger centres of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of 

people who are quite concerned. In fact the federal election is 

currently going on in Canada, and while a number of politicians 

and parties would like to argue jobs and the economy is 

important, I think as we’ve seen with the poll the NDP did not 

that long ago, health care is a major issue. It’s a major concern 

on people’s minds, and it certainly is a concern on people’s 

minds in this federal election. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, day after day we are confronted with the 

effects of the closure of 52 hospitals on the lives of rural 

people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many other stories 

were shocking and unfair, and we as legislators must put an end 

to this campaign of abuse that the NDP government has 

inflicted on rural people and indeed on all Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our party understands the financial constraints that 

have driven health reform. At least that’s what the government 

tells us. The government tells us that we undertook health 

reform to try and save some money and to wrestle our 

provincial debt, bring it under control. 

 

(1515) 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you take a close look at it, you 

would ask yourself, did we really save anything or what have 

we saved. Did we save anything as far as funding? No we 

haven’t. We’re actually spending more on funding in health 

care than we did in 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at 52 rural hospitals closed, when 

you look at nursing positions, when you look at beds that have 

been taken out of the system, not even not just the beds in the 

hospitals that were closed but even currently functioning 

facilities where beds have been substantially reduced, and when 

you add it all up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you would assume that 

there would be a bottom line that would actually be lower. That 

there would be some actual cost savings. And the government 

would argue, well it’s the inflationary factor that we brought 

under control by doing this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe we have had a very high 

inflation in this province over the past number of years, and to 

not show any major reduction in spending one has to ask: where 

are all the dollars going? And you can see why people across 

this province — not just rural residents but people right across 

this province — are concerned about their health care. 

 

Now I guess I can feel for the Minister of Finance and the 

Minister of Health when we talk about health care funding. And 

on many occasions we’ve heard in this Legislative Assembly 

that the government has argued the reason they haven’t been 

able to really wrestle and show substantial changes and savings 

in dollar value is because the federal government has cut some 

$200 million out of health transfers. And it’s clear that any 

government has to act responsibly to stay within its means. We 

agree with that. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the federal government has cut, 

the provincial government would like to argue we’ve had to 

make changes and we’ve had to make choices because of their 

cuts. The realities are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial 

government certainly is not innocent of making cuts neither. 

And we as taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan have had 

to absorb more and more every day — every day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — whether it’s in health care or whether it’s in 

education or whether it’s in municipal services and municipal 

government. 

 

What has happened? Back in 1991 the provincial government 

made a choice. They argued we need to bring the deficit under 

control. And their choice was, rather than really cutting 

spending, rather than cutting administrative levels of spending, 

they moved the cost to the taxpayer via transfers. They 

transferred by not providing the funds that were available or 

that were needed to provide the services. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we can see it in the three major areas that most people 

in rural Saskatchewan experience on an ongoing basis. 

 

And so while the provincial government would like to argue the 

federal government’s offloaded, the provincial government has 

offloaded substantially on the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And as a result, taxpayers are becoming more 

and more concerned about the lack of services that they are 

receiving despite the heavier tax load that we are bearing in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s more than just the 

financial responsibility to consider. There’s also the social 

responsibility — the responsibility to show compassion. It is on 

this score that the NDP government has failed the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their own polling shows that a 

majority of Saskatchewan people feel that the health care 

system is going to get worse rather than better over the next 10 

years. And that is an interesting statistic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

While people of Saskatchewan . . . while the Minister of Health 

would stand in this Assembly and tell us we’ve got the best 

health care system in the world, there are many people in this 

province who would beg to differ. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

all members in this Assembly I’m sure have been consulted by 

constituents or by concerned individuals who feel that they have 

been let down by the system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people understand that the government 

and the health care system have to operate within its means. 

They understand that the government cannot be all things to all 

people. None the less, health care is a central value to 

Saskatchewan people, and Canadians generally. 

 

What wears on their minds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not so much 

the sacrifices that have been made so far, but the uncertainty 

about the future. And that is the big thing on people’s minds, 

especially as we find a . . . as we move into an era where there 

will be more seniors living in the province of Saskatchewan and 

certainly needing access to more services. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the numbers . . . 

And I think this is a concern. This is an issue that’s been raised 

over the past number of years about the movement of the baby 

boomers after the Second World War in moving up into their 

years of retirement. And to have uncertainty in the health care 

field is something that is intolerable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

From community to community, people are asking themselves, 

is our hospital going to be next? Is our nursing home going to 

be here to care for our parents or to care for me? I’ve put so 

much money into this province. I’ve paid my taxes. Am I going 

to have access to the services that I believed that I was paying 

my taxes to fund and provide? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if our children break their legs playing 

sports, how far will they have to go to find a doctor? Half an 

hour? An hour? Or two hours? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the taxpayers just want to know what the 

bottom line is. They just want to see an end at the light . . . a 

light at the end of the tunnel of health care cuts. If they have to 

make alternate arrangements for clinics or retirement homes for 

their parents, they are willing to do that. But they need to know 

how, and they need to be able to plan for their futures, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what our Bill does, our Bill would provide 

them with this assurance. The health care Bill we have brought 

in — this health care charter of rights and responsibilities — 

would set out clearly what basic medical services Saskatchewan 

people can count on. 

 

Just as important, it would define incontrovertibly who was 

responsible for providing and paying for these services. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there would be no more shell games of shifting 

blame from the province to the health districts to municipalities, 

etc., etc. 

 

These guidelines would not be arbitrary and they would not be 

done in haste. We would want to see the Department of Health, 

the health districts, and all affected interest groups be actively 

involved in a thorough examination and discussion of the 

regulations for this Bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care is a feature of Saskatchewan 

life that we are all proud of. This Bill reaffirms our commitment 

to the principles of solid, sound financial health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe this is a project that I think cuts 

across partisan lines. I don’t think it matters whether you are 

Tory, Liberal, Reform, NDP, or old-line CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation), or what political affiliation you 

may have, the importance of health care is something we all 

agree on regardless of politics. 

 

With a health care bill of rights and responsibilities, we would 

be putting our money where our mouths are, and give 

Saskatchewan people a new, lasting commitment to health 

services that they can plan on. 

 



1818  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask all members in this Assembly 

to support this Bill; to stand up and support Saskatchewan 

people and give Saskatchewan people the opportunity to have a 

say and a voice in the health care services, in the health care 

program that they feel would best serve them into the year 2000 

and beyond. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll be very 

brief in my remarks since I do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes. I do believe that we already do have, in effect, a bill of 

rights and responsibilities respecting health care in this 

province. We do have a guarantee. It’s called medicare. And we 

are reaffirming that guarantee through our reforms, the wellness 

plan. 

 

I am very pleased though, quite frankly, that the small third 

party has brought forward this Bill because it is nice to see that 

they actually do care about both rights and responsibilities. 

 

We can assume therefore that if this province is ever 

unfortunate enough to have them once again form government, 

that we won’t see again the sorry spectacle that we saw in the 

’80s, where in a vain attempt to curry favour and gain votes, 

that they would be building hospitals every 20 miles. Not based 

on the needs of the community, but based on the needs of the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who wanted to get 

re-elected. 

 

Now they’ve reformed. What are they doing? They want to 

have the same kind of nonsense that the Reform Party seems to 

be proposing right now — fee for service and two-tier health 

care. That’s not the style of health care that the people of 

Saskatchewan want and need. 

 

Now I will grant you that there is anxiety right now in this 

province; that some people are concerned about change and I 

respect their concerns. But Bills like this and rhetoric like 

we’ve heard from the two members opposite, do nothing to 

calm fears or to deal with anxiety. All it does is fuel the fear 

and create a situation where people start to be concerned about 

what kinds of medical services they’re going to have. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only thing that has not been done that 

is referred to in this Bill 227 is to establish a very specific task 

force. All the other things that are referred to in this Bill are 

already in progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan do have access to 24-hour 

emergency services within a specified distance. People do have 

access to a specified number of acute care beds. It is not based 

on community population though, Mr. Speaker; it is based on 

community needs. And those community needs are determined 

by locally elected and appointed boards. 

 

People in Saskatchewan do have access to a specified number 

of long-term care beds. They have access to necessary surgery. 

And the doctors priorize that. And they have access to an 

impartial body to have complaints about health care systems 

investigated and adjudicated. We have 30 care coordinators in  

this province, and we have elected representatives on the health 

care boards. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have MLAs who are more 

than capable of hearing people’s concerns, complaints, and 

suggestions for change. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will admit that there have been some 

problems as we have been reforming the health care system. 

Those problems though, Mr. Speaker, have not been as a result 

of this government not having a broad plan and not knowing 

where the light at the end of the tunnel might be. The problems, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, have come as a result of the federal 

government as a johnny-come-lately finally discovering that 

perhaps the debt and deficit are a problem in this country. It 

comes as a result of them not having proper priorities, of not 

deciding that people’s health care, people’s education, and 

people’s welfare are top priorities in this country. 

 

So consequently, Mr. Speaker, we had the unfortunate cycle . . . 

or the unfortunate sight of the federal Finance minister, 

hopefully soon to be former federal Finance minister, deciding 

to fight the deficit on the backs of the sick in Canada. 

 

So what did they do? They chopped out transfer payments to 

this province. And what did out government do in response? 

We decided to back-fill the problems that they had created. 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government, this NDP 

government, cares very much and puts as a top priority, a 

sound, solid, responsive, and sensitive health care system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest that the Act to establish 

Health Care Rights and Responsibilities in the Province of 

Saskatchewan is a redundant Act. It is not needed and I would 

certainly recommend that all colleagues in this House not 

support this Bill. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Is the member wishing to close 

debate? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Yes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I must warn the Assembly that the 

mover of the motion is wishing to reserve his right to close 

debate, and if anyone is wishing to speak on it to do so now. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was very 

interested to hear the member’s comments with respect to 

health care and the delivery of health care services in 

Saskatchewan, concluding that, and saying in her address, that 

people already have access to all of the things that this Bill 

outlines in a bill of rights and responsibilities for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would certainly have to take issue and I think people all 

across Saskatchewan would take issue with the fact that they do 

not have access to 24-hour emergency services within a 

specified distance. 

 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

If you look at rural Saskatchewan, Madam Member, you’ll find 

that there are many communities that at one point in time had 

health care services that no longer have those health care 

services within their community. They don’t have access to the 

number of acute care beds based on community population any 

longer. They no longer have access to a specified minimum 

number of long-term care beds based on community population 

or the number of seniors within their community. They do not 

have access to surgery within a specified time frame either. 

 

These are the kinds of things that are outlined in this Bill. These 

are the kind of things that I think the people of Saskatchewan 

are looking for. And these are the kind of things that even 

though the member says we have access to all of that, the only 

concern essentially that she has with this Bill is that there isn’t 

an impartial body to have complaints about the health care 

system investigated and adjudicated. 

 

Well I would hope that if we . . . if those are her only concerns, 

that there isn’t what we would call something like a health care 

ombudsperson, that would be her only concern, then it 

shouldn’t be any problem whatsoever for that member and all 

members of the government to support this piece of legislation, 

I wouldn’t think. 

 

We would hope that they would do so to provide the people of 

Saskatchewan with the kind of quality of health care services 

and the delivery of those health care services that are so 

critically important. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we have presented this 

legislation. That’s why we believe it’s important to the people 

and the families of Saskatchewan. And that’s why I urge all 

members to accept this legislation and pass it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:32 p.m. until 3:33 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 12 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Draude Bjornerud 

Hillson Julé Aldridge 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

 

Nays — 20 

 

Mitchell Tchorzewski Johnson 

Whitmore Kowalsky Crofford 

Koenker Bradley Lorje 

Renaud Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Jess Langford 

Murrell Thomson  

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 67 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

begin this debate on a Bill to give this government the power to 

abolish marketing boards in this province by having a look at 

marketing systems. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in Saskatchewan, especially 

producers, are well aware that a few short months ago this 

government was using thousands of taxpayers’ dollars to fight a 

proposal to allow open marketing of feed barley. They said it 

was outrageous. They said it was heresy. In fact a former 

minister of Agriculture said some things I am prevented from 

repeating in this Assembly. 

 

So we fought against opening up the Wheat Board even to a 

minimal degree; and in fact Liberals were taken to task for 

saying that, well let’s let the producers decide, let’s have a vote. 

Liberals weren’t saying that we should do away with the Wheat 

Board. They were simply saying, well let the producers decide 

what they want to do with barley. And to the NDP that was 

going much too far. And they were outraged and they used 

taxpayers’ dollars against that plebiscite and they used some 

pretty crude, foul language on farmers who supported the vote. 

 

Well so where are we now? Well the member from Watrous, he 

said on April 4, 1996, farmers are better off financially under 

the Canadian Wheat Board. We need single-desk marketing. 

And yet now this same member from Watrous is standing in 

this House asking for the right to abolish every single provincial 

marketing board without a vote of producers — just a stroke of 

the pen and gone. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this hypocrisy or isn’t it? This is the 

same member who found it offensive that producers would 

have a vote. He doesn’t think that letting producers decide their 

own future is appropriate on an issue as sacred as single-desk 

marketing. 

 

Well some of my colleagues here have been saying that the 

members opposite have been inconsistent. You know, they 

fought for the Canadian Wheat Board; now they’re fighting 

against provincial marketing boards. They’re saying this is 

inconsistent. 

 

Well at the risk of sounding as if I’m disagreeing with my hon. 

colleagues, may I say that I see something very consistent in the 

NDP’s stand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In both cases, they were 

opposed to a producer vote. In both cases, they didn’t think the 

farmers should be listened to. They didn’t think that producers 

should have an input into their own future. And in that sense, 

they have been very consistent. 

 

They were angry with the federal Liberal government for saying 

we will allow producers to decide their fate and the fate  



1820  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

of the Canadian Wheat Board. They were opposed to that. And 

now they stand in this House to say they are opposed to a 

producer vote on the future of the provincial marketing boards 

— nine marketing boards under provincial jurisdiction. Should 

they have a vote? Should producers have a vote as to whether or 

not these marketing boards are still the way to preserve and 

protect their future? Of course not. The NDP doesn’t believe in 

that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former minister of Agriculture, 

in talking about the debate last year over the Canadian Wheat 

Board, he ran across some farmers who were in favour of taking 

away the Wheat Board’s monopoly. He found this outrageous 

— say he resorted to obscenities — but he found it so 

outrageous that farmers would say they don’t believe in the 

monopoly of the Wheat Board that he said this: when it comes 

to freedom of speech — in opposition of single-desk marketing 

— quote: “I think there have to be limits.” So if a farmer dares 

to express doubts about single-desk marketing, that is an 

example where we cannot tolerate freedom of speech. 

 

So here we have an NDP that not only stood up for single-desk 

marketing, but opposed a vote, and actually opposed the 

exercise of freedom of speech. Freedom of speech was going 

too far when you had people with the gall to stand up and say 

they didn’t think there had to be a monopoly. How outrageous. 

Those people should be in a concentration camp. Well . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What are you saying? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Please listen, you might learn something. So 

these same people who spent taxpayers’ money — taxpayers’ 

money — to say that we would not have a free vote by 

producers on whether or not to preserve the Wheat Board 

monopoly over barley now are asking this House — this House 

— to abolish nine marketing boards, nine marketing boards, 

with no vote at all. The stroke of a pen. 

 

Yes, that’s what’s in this legislation. And if the hon. member 

from Saskatoon whatever doesn’t know this is in the legislation, 

I encourage her to read it, because that’s in the legislation. 

 

Well we the . . . Well I don’t know what was so offensive about 

saying . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on her 

feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Personal privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is your point of privilege? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I was listening to the member, and I heard him 

say that members opposite — referring to the government 

members in this House — should be in a concentration camp. 

I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found that extremely insulting, 

extremely negative, and absolutely unnecessary. And I would 

ask the member opposite to withdraw the remark and to 

apologize for all the victims of the Holocaust who actually were 

in concentration camps. I think that what he has said is 

reprehensible and I would ask that he withdraw it. 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think the hon. 

member was listening to me. I did not say that learned members 

opposite should be in a concentration camp. I was quoting from 

the former minister of Justice who said that he did not believe 

in freedom of speech. There have to be limits to freedom of 

speech for people who . . . for people who come out against the 

Wheat Board monopoly. This was the quote I read. 

 

Now I did go on from that to say that these people who have 

stood up and argued against freedom of speech, their position 

appears to be that anyone who argues against single-desk 

marketing should be in a concentration camp. Now I freely 

concede the minister did not go that far, he only said there have 

to be limits to freedom of speech; we can’t allow freedom of 

speech to include the right to argue against a monopoly of 

marketing boards — the same minister who is now wanting the 

power to abolish all marketing boards. And I’m certainly 

prepared to retract that part of my remark. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. There seems to be a little 

confusion of what the member originally said, and because of 

that confusion, I will check the verbatim and bring a ruling back 

to the House at the earliest convenience. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the boards the 

government is now seeking the right to abolish without a vote is 

of course SPI. Now SPI is the son or daughter of Saskatchewan 

Hog Marketing Commission. And who formed SPI, who 

formed the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission? Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one Jack Messer. One Jack Messer, to 

whom members opposite owe so much, who has done so much 

for public policy in this province. 

 

So this is another one of the nine boards this government wants 

the right to abolish without a vote of producers. And I think it is 

incumbent on members opposite to tell us: why did you find it 

so offensive earlier this year, so offensive that the federal 

government allowed a vote on barley under the Canadian Wheat 

Board on whether or not there’d be a continued monopoly? 

 

You found it so offensive that you spent taxpayers’ dollars on 

the vote. You found it so offensive that a former minister was 

using obscenities on a farmer who came out against the Wheat 

Board monopoly. You found it so offensive that that same 

minister said there have to be limits on free speech. And yet 

now you ask members opposite to give this minister the power 

to abolish every single provincial marketing board with no vote 

of producers whatsoever. 

 

Well last week the Premier stood in his place and encouraged 

members opposite to get some public reaction, some producer 

reaction. Well we’ve done that. I know my colleague will say 

the letters we’ve sent to farmers . . . we’ve been on the media; 

we have been asking producers to contact us as to whether or 

not they want these marketing boards to go or whether they 

think that marketing boards are still a way to protect them. And 

we’ve asked them whether they think a vote is important or 

whether the minister can just make this decision for them. 

 

Well of course this only just went out. We haven’t had a chance  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

to get the reaction back so we don’t know what producers are 

going to say. But as with Ralph Goodale, we think it is 

important to hear from producers. This is first and foremost 

their livelihood. So we want to get the reaction of producers on 

whether or not marketing boards continue to be a beneficial 

way for them to market their products. 

 

And I think I can speak for all of my colleagues when I say, if 

producers no longer feel that marketing boards are the way to 

go, we can certainly live with that, as Ralph Goodale can live 

with that. But if producers still believe in the integrity of 

marketing boards, I think we need to consider that too, without 

giving the minister authority to unilaterally abolish every 

marketing board with the stroke of a pen, without consultation 

with the producers. 

 

Well I am sorry that the hon. member opposite found it 

offensive for me to bring up the fact that the former minister of 

Agriculture would use obscenities in addressing a farmer, 

would question whether or not we should have free speech on 

this issue. But I’m sorry, those are the words of members 

opposite, and in view of those words, I ask again: how can you 

justify your position on the Wheat Board vote with the 

legislation you have now placed before this Assembly this 

afternoon? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and speak in this debate here this afternoon. 

 

The debate on this Bill thus far has been a rather short but 

certainly a stormy one. In the House we’ve already seen a rare 

occurrence in that the Premier got up and spoke on a Bill. Now 

you have to wonder why the Premier would take the time to get 

up and comment on a Bill when the minister responsible claims 

it’s merely a housekeeping one. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m of the opinion that the Premier 

doesn’t normally spend his time addressing issues unless they 

are of the utmost importance. And this Bill is important to the 

government not because of the final result that they believe it 

might help them achieve, but because it exposes their 

inconsistent stand on the democratic rights of farmers. 

 

For years this government has consistently argued it is the 

defender of the little guy. It also tries to claim that it’s the 

defender of due process in the democratic system. When we 

look at this Bill, we see otherwise. The government realizes this 

and it hopes to just pass this Bill off as a housekeeping one. 

According to the members opposite, this is just about amending 

the law so it reads as it once did. 

 

The other argument we’ve seen the government use here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is to say that this Bill is about the end 

justifying the means. The government argues that this Bill is 

about expanding the hog industry, not about giving the NDP the 

arbitrary right to abolish marketing boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the two basic arguments or 

reasons which the members opposite use to justify the passage  

of this Bill. But I have problems with both of them, and in fact I 

think both are poor reasons for passing a Bill. In my remarks 

this afternoon I intend to show how I believe the members 

opposite are abandoning important principles and making this 

Bill out to be something that it isn’t. 

 

Before I begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I must say a few words 

about the remarks I heard the Minister of Agriculture make on 

the noon agricultural newscast last week. I don’t have the exact 

text of the remarks available at this moment, but it wasn’t so 

much what was said but how it was said. 

 

(1545) 

 

Last week on the BBS (Baton Broadcasting System) noon 

agriculture report, the Minister of Agriculture was remarking on 

the comments made by Jim Morris, manager of SPI. The 

minister disagreed with Mr. Morris’s assessment that this 

legislation was causing a great deal of uncertainty, uncertainty 

which in turn was forcing SPI to lay off people at the Moose 

Jaw packers plant. 

 

Obviously the minister disagreed with Mr. Morris and, well 

that’s his prerogative. The tone of voice, however, would leave 

the viewer to think very poorly of the minister. Without saying 

it directly, the minister used his tone of voice to virtually attack 

the character and integrity of Mr. Morris. 

 

Most people watching this would probably wonder whether this 

is how the minister handles every member of the public who 

disagrees with him. Is this the extent of the minister’s listening 

skills? Is this how the minister addresses members of the 

industry he’s supposed to defend and represent? In any event, 

the minister should reconsider his actions and avoid attacking 

the character of members of the public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of 

Agriculture suggest this Bill is simply housekeeping. It’s simply 

a matter of restoring to The Agri-Food Act, provisions which 

were overlooked. According to the minister, the Bill just 

restores the government’s power to revoke a marketing board 

without first holding a vote of the producers to decide on the 

matter. 

 

Essentially the minister argues that this has been the case all 

along, and when the law was changed by the previous 

government they had inadvertently changed it to remove that 

right. The argument made by the minister is more of an 

argument of convenience than anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

He says this was just an oversight, but in doing so he neglects 

to mention that this government reviewed and amended The 

Agri-Food Act in 1992. 

 

At that time this government obviously directed its legislative 

draftsmen to review this piece of legislation to locate mistakes. 

I’m sure that these are competent people. If they thought that 

maintaining the democratic right of farmers to choose whether 

or not to wipe out their marketing boards was just an oversight, 

I think they would have told the minister so at the time, and the 

Act would have been amended at that time. 

 



1822  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the arguments used by the Premier 

and the minister clearly don’t wash. They freely chose back in 

1992 to maintain the law as it stood. They chose to maintain the 

democratic right of producers to ultimately decide the issue of 

marketing boards, just as they are choosing opposite today on 

this matter of principle. 

 

For the minister to downplay the serious issue of the democratic 

right of producers to decide their future is a gross injustice to an 

important issue. While it’s clear that this government took a 

look at this issue back when it amended this Act five years ago, 

its argument that this is just turning this back to the way they 

used to be, is also riddled with another serious error. 

 

I ask the members opposite to consider applying the same 

principle to other issues. When it comes to farmers’ democratic 

rights they have no problem turning things back to the way they 

used to be. But what about other issues like, say, social 

policies? Throughout the years we’ve made all sorts of progress 

on social policies. We now have a social safety net, which we 

didn’t have before. 

 

Take Unemployment Insurance, or Employment Insurance as 

it’s now called. Would the members opposite suggest that we 

just go back to the way it used to be where Canadians in the 

1930s had few, if any, protections from the devastating effects 

of losing a job? I don’t think the members opposite would go 

for that. 

 

So I say to them, even if previous legislation, amended by the 

Devine government, allowed for the dissolution of marketing 

boards without a vote, does that make it right? Just because 

something was a certain way, does it mean we have to keep 

going that way? 

 

If this is the minister’s philosophy, to go back, just because that 

is the way it was, does he want that applied to the agriculture 

industry? I don’t think so. I think he would agree that going 

back simply because that’s the way it was, is a rather absurd 

argument. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless the minister can come up with a 

more rational, a more logical, sound reason to justify what he’s 

doing to the democratic rights of farmers, he should reconsider 

pushing this Bill through. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of 

Agriculture also imply that the principle of this Bill is to expand 

the pork industry in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the principle 

of a Bill or a piece of legislation is not about the end result, it’s 

always about the means. And the members opposite are more 

aware of this. 

 

Legislation, as always, does not provide an end in itself and it 

never has and never will provide an end itself. Legislation is 

there to provide a means of reaching an end. Governments 

show their true colours by how they try to reach these ends. 

 

This government, like most people in Saskatchewan, wants to 

see an expanded hog industry and all the jobs which come from 

it. They’ve chosen to reach that goal, in part, through this  

legislation. Mr. Deputy Speaker, given that legislation only 

helps government and the people to reach their goals, this Bill 

is therefore only a means to an end. Mr. Speaker, the end never 

justifies the means. Sure, everyone in Saskatchewan wants 

economic growth, but we also value other things, like our 

democratic rights and freedoms and the importance of 

consultation. 

 

We all know the government will ultimately use its majority to 

get its way on this Bill, but I raise this question: do you think 

it’s right to wipe out the democratic rights of farmers to decide 

whether they want to eliminate or amend their marketing 

boards? Do you think it’s right to do that just to achieve an 

end? Surely it isn’t right. 

 

When people disagree on how to accomplish a goal it’s easy 

just to use legislation to decide the matter. But it takes a great 

deal more courage to let those involved use the political and 

negotiation process to resolve the matter themselves. While a 

solution might be more difficult to obtain, its future will be 

more solid and everyone in society will benefit from finding a 

compromise. 

 

The principle of the Bill before us today is the democratic right 

of farmers to ultimately decide the issue of marketing boards 

through a democratic vote. It’s not about housekeeping. It’s not 

about an end. It’s about the means which the government 

intends to use to reach that end. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find it sadly ironic that this same 

government which now wants to use undemocratic means to 

reach an end is the same government which wants to paint itself 

as a defender of farmers’ democratic rights. 

 

I note that a senior political employee of this government and 

the federal NDP candidate for Palliser suggests that he supports 

defending the Canadian Wheat Board. This government 

suggested it defends the right of farmers to choose on that issue, 

but in this legislation the NDP government is willing to use any 

and all means available to undermine the democratic rights of 

farmers to decide the future of their marketing boards. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has a poor reputation with 

farmers. And by having this double standard they’re doing 

nothing to correct it. 

 

Before I conclude my remarks, I’d like to remind the members 

opposite and the minister that I’ve written to my constituents 

regarding this issue. In the next couple of days they will be 

receiving a letter from myself outlining this issue, and 

reiterating a promise made by the Premier. In debating this Bill 

in the House the Premier stated, and again I quote: 

 

You want time to consult with your constituencies? We’ll 

give you the time to consult . . . but make sure you consult 

with them in fact and in substance and in all honesty. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this was good advice. So I wrote 

my constituents on the issue but many of them are busy seeding  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

and they’ve yet to receive the correspondence. So the question 

remains as to whether the Premier’s words were just another 

hollow promise like that of eliminating the Saskatchewan flat 

tax. If you really want to hear from my constituents you’ll do as 

the Premier promised and wait for them to respond. This is your 

government’s promise and like anything else, we’re here to 

encourage you to keep that promise. But you are ultimately 

responsible for keeping it. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll take my place and leave the 

responsibility of keeping this promise with the people who 

made it. If this is more than a hollow promise, you’ll wait on 

this Bill. If you ram this Bill through instead of adjourning it, 

then we’ll all know just how much a promise from this 

government is really worth — nothing. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Is the minister about to close debate? 

The minister is wishing to exercise his right to close the debate 

and I must warn members of the Assembly if anyone wishing to 

speak on this motion must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I won’t 

take long, although I could take a long time, but we will have a 

chance in committee to expand on some of the things that I 

would like to say. But I want to take a few minutes just to set 

the record straight on a few things. 

 

And I know the members opposite have the right to stand in 

their place and go on about what this Bill may or may not do, 

but I want to just correct a few things because obviously they 

haven’t done their homework, okay. So while they have the 

right to do that, I would also wish that they would speak the 

facts about this Bill. And the member from North Battleford, 

the two-year member from North Battleford, was saying that the 

government, the minister, has the right to . . . is going to nullify 

the vote. 

 

Well if he were to look at the Bill and see what the Bill does, 

the right to a vote of producers is still in the Act; it does nothing 

to take that away. Nothing to take it . . . doesn’t take anything. 

The Agri-Food Council, through The Agri-Food Act, if 

requested by a marketing board, can still conduct a vote. At the 

end of the day, if the province were to decide that we would be 

put at a disadvantage if the wishes of those producers were 

carried through, then we would have the right to overrule that. 

 

And not the minister; this is simply enabling. This is simply 

enabling. It has to go through Executive Council, it has to go 

through Executive Council . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well 

now there again the member should listen, because obviously 

his leader on the government payroll hasn’t done his research 

for him. And he hasn’t or is not willing to do the research 

either. A vote still can be taken. 

 

But what it does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to allow Executive 

Council, not just the minister — it has to go through all the 

hoops — to make a decision. And I would when it comes to . . . 

when this comes to Committee of the Whole I will be asking 

the member if he doesn’t think the province has the right to 

control the economy of its people. And certain situations you  

have to. 

 

I will also be asking him, Mr. Speaker, if the Liberal provinces 

who have similar legislation, if he’s asking them to revoke their 

legislation. I mean this makes no sense, what he’s saying over 

there. 

 

So the other thing I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the Liberal news release that was put out a few days . . . last 

week actually, the middle of last week — in where they quoted 

Mr. Jim Morris of saying the reason that the Moose Jaw 

packing plant was going to be . . . the lay-off notices were put 

forward was because of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is absolutely false — absolutely false. 

I have a letter here from Mr. John Germs, the chair of SPI 

Marketing, which states, and I quote: 

 

The Board of Directors of SPI Marketing Group has 

decided to downsize the Moose Jaw Packer plant for two 

reasons: 

 

1. The hog shortage problem in Saskatchewan; (There’s a 

hog shortage problem in Saskatchewan, and indeed across 

Canada; not the only province suffering from that. And 

secondly) 

 

. . . The Directors are not prepared to subsidize it’s 

Provisions Accounts through the weekly pool (meaning 

they’re losing money). 

 

And the fact of the matter is if the members opposite would 

have done the research before they jumped to a conclusion put 

forward by Mr. Morris — a false accusation — they would 

know that the decision to give the lay-off notices in Moose Jaw 

are done annually. And the extra provision for lay-off was made 

before The Agri-Food Act was introduced. So how could it 

have anything to do with it? 

 

The other thing that . . . the other accusation that was made is 

that this Act somehow is going to stymie the hog industry. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1990 — from 1990 to 1996 — 

there were 1,112 hog producers left the industry. All of them 

. . . not all, all but 12 of them, were under 100 sow producers. 

That’s nothing to do with the government. That’s since 1990. 

That’s the trend in the industry — two governments. There 

were 33 new hog initiatives, all over 200 sow units, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So for anyone to relate The Agri-Food Act to the production of 

hogs simply has not done their homework. And the other thing, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say, the last thing I want to say, and 

because this provokes a much longer debate; but the last thing I 

want to say is this province and western Canada’s positioned 

very well to take advantage of the great demand in the world 

hog . . . world pork meat consumption, pig meat consumption. 

 

Everybody — nearly everybody — in this province is agreeing 

and excited about the things we have to do to make sure we get 

there except the Liberal caucus. I mean even the Tories 

understand it. They understand that you have to pull together. 



1824  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

And I’m going to just read you just a small quote here to end 

this. It’s from the Urban Voice. The Urban Voice is the 

monthly newsletter of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association. And the headline is “Local hog initiative has 

LeRoy squealing!” And this is from the town of Leroy. And it 

says “The Town of LeRoy has . . .” I’m quoting now: 

 

The Town of LeRoy has boldly stepped into the industry 

we feel confident will provide the missing equation to 

maintaining a rural community — more people! 

 

Three years ago, our rental properties had a high vacancy 

rate, businesses in general were strained to survive. Today, 

the community is busy handling construction crews and 

new residents. More importantly, a new positive attitude 

has developed, inspired by economic activity. 

 

You know what that economic activity is, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

It’s the building of their third new hog barn. They’ve gone into 

training initiatives for pork. They’ve gone into manure 

management with PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 

Institute). 

 

And I want to just put another quote here: 

 

After three years and two $6 million projects, our 

community is feeling a new sense of optimism. Projections 

for school enrollment look good; a housing market has 

developed, bringing value back to existing homes; business 

has picked up; and best of all, the recreational facilities are 

holding their own without (having to be subsidized. Well,) 

excessive subsidy. 

 

This is what’s happening. All I want to do is ask the members 

to do a couple of things. 

 

First of all, get your facts right. Don’t be going around 

scaremongering, trying to destroy this industry. I could never 

figure that out. Figure out who’s telling the truth and who isn’t 

telling the truth. 

 

And I think the Chair of the board, his letter is about where you 

go. There’s another old saying: when you talk to the horse, you 

talk to the head — and the head of SPI is the Chair of the board. 

 

So just ask members to do that. Get on board. Get on board, 

because I’ll tell you, the only people that you’re hurting is all of 

Saskatchewan. This initiative’s going to put people back into 

rural Saskatchewan, as proven by the town of Leroy. It’s going 

to put economic development back in. Why in the world do you 

want to stop that? 

 

And as far as . . . the last point I’ll make, the very last point I’ll 

make, when the member from North Battleford or wherever 

compares this to the Wheat Board, again this is simplistic, 

simplistic. And you can’t . . . you have to do the analysis. And 

I’m sure that his leader’s not capable of doing that analysis, but 

there are people who can do it for you. Do the analysis. 

 

And you know the board does give us advantages. In 

Saskatchewan we have to analyse all our projects, all our  

institutions, and decide what has to happen. Basic three things 

— status quo, totally change, or modified to meet modern trade 

rules. That’s all we’re asking. Let’s figure out what we have to 

do to make sure our province is going to lead in Canada in this 

production and adding to our economy of the province. 

 

So I just ask members to please get their head out of the sand. I 

know there’s time to do politics, there’s time not to. Now is the 

time to stand up in your place and get onside with the 

development of this industry. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. On my 

left, Dale Sigurdson, assistant deputy minister. On my right, 

Terry Scott, assistant deputy minister. Behind me, Jack Zepp, 

director of — don’t have — director of administrative services 

branch. Behind me, Ross Johnson, budget officer, 

administrative services. And at the back, Donn Farrer, manager, 

agricultural operations. And Jacquie Gibney, acting director of 

pork central. 

 

The Deputy Chair:  Thank you, Minister. Members, this 

department was before the committee on April 14 and May 5 

and then again today. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I couldn’t let you get away with it 

that quickly, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d like to welcome 

you and your officials here today. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know I’ve discussed this with you before, but I 

wonder if you can clarify for me again what the position of the 

department is on lease lands — that the person leasing them, 

particularly pasture lands, and that person no longer has 

animals. What’s the procedure if that person is still leasing the 

land? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chairman, to the member, I just 

wanted to make sure that I knew the procedure here. If the land 

is being leased to a lessee, then . . . they don’t have cattle on the 

land and it’s pasture land, of course when we discover that, that 

somebody reports that he doesn’t have or we find out there’s no 

cattle on there, then there is a period of time that I believe he is 

allowed, or the person is allowed, to put cattle on there to graze. 

But eventually if cattle are not placed . . . if they’re not being  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

. . . a piece of land is not being grazed or utilized, then it will be 

taken away from that producer and re-tendered. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve had 

complaints come to me that some individuals under these 

circumstances are running animals for someone else on that 

leased land and those animals do not belong to them. What 

happens in those cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  While we think that’s happened in the 

past and maybe still happens once in awhile, there’s no 

provision for subleasing. So if you have land rented, leased in 

your name, they technically should be your cattle. Unfortunately 

if they’re not branded and you’re brand registered, it’s very 

difficult to tell who’s cattle they really are. Some farmers will 

just say yes, they’re my cattle. 

 

Now, but if you know . . . I’ve had a situation in my own area 

that I know that the same thing happened. And if you have 

cases where people suspect that this is happening, then we ask 

you to bring it to the department. Because while we do have 

rules it’s very hard to determine sometimes whose cattle they 

really are. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. This 

particular case that’s been reported to me is supposedly the 

cattle are branded but the brand belongs to another person. And 

I’ll give you the land location and I can give you the name in 

private if you want, but I’ll give you the land location. It’s the 

west half of 29-5 of 2 west of the second, the land in question 

that has been reported to me. So if you can check into that and 

perhaps the thing that needs to be done — and I don’t know if 

you can do this or not — but check and see any cattle sales in 

that person’s name and whether or not they’re showing up on 

his income tax to determine whether or not he actually owns 

those cattle or if they’re simply being subleased to somebody 

else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We will definitely look into it because 

we discourage things like this because it is public land and 

we’re in charge of that land and we have rules by which 

producers have to abide by, and in fairness to all the producers 

we’ll enforce those to the best of our ability. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 

the things that’s happened over this past winter and that has 

come before this House on a number of occasions — indeed the 

first debate we had in this House after we came back into 

session dealt with this particular issue — and that’s the delays 

in the grain handling. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it’s been suggested — and we favour it — 

that those who are responsible for any delays in the grain 

transportation system should be held responsible for those 

delays and that they should pay the costs associated with that. 

Farmers are paying the demurrage today on the ships that are 

sitting off the west coast. That has been going on for a good 

period of time. Certainly now we’re down to less than 10 ships 

waiting, but at one point in time we were over 40 ships. I 

believe that farmers are on the hook for over $65 million. 

 

That cost should be spread out amongst all those that are 

responsible. If farmers didn’t deliver the grain on time, then 

they should be responsible. If the elevator companies didn’t 

move it through their system on time, it should be their 

responsibility. If the rail didn’t allocate the cars properly, didn’t 

move the grain to the west coast and to port, it should be them. 

And it should be the Wheat Board’s responsibility if they put 

the wrong grain in terminals at port. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you agree with all of those areas facing 

their own responsibilities and paying the cost rather than simply 

the farmer bearing the cost for everyone else’s unfortunate 

deficiencies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes I do. It appears to be $30 million 

demurrage. Lost sales could be — depending what the price 

does — could be 100, 200 million. There’s no . . . I mean it’s an 

unknown figure right now. But I do agree. The people who’re 

responsible should be charged with paying for the costs of their 

delays. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Would 

you agree that that also applies to any labour unions that may 

have held up the system, or to the Canadian Wheat Board? Now 

if the Canadian Wheat Board is to be held responsible, that 

again comes out of the farmers’ pockets. So some other method 

has to be found to hold the Canadian Wheat Board accountable 

for their actions. And perhaps if there was some sort of lien put 

against the managers, the executives, the CEO of the Canadian 

Wheat Board, on their salaries and to hold them personally 

accountable, would go some ways in making them more 

accountable and more efficient to the farmers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the Canadian Wheat Board is an 

arm of the federal government. So yes, I’m not sure how it 

would work if you went to a personal guarantee. You may have 

some problems attracting commissioners to the board, because 

there are times I’m sure when they call grain to port and for 

various reasons they need different grain by the time the ship 

gets there, or whatever the reason. 

 

And as far as labour unions are concerned, I agree they have to 

have some responsibility. That, like anything else, we’d have to 

sit down and discuss, because I don’t believe that that 

responsibility though should take away from their collective 

bargaining rights and the right to strike. But yes, we can have 

these discussions. 

 

And I’m really disappointed that Mr. Goodale and the Liberal 

government has left it this long. I thought always that at times 

when elections were coming that you could . . . as a lobby 

group, that we are now, that we could rely on some pressure 

being applied. But we’re applying the pressure, but 

unfortunately Mr. Goodale and the Liberal government isn’t 

listening. 

 

And the other thing I’d ask you to do is, we’ve intervened in the 

Wheat Board application to the CTA (Canadian Transportation 

Agency), whether we believe the railroads are the major 

contributing factor to the 30 million demurrage. We would ask 

you to support that action. 



1826  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, we’re supportive of 

shared responsibility in this; that each area accept their share of 

the responsibility. And that includes all players — farmers, rail, 

Canadian Wheat Board, and the unions involved, and including 

the grain companies. Because the inefficiencies that they may 

have in their system can also cause problems. So all areas 

should bear the responsibility rather than just simply the farmer, 

who bears it all today. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the changes you have made this past 

session has been the tax relief to hog operations. I have a news 

article here that talks about the deductible of the PST 

(provincial sales tax), $500 deductible, and the rest being 

written off or being forgiven for major hog operations and other 

livestock operations, providing they exceed the $500 PST limit. 

 

Mr. Minister, this article though suggests . . . by a Mr. Terry 

Boehm of the NFU (National Farmers Union), that any benefits 

to the hog industry is . . . well I’ll quote: “There’s a lot of hype 

right now and it’s sort of unsubstantiated.” 

 

Now on the other side we have Mr. Richard Wright, who is the 

general manager of Quadra Management at Outlook, who 

would indicate that there is some benefits. And I’ll quote Mr. 

Wright: “They are making a small premium by selling it at a 

barn, but there seems to be no question of that, that there is 

going to be a benefit to the barley producers.” 

 

So is there going to be a benefit to Saskatchewan producers in 

general by these larger hog operations, by the benefits being 

accrued by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool generally? Because 

that is the major component going in on these larger hog 

operations, not to say that others might not also, but right now 

it’s the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Is there going to be a benefit 

to Saskatchewan producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Absolutely. The benefit will . . . To 

producers, you said. And I’ll just maybe expand that. To the 

grain producer, as far as the price is concerned, there won’t be a 

great increase in the price because of the production. But what 

it does, it provides you with a very good market and another 

option in your rotation of your farm crops. 

 

But the producers and the communities will certainly benefit 

from the tax incentives. The communities will benefit. As I just 

said a few minutes ago in this House, the town of Leroy is very 

excited. They’ve got a number of hog operations going up. 

They’ve got three now, I think two or three more slated, and 

their activity in their town has increased. 

 

Now Mr. Boehm said, unsubstantiated by . . . I happen to know 

Mr. Boehm. He doesn’t live too far from me and we have some 

good discussions. I think that if we were to have a discussion 

about the potential, and I’ve said many times in and out of this 

House, potential, then we would all agree that we have to take 

advantage of the rate . . . the increased consumption. 

 

And the fact that two major countries are out of the pictures for 

awhile as far as production is concerned, so definitely 

advantage. Not just to grain producers, who have probably the 

smallest an advantage unfortunately, but it will flow to market  

— hog producers, communities, and the general economy. And 

I just might add, the people who are dropping off of the 

industry are the, basically under a hundred sow units; people 

who are coming in are the 2-, 300-plus units. 

 

That’s nothing to do with anything; it’s that way right across the 

country. Nothing to do with anything but the economies of 

production. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I 

certainly hope that these hog operations are a benefit both to the 

people who invest in them and in the producers who will sell 

supplies to them. 

 

But if this tax relief is of benefit in job creation in the hog 

industry, would it also not be of benefit across the board to all 

agriculture, to all Saskatchewan people, if those types of tax 

relief were given to industry to come in and set up new 

operations in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

I would certainly encourage you and your government to move 

in that direction rather than simply pinpointing it on one 

particular area, the hog operations, and to a smaller extent to 

livestock outside of that. 

 

And the only reason that is happening today is because the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool wanted to move into that area and 

certainly must have lobbied successfully your government to 

make those changes, to give them some tax relief from the PST 

to go ahead with those operations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well as a matter of fact it does apply to 

quite a broad base. As you will know, the new exemption is for 

intensive livestock operations, potato storage, fruit storage, 

greenhouses, and vegetable storage. 

 

But as far as industry’s concerned, a couple of years ago we 

removed the tax from any flow-through products. Like if it’s 

steel coming in to build an air seeder, the tax was removed from 

that. We have no . . . we have removed the E&H (education and 

health) from machinery. For example, if you’re starting up an 

industry, there’s no tax on the machinery you install for 

production. In fact this year, this last budget, we removed the 

tax on used machinery. 

 

I know the Weyburn cable company had some used machinery 

and we made it retroactive to them. I think IPSCO had some 

used machinery they put in. So we are expanding the base. 

 

This is why Saskatchewan, next to Alberta, who has no E&H 

tax, is the lowest taxed province in Canada. Even though 

Manitoba has a 7 per cent tax, the same as we do, our base is 

quite a lot narrower — the articles we tax compared to 

Manitoba. So as far as the province goes, we are the lowest 

E&H tax in Canada. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 

thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and for 

answering our questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I too would like to thank the officials for 

helping me provide the answers to the questions for the 

opposition members. 

 

(1630) 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 

have with me today, Ernie Lawton, the acting secretary of 

Indian and Metis Affairs; Donavon Young, assistant secretary, 

Metis Affairs; John Reid, executive director, policy and 

planning; and we also appreciate that we’ve been joined by Ray 

McKay, deputy minister of Northern Affairs, and Brian 

Cousins, director of communications for Department of 

Northern Affairs, because apparently there was some questions 

that there wasn’t an opportunity to ask during the Northern 

Affairs. And seeing as those were voted off, we thought we’d 

make that convenient here today. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Again, welcome to both ministers and their 

officials, and thank you for making the extra effort in 

addressing some of the questions we have for Northern Affairs 

as well as SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat). 

 

Just getting right into the mix of things, Madam Minister, did 

you indicate that to resolve the issues of racism in regards to 

aboriginal workers at the Casino Regina that a mutually agreed 

upon arbitrator/mediator would be selected? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes we did. Because of the range of 

concerns that were coming forward, it didn’t fit well into any of 

the existing processes. And so we sat down together, met, and 

we jointly agreed and co-signed an agreement to have a 

mediator, a mutually agreed on mediator, and that it would be a 

mediation and arbitration process. So moving from mediation to 

arbitration. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. I thank the member for yielding 

the floor. If we are going to entertain questions of the Northern  

Affairs office, that would require leave of the committee 

members, and as Chair, I need a motion. I just . . . what I need 

is to know, is leave granted to consider questions of Northern 

Affairs office. Is leave granted? That is agreed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

did the employees submit a list of acceptable arbitrators or 

mediators? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The actual selection of the mediator 

was handled by the board of directors in conjunction with the 

representatives of the employees. So my understanding is that 

they both agreed to this name submitted. Some of the names 

that were discussed earlier didn’t have the background in labour 

issues, mediation and arbitration, that were required to do the 

extensive review that was needed. But all parties did agree to 

the person that was eventually contracted to do the work. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Were concerns expressed to you about the 

selection process and what steps did you take to resolve them in 

terms of the two groups? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No concerns were expressed and no 

steps were taken. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Were there any roadblocks to reaching a 

mutually agreed upon arbitrator/mediator? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly not in my understanding. Mr. 

Ish, who was chosen, has a very good reputation in this field. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Was there any pressure by management for 

the employees to agree to an arbitrator or mediator whose name 

the employees may not have supported or did not submit? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, an agreement was mutually 

signed. And this was an alternate process that was offered to 

them; it was certainly not the only process that they had at their 

choosing. They could have gone to the Human Rights 

Commission. They could have worked strictly with a lawyer. 

They could have gone through a union process in the 

workplace. 

 

This was chosen and people signed their agreement to this 

process with this mediator. So I would assume that if they had 

not agreed they should not have signed that paper. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. What are you 

doing to address the concerns that job descriptions do not 

encompass skills and experiences that are not directly and 

narrowly connected to job experience? That by having very 

narrow job descriptions, you’re keeping capable people out of 

management jobs, people who sometimes happen to be native. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If this is a problem — and I don’t recall 

right off that this was a problem mentioned in the mediator’s 

report — but if this was a problem this is not a problem 

uncommon to any workplace which is working in an 

environment where they’re trying to reflect more broadly the  



1828  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

skills that people may bring to a job that weren’t perhaps 

received in a university or training institute, or were not perhaps 

received on the job. 

 

For example, women going into the workforce may have many 

experiences with doing volunteer work in organizations and 

what not, which although requires a high level of skill is often 

not considered a qualification for a job. 

 

So this is a problem that runs throughout all corporations, all 

government departments, and it may in fact exist at the casino 

but it hasn’t been an issue of particular discussion. However 

now that they have a union in place there, that would be the 

vehicle to deal with that issue. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And what are 

you doing to address the concerns that minority groups do not 

have fair access to management positions? What actual plans 

have you got to address some of those concerns? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I do believe that the mediator’s report 

speaks to improving career pathing, training, and perhaps 

strengthening the recruitment efforts. 

 

Again these are things that can be worked out with the union 

and management, and I think every organization could improve 

those practices. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And a final 

question in reference to the actual Casino Regina. Are you 

planning on selling this casino? Are you talking or negotiating 

with any native organization or band about the sale? And if you 

do decide to sell, what provisions are you making to ensure 

current employees’ jobs are protected in case of a sale? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I would ask the member if he’s making 

an offer? I know that you are an astute businessman. 

 

Right now there’s a review going on by a business consultant 

who’s looking at the business aspects of options to sell or not to 

sell, and what kind of factors should be considered in a request 

for proposals if in fact there was a decision made to proceed 

with that. 

 

The review that they’re doing isn’t done. None of those 

decisions have been made. A list is being kept of everyone who 

has expressed an interest, but no discussions have taken place 

with any interested party beyond the receiving of their interest. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And just one 

final question in terms of the negotiations with the Metis Nation 

of Saskatchewan, in terms of their revenues from the whole 

issue of gambling and the association entities fund. Could you 

give us an update as to what the Metis Nation may have 

received and what they’re about to receive in the next year or 

two years? And that’ll conclude my questions in terms of the 

gambling aspect. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  As you know, the percentage of their 

share of the total fund was 25 per cent of the associated entities 

fund. And I just wanted to make sure I had the correct budget  

figures for you. In ’96-97 it’s 260,000, and in ’97-98, it’s 

projected to go up to 607,000 just on the straight revenue share. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And at this 

point in time I just want to quickly make a statement in 

reference to Northern Affairs. And certainly having an overlap 

in responsibility with Indian and Metis, there’ll be some interest 

in what I have to say and what I view as currently a major 

problem in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I guess the fact that 80 per cent of the northern people are 

of Indian or Metis ancestry, it does in essence complement both 

yourself and the member from Cumberland’s portfolio. 

However, for the past several decades northern people have 

been harping about housing problems in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I, like may other people of the North, have 

been talking and pointing out the fact that housing remains to 

be the number one problem in Northern Affairs . . . northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

For many years people have been talking about an exciting, 

innovative, and comprehensive strategy to deal with housing. 

Housing, in a large part, is filled with a system of disincentives. 

There are major problems in terms of repairs for many senior 

citizens. There are many problems for working families. There 

is very little influence that the communities have and the 

leadership of the communities have in terms of housing. And I 

just want to elaborate on that a bit because we probably have 

about 15, 20 minutes of statements and one question to follow. 

 

However, we need to have substance and long-term 

commitments rather than ad hoc rhetoric when it comes to 

sustainable housing initiatives. And northern people 

understand, they understand very clearly, that they do not want 

nor do they expect free housing. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, and, Mr. Minister, the fact is they want 

to make sure that the housing initiative or strategy that we 

develop from here on in, is a strategy that would assist them in 

helping them to become home-owners and people that could 

really build their future based on the fact that they have a decent 

house and a decent roof over their heads for their children. 

 

Madam Minister, in northern Saskatchewan I know of a great 

many elderly people who live in homes that lack decent 

insulation, that lack decent doors and windows, electricity, 

water and sewer services, and the list goes on. And I want to 

say publicly that it’s a shame that we allow our elderly people 

to live in substandard houses and run-down housing in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

For your information, I’ve completed a survey of housing 

conditions in many northern communities — La Loche, 

Uranium City, Beauval, Pinehouse, Ile-à-la-Crosse, Buffalo 

Narrows — and I’ll be sharing some of those findings with you. 

In fact, Madam Minister, and Mr. Minister, we have a list of 

elderly people here — 246 strong — of people we know and 

we’ve identified that have housing problems. And I would like,  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

for the Assembly’s record, is to send those invitations . . . or the 

applications over to you so that you know exactly which people 

we’re dealing with here. 

 

And again the predominant theme that emerged from the 

results: that many houses in northern Saskatchewan are in 

desperate need of repair. And many of these senior citizens are 

living on fixed incomes. They simply — and I stress simply — 

cannot afford to repair their homes given their fixed income. 

These elderly people wish to live independently and yet they do 

not have the means to maintain their homes, so many times look 

to senior governments to assist them in that effort. 

 

And I want to make it perfectly clear, Mr. Chairman, that when 

we talk about repairing these homes, we don’t mean the lap of 

luxury. We don’t mean Jacuzzis and patio doors, we’re talking 

about simple things like proper insulation, water and sewer, and 

decent doors and windows. 

 

Now I think the key thing here is that, in the final years of many 

of our senior citizens in northern Saskatchewan, you know the 

problems that they have in terms of fixed incomes and health 

problems and so on and so forth, the last worry that we should 

have as a senior government — and the last worry that they 

should have — is to ensure that we have a long-term, 

sustainable housing support package for them. 

 

Now in northern Saskatchewan, as we realize and we know, 

that the housing markets do not exist in northern Saskatchewan. 

They simply don’t. They may exist in pockets like La Ronge or 

perhaps Creighton or perhaps even Air Ronge, but largely the 

rest of the northern communities are totally ignored and totally 

forgotten. And since the banks don’t go and deal with some of 

these communities, then you almost guarantee yourself that 

there is no dollars for buying homes from any other source 

except people’s private pockets. And, Madam Minister, many 

people in northern Saskatchewan don’t have 60,000 to $70,000 

to build a home, especially the elderly people. 

 

Now what I wish to do today is to highlight that point and to 

share with you some of the graphic examples of why housing 

continues to be a number one problem. In terms of medical 

proof, and I share with the minister a statement of April 30, 

1997. It’s an article in the Star-Phoenix. And according to 

James Irvine, a medical officer with the province’s Northern 

Health Services, and I quote: 

 

Hepatitis A, a less virulent (form) . . . of hepatitis B and C, 

is endemic in the region (of which he’s referring to the 

North) with an average of 60 cases reported each year over 

the last decade. 

 

The virus which is spread through fecal-oral contact, 

affects the liver and causes a loss of appetite, fever, 

nausea, abdominal pain, and jaundice in some (areas) . . . 

Most victims are . . . under the age of 15. Two 

Saskatchewan residents have died from the virus in the last 

decade. 

 

In case I may have lost some of you, this would be the good 

time to start listening. This medical expert stated that the North  

has a high rate of hepatitis A because of poor living conditions 

including bad housing and poor sanitation. 

 

So we have medical proof and we have the necessary 

Star-Phoenix report to substantiate what was being said — and 

I’ll share that with the minister; I’ll put it here for her to collect 

in due time. And although the doctor goes on to say that there is 

a vaccine for this virus, which by Irvine’s own analysis does not 

work very well, well it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, the best cure 

or vaccine for this virus would be to solve the root problem and 

that’s getting adequate and decent housing for many senior 

citizens and families in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The deplorable housing conditions in the North are making 

people sick — clear as day. And for the life of me I cannot 

understand how come the members opposite do not understand 

this, after all these years of northern leaders explaining to you 

what the problems were. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early stages of health reform, before they 

got rid of the Saskatchewan health council, the members 

opposite used to preach about the determinants of health. Let 

me remind the members opposite of their philosophy — that a 

person’s health is greatly affected by their physical 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to begin to address the housing problems 

in northern Saskatchewan and highlight the health concerns and 

the elderly people’s concerns for the members opposite to once 

again hear how these problems have continued to affect 

northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government cannot neglect these symptoms 

any longer. The poor housing conditions are making northern 

people very, very angry. This is one reason why the government 

must begin to adopt a comprehensive housing strategy in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I believe a truly comprehensive 

strategy must cover the following five points. 

 

Number one, the provision of senior-specific dollars for 

renovations to privately owned homes by senior citizens and not 

an ad hoc approach, Madam Minister, and Mr. Minister. An 

approach where we have a 5-, 10-, 15-year strategy. An 

approach in which we can’t say, well we had RRAP (residential 

rehabilitation assistance program) 12 years ago as a senior 

citizen so we can’t fix your door or your window. 

 

We need to have a senior-specific program to deal with those 

senior citizens that are living independently, to address their 

ongoing housing needs. If they choose to be independent, then 

by golly we should support them to become independent. 

 

Number two is an examination of the possibility of a housing 

package geared for working families similar to the remote 

housing program, ensuring that housing prices reflect true 

market values. 

 

Madam Minister, as you’re probably aware, the remote housing 

program was a federally initiated project in which a huge 

portion of the mortgage over a long-term, 10-year period was 

forgiven if people come up with their own dollars and  



1830  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

maintained their own homes. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I would encourage you and I would also 

encourage your colleague, the member from Cumberland, to 

look at the possibility and research the idea of having all 

existing mortgages for working families in northern 

Saskatchewan fall under the same guideline as the remote 

housing program — the remote housing program that you’re 

familiar with. 

 

And perhaps you will see, when you encourage people to work 

and you don’t discriminate against people that are working, 

then you will see they’ll begin to take care of their homes; 

they’ll have pride in home ownership, and eventually they’ll 

have this home under their own names, thereby reducing the 

system of disincentives that the moment they go to work, all of 

a sudden 25 per cent of their income, whether they’re making 

$600 a month or 6,000 a month, no longer acts as a deterrent 

for people to help themselves. 

 

The second . . . the third part of the housing fund would be to 

look at a continual flow of dollars for a repair program, 

generally for a lot of the senior citizens but specifically for all 

northern people that have housing problems. 

 

And the fourth item of interest that I share with you is the 

devolution of more control of housing to the local level, to 

housing authorities. You have a very good example of how 

housing authorities could be empowered to make more and 

more decisions. And, Madam Minister, and Mr. Minister, it is 

hoped that you expand those authorities’ power so that they can 

do more and more at the local level. 

 

And as well to encourage homesteading in which people wish 

to live out amongst the northern forest, whether it’s at the fringe 

of a lake or the fringe of a river. You know you should 

encourage more homesteading. And as well to involve the 

community councils a heck of a lot more in terms of lot 

development for affordable housing. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I also want to share with you again a 

number of letters from people that we got. And I’ll just list off 

the names of people that are concerned about some of the 

housing and I’ll share with you some of the exact words. 

 

Again I used this gentleman as an example before and his name 

is Robert Aubichon. And I quote: 

 

Anyway I’m getting tired of being harassed, bothered by 

people from housing division. I’ve indicated to them on 

numerous occasions in the past few years that I’m making 

an effort to pay and I’m paying what I can afford. I have 

other debts and bills to pay besides my mortgage. 

 

Then he goes on to add, quote: 

 

I also want to add that there’s absolutely no way that our 

house is worth the kind of monies that we’re being 

required to pay. 

 

That’s from a working family, Madam Minister, and Mr.  

Minister. 

 

And here we have a list of a number of things that he sent me, 

and of course I’ll share this information with you as time is 

done. 

 

In all we have another example here of a lady from Buffalo 

Narrows, Helen Tinker. Her and her husband worked many 

years in Buffalo Narrows. They ran a café there. They employed 

people. They’re very proud, independent people that put a lot of 

effort into their community and into their family. And again in 

their older years they’re asking for some help and they aren’t 

able to get any help. 

 

And again I’ll quote from her letter: 

 

Dear Buckley, I am writing this letter to you in the hope 

that you might be able to do something and help us get 

some work done on our house . . . Last year we filled out 

forms to request help with renovations and were informed 

that there were no funds available for mortgaged units. I 

would like to know why this is? 

 

And that’s another example, Madam Minister. 

 

And then we’ll go to another example here in terms of a lady by 

the name of Denise Moise. And I used her as an example before 

but I’ll use her again. Quote: 

 

I have lived 15 years in this building and every year I am 

having (a) problem with water in the basement, this 

doesn’t happen only in the spring, from spring all through 

summer I have flood in . . . (my) basement, Besides I have 

11 children, 5 under age. 

 

And this of course is from a lady by the name of Denise Moise. 

 

And continuing on. Have another letter here from Alice and 

Marcel Lemaigre. And again it’s addressed to me, March 8. 

And I quote: 

 

The house is in poor condition and it’s cold in my home all 

the time (as) we have (to have) the furnace (on) almost 

constantly. I’ve applied through Social Services for repairs 

and it can’t be approved. 

 

And continuing on to another letter, Madam Minister. And 

another letter. And it just goes on and on and on. 

 

But I wanted to share this with you, Madam Minister, so you’d 

know exactly what I’m talking about, and in the hopes that 

something could be done to assist this process. 

 

And I’ll share with you, Madam Minister, as well some letters 

from Glen and Karen Bouvier of Ile-a-la-Crosse. Again these 

are a young couple that have been married for a number of 

years. They worked for themselves. They’ve raised their family, 

and again — housing problems. Why? Because they’re 

working. They’re required to pay an enormous amount of 

money for the house, a house that is not even worth half the 

amount that the government wants. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

And this is exactly what I’m talking about, Madam Minister, 

when I talk about decent appraisals, a decent housing market, 

and a decent chance for working people to make it in northern 

Saskatchewan, and to not have housing hurt them. 

 

All right, and finally, Madam Minister, the last five minutes of 

my allotted time here, I wish to share with you a letter that I 

wrote to the Hon. Diane Marleau, minister responsible for 

CMHC (Canada Housing and Mortgage Corporation). And I 

share that letter with you in which I ask both the federal 

governments and the provincial governments to get together for 

the sake of northern Saskatchewan communities and people and 

home-owners that find themselves in these very serious 

problems. 

 

(1700) 

 

This is not about politics, Madam Minister, it’s not about race, 

and it’s certainly not about northern versus southern. Madam 

Minister, this is about serious problems, problems that northern 

Saskatchewan people have for many years harped on and spoke 

about through thousands of meetings with thousands of 

bureaucrats, cabinet ministers, and politicians. And, Madam 

Minister, I’ll send the entire file over to you so you can see 

firsthand exactly what I’m talking about. 

 

So in closing, you have our letters. We presented petitions here 

today. You have the news report. You have all the resources at 

hand. The ideas and solutions have been presented. The report 

with names of many of the elderly people that are finding 

themselves in this poor housing. You have the constant 

reminding by northern leaders. And, Madam Minister, the 

province is now in better fiscal shape than it’s been in the last 

10 years, and you are able to do things. And now we ask for the 

will, the will to change things. 

 

So the question I have for either the Minister of Northern 

Affairs or the minister of SIMAS — you can flip a coin who 

wishes to respond. But unless and until you both begin to 

address this problem in a comprehensive way, then the response 

will not be a winning response. 

 

So the question I have is, what are you going to do to address 

the issues and concerns I brought forward to you in reference to 

northern housing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the 

member opposite for his comments, and the matters he raises, 

and for bringing the letters of his constituents to our attention. 

He’s obviously doing a thorough job of representing his area. 

 

However, having said that, I will say that being familiar with 

the North myself, I would say under no government has it 

received better attention than it has under our government. And 

under the leadership of this particular minister and the 

particular deputy minister in place at this time, probably moving 

towards the best working relationship, the best understanding, 

and the most improvements that have ever been made in the 

history of this province in the North. 

 

And I’m very optimistic that with the kind of relationships that  

have been built, and with the good understanding that exists, 

that the whole government decision-making apparatus is 

becoming more understanding of the issues of the North and 

more able to respond with appropriate programs. 

 

I’ll also say that you suggest that the federal government and 

the province get together. Well it’s hard to get together when 

you’re dancing by yourself. And we put 8 million in. What was 

the federal government’s response? They withdrew entirely. So 

you can shake your head, but you can’t shake off that reality in 

the North. Under the old system the federal government would 

have put 10 million in here. They’ve withdrawn that entire 10 

million. And you know and I know that with that 10 million 

added to our 8 million, we could be getting more done than we 

can with the current 8 million. 

 

Between ’92 and ’96 there was 218 units went in at a cost of 18 

million. And I know you’re aware of the high cost of providing 

these much needed housing allocations in the North. 

 

You will know that the New North is now involved in helping 

to generate both solutions for what’s needed in the North, and 

as well to help set some of the priorities. And with that new 

relationship, some of the innovative things you refer to have 

been developed and are in the process of being implemented. 

 

You would know many of the people who sit on that housing 

committee — people like Fred McCallum, Ina Fietz-Ray, June 

MacDonald, Max Morin, Donald Favel, Irwin Henny, Morris 

Onyskevitch, Melvin Nataweyes. These are all people who have 

a good understanding of the community and who we now are 

working very closely with to make sure that the available 

dollars are used in the best possible ways, and in support of the 

money that those individuals and communities have, to create 

the best solutions we can to both the sewer and water and the 

housing problems. 

 

During the past six years there’s been 15.25 million for water 

and sewer compared to 7.8 million in the previous six years. So 

I guess we can still say that we can do better, but I think every 

sign, every step, the commitment of funds by the provincial 

government in the absence of commitment by the federal 

government, illustrates that we are on the right path here and 

that we can expect greater success in addressing the very 

legitimate concerns and the matters that you raise. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, 

Madam Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. 

 

Madam Minister, I have some questions and concerns 

surrounding victims of domestic violence and particularly in the 

North. Could you tell me what provisions and services have 

been made and actually are now in place to provide transition 

houses or some sort of service to battered women in the North? 

 

As you well know, the incidence of domestic violence is at 

unacceptable levels and it certainly is a problem in the North as 

well as in rural areas of the province as well as throughout the 

province. But I would like to know if you have some 

information that you could provide me with. How many 

transition houses are in the North, north of Prince Albert, and  



1832  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

where they’re located, and also if there is any stats you may 

have on the number of women that have come forward with a 

need for the service of a transition house. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly that’s been a matter that the 

women of the North have raised. When I lived in La Ronge was 

when the La Ronge services got going. There is a transition 

house in both La Ronge and Sandy Bay. And the members of 

those transition houses, who operate those transition houses, are 

members of the provincial association of transition houses who 

work together with Social Services to develop the plans for 

where new services should be added when they’re needed. 

 

There certainly is an issue of people who prefer to receive 

services in their home communities and people who prefer to go 

out of their home communities. So that would be part of the 

issue that the transition house association would struggle with, 

is where the appropriate place is. 

 

But the women’s organizations are strong in the North and they 

are members of the provincial committees who deal with these 

issues. 

 

Now they deal primarily with the Department of Social 

Services, so any specific details would really have to be dealt 

with — I think those estimates are still coming up — with the 

Department of Social Services. I can only give you a general 

answer. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Just one question to the . . . a 

couple of questions to the Minister of Northern Affairs. First of 

all, will you support Bill No. 237, The New Organized and 

Rigorous Transportation, Housing, and Economic Renewal of 

the North, thereinafter called The NORTHERN Act, once it 

comes up for second reading? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  For the member’s information, I looked at 

the proposal for the Act, and a lot of the major issues are 

already covered in the existing Act. The only thing that I saw 

that was different on your Act was in relation to housing, which 

is already covered in the municipal services area. 

 

And I think that when you’re looking at Acts you have to look 

at the existing record on the Acts and move from there. So what 

I’m telling the member is that they’re already covered on the 

existing Acts. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister; a couple more 

questions. Currently the provincial government charges rent 

equal to 25 per cent of family monthly income for rental of a 

government-administered housing unit. 

 

For poorer families this is typically maybe 100, $200 per 

month. However over time, if these poorer families gets good 

paying jobs and do not want to move out, their rent becomes 

totally unreasonable. 

 

For example, 25 per cent of a $30,000-a-year job is 750 a 

month. This makes it very difficult for families to save money,  

to build their own homes, and provides very little incentive to 

work. 

 

Given that the provincial government is administering the 

program in conjunction with the federal government, will the 

minister consider changing these mortgage units where 

possible, and these rental units were possible, into a program 

similar to that of the remote housing program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  The minister gave you all the names of 

the very important members of the New North committee. That 

will be one of the issues that we will be reviewing this year. So 

we’ll be dealing with that issue, and they’ll be sending a 

recommendation to us. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The second part of the question, Mr. 

Minister; would you pay $140,000 for a home in Buffalo 

Narrows? Or would you pay $120,000 for a home in Patuanak? 

Or would you pay $160,000 for a home in Beauval? 

 

And by homes, Mr. Minister, I’m talking about the homes that 

are currently administered by Sask Housing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  In many cases when we looked at the 

history, you know, of the development in northern 

Saskatchewan, part of it was, when those houses were built, 

part of it was to also look at the job creation element. So in 

many cases when they were built, there was a lot of labour costs 

involved. And also it was done in partnership in many ways 

with the federal government. So that any changes in that regard, 

we’d have to look at historic changes on the laws that the 

federal government work with, and the laws that they work with 

in the province, you know, as a whole. 

 

But there was a very deliberate policy to try and get the job 

creation element so that local carpenters, and local carpenters’ 

helpers, and electricians could be part of the building process of 

those houses. And as a result, those costs were highly inflated, 

you know, as for a building cost in the urban setting. And I 

sense that was the basis of those housing. And many of the 

leaders, you know, talked about it at that point in time in 

history. And they would have hoped to make, you know, 

changes. But such were the . . . such was the record that is, you 

know, before us. 

 

So there would have to be federal agreement in regards to the 

laws that the federal government operated on. Let’s remember 

that most of the housing in the ’70s were built with a 60/40 cost 

share agreement with the federal government. The feds paid 60 

per cent; we paid 40 per cent. And as such, the housing was 

done under the rules of both the federal government and the 

provincial government; and unless there was changes, you 

know, at the federal level, then it would be very difficult for the 

province to hold all the costs, you know, that were brought into 

focus at that point in time in history, because it was also a 

federal decision. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In my closing 

comments I just wanted to point out that this is a northern issue. 

It has been prevalent in northern Saskatchewan for a number of 

years in terms of the problems of housing. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

And the final two questions I have for you — and thanking both 

ministers for their time and thanking both the officials of both 

departments for being here — is number one, is to heavily 

involve the municipal governments in negotiations that you 

have in reference to housing. Many times they are totally 

eliminated and they have no influence whatsoever to determine 

who should receive support and who shouldn’t. And many 

times their assistance is very valuable. 

 

And the second point is, we’ve done our homework. We’ve 

gone out there. We’ve identified which people, in the 

cross-section of communities — not all communities — who 

identify which communities and which people are being hurt 

and being neglected by the housing programs. And if we’re to 

get the names and the exact problems at their house, which we 

have here, would you undertake to contact each and every one 

of these individuals to see if they’re eligible for RRAP or ERP 

(emergency repair program), or some assistance to repair their 

homes? Because their voices are certainly going to be heard and 

we want you to share the concerns that they have written down 

for us. And will you undertake to address some of these 

problems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  To the member, there’s two aspects to the 

issues in regards to the mechanism. One is that we’re working 

with a New North group to continue making improvements on 

the existing situation in regards to housing. The other thing is 

that on the existing housing, we have the local housing 

authorities. The majority of them manage, you know, our 

housing units in the North and they work with the federal 

government and the provincial government in regards to the 

RRAP programs, and the emergency repair programs, as well as 

a program in relation to seniors. And I think that through those 

mechanisms — both the New North plus the housing authorities 

— we could mount a housing strategy that’s indeed beneficial 

in dealing with the issues that you mention. 

 

(1715) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. And I’ll now present 

you with the completed surveys. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 

Minister, Mr. Minister, and officials, I’d like to welcome you 

here this evening. 

 

I’d like to deal with an issue that we have talked about many 

times and that’s specific land claims. SARM has now gone to 

court with the federal government to try and seek a solution to 

those areas where the federal government certainly isn’t 

meeting their commitment. Madam Minister, what is your 

department doing to either assist or to intervene in this 

particular court case? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We just met with SARM officials last 

week and what we’re doing right now is examining the content 

of their court challenge, and they needed some additional 

information to be filled in — historical information — and 

we’ve assisted them in developing the court challenge in such a 

way that all the necessary information is provided. At this point 

we’re just playing a support role to their action and certainly  

have indicated to the federal government at any time we’re 

prepared to come back to the negotiating table, but not until 

they’re prepared to table a real and sincere offer. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Golden 

West, one of the municipalities directly involved in this 

particular case, is in my constituency and they have been 

fighting the federal government since 1993 on this particular 

issue, when they believed at that time they had an agreement for 

I think it was twenty-two and a half times the assessed values 

for compensation. 

 

And the federal government, with the change of government, 

the new administration, reversed that decision and I think it 

would be incumbent on the provincial government — and I 

know that you’re supportive of a better compensation than what 

the federal government is offering — incumbent on the 

provincial government to participate to the fullest extent 

possible to come to a successful conclusion to all of these 

specific land claims because obviously the reserves in question 

are entitled to the land — it’s not in dispute — but the 

settlements being proposed by the federal government is where 

all the difficulties lie, and I think we need to bring that to a 

speedy and successful conclusion. 

 

Madam Minister, another area that I wanted to touch on was a 

persistent concern both in native and non-native communities, 

and that is of welfare abuse. And recently the Lac La Ronge 

Band, to their credit, is taking action on this particular issue by 

requiring that social assistance recipients on the reserve 

between the ages of 15 and 20 to either actively look for work 

or be in a training program. What kind of support is your 

department providing for this type of initiative within the Lac 

La Ronge Band or indeed any other band that may be involved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The bands administer their own social 

services and their authority comes directly from the federal 

government. The way in which the province could be involved 

is sharing information between on- and off-reserve transactions 

or to share with them how we do some of that due diligence in 

provincial situations. 

 

But we have no direct authority over that. They’re relationship 

on those matters on reserve is directly with the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Have you 

been tracking how the project is working? Whether it’s being 

successful while it’s providing the incentives? Whether it’s 

providing for what they hope to achieve? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  La Ronge Band is keeping track of that, 

and they have more individuals enrolled in post-secondary 

education than any other band in the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you 

think that there will be any examples or benefits that can be 

applied outside of the band structure, off the reserves, for this 

program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think there would be. And I guess one  



1834  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

of the things I would say, part of it could be looked at as a 

requirement, but also when a community sends a strong 

message that it values education, that it values people being 

involved in the workplace, that also has a very strong result. 

 

I was on Red Pheasant Reserve the other day at the school, and 

I asked the woman who’s the principal there, what is the single 

most important thing that you need at your school for your 

students to be successful? And she said, community support. 

 

Sure they could have used a little more room or this or that, but 

the strongest feature they need is for people to get out to the 

school parent-child days and to support school activities and to 

really show the children in the community that education 

matters. 

 

So one of the things the La Ronge Band is obviously doing is 

they’ve made a strong statement that education matters. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 

think that statement applies no matter whether you’re on the 

reserve or off the reserve. In every one of our schools the 

parents need to support what is taking place there. It needs to 

support the students in that school. 

 

And I think the Lac La Ronge Band should be commended for 

the efforts that they’re putting forward in this area, and perhaps 

the Minister of Northern Affairs could pass that on because I 

don’t get the opportunity to get up to La Ronge very often. And 

I’d appreciate that if he would. 

 

The one other area, Madam Minister, that I would like to deal 

with is, does your department provide any advice on tax issues 

dealing with Indians and Metis? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I just thought I’d clear up a factual 

thing first. You would know that Metis persons always pay 

taxes; they have no exemption. 

 

We are not central to the tax discussion, although sometimes we 

might be involved in some of the discussions. But we’re 

contemplating whether we need a special federal-provincial first 

nations table to deal with this issue. And should that happen, 

we would likely be more involved. But at this point it’s largely 

been a matter between the Finance department and first nations. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. It 

seems that it’s becoming more of a problem in my own 

constituency. White Bear is in a tax dispute with liquor sales 

from the casino. I know my colleague in Moosomin, the Ochap 

reserve is in conflict with the government over the PST 

collections on reserve. 

 

Really I was wondering, does your department offer any advice 

either to the Finance department or to the native bands dealing 

with these kinds of tax issues? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Probably the best way I could address 

that is by saying that through the work that SIMAS does, we 

build a lot of relationships. And part of course of getting  

through a difficult discussion like this is drawing on the 

relationships that you’ve built and the working relationships. 

 

And so whereas we are not tax experts, we certainly do have 

some understanding of the history of how these discussions 

evolved and why people today have the expectations that they 

do on a number of fronts. So we would be part of informed 

discussion on the matter, but still and all, current arrangements 

take place within the framework of current tax law. 

 

The other role we would play is if it seems that a matter that 

involves the federal government, first nations, and the province 

is not able to be resolved in the normal ways, we may then look 

at helping to set up a negotiating table so we can have a specific 

forum within which to address these problems. 

 

And again our role would be that of a department that has 

established significant relationships in this area and can perhaps 

keep people together as we get through the discussion. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Have you set up or have you offered to 

set up these kind of committees with the White Bear Band or 

the Ochapowace Band? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  One of the . . . there’s sort of two 

trends that encompass all of these discussions in Canada. One 

of them is that people think sometimes that they can be resolved 

through legal means. Well what we’ve determined is quite often 

that courts will bounce these decisions back to the political 

arena because they will say that these arrangements sprang out 

of what were originally political agreements, treaties between 

nations, and that as such they’re not necessarily narrow legal or 

administrative interpretations. And so quite often even court 

challenges don’t resolve these kinds of discussions. 

 

So when we hit a particular problem, such in the case of the 

White Bear situation, the departments that are empowered to 

look after those things, such as Liquor and Gaming and 

Department of Finance, look at them to the extent they can, but 

sometimes you hit a jurisdictional, constitutional, historical wall 

which can’t be resolved by those rather simple administrative 

mechanisms that seem to apply to all other situations. 

 

And at that point, again sometimes we become involved 

because these are issues that will be resolved sometimes 

through the negotiation of a new political arrangement. Because 

that was where those arrangements came from in the first place. 

They weren’t created by the courts; they were created out of 

agreements made between leaders of the day. And so we need 

to look at those in a modern day context. And sometimes when 

they cannot be resolved in the more predictable manner, that’s 

where these discussions will end up. 

 

And I think most people . . . what was interesting, we had a 

meeting of all the ministers of Indian and Metis Affairs from 

across Canada, of all parties, all persuasions, and I think 

everybody recognizes that there are these same difficulties 

inherent in dealing with an issue that’s this laden with history 

and with other constitutional and legal impediments. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. When 

I look back at the original White Bear situation though, with the 

original casino in place, your Minister of Justice resolved that 

issue with force of arms and direct . . . the clout of the law in 

raiding the Bear Claw Casino. And I believe in that particular 

case, a committee such as what you suggested your department 

could set up, I think could have perhaps worked to resolve that. 

 

Because the leadership at White Bear wanted to negotiate, 

wanted to resolve some of the issues, and were prepared even to 

allow it to move into the courts without the force of arms. 

Because they wanted a resolution on the constitutional issues. 

And that has never been resolved. The courts have avoided 

making the decisions necessary in that area. 

 

And yet we’re facing almost the same . . . similar circumstances 

now with liquor taxation, or with the PST at Ochapowace. So 

while you avoided it in the one circumstance and you 

negotiated an arrangement for the casino usage later, that still 

could have been done in the initial situation without the force of 

arms or without the intervention of the court’s heavy hand. 

 

And I think it would serve the province well if we were to enter 

into negotiations and settle that issue, but do it in a reasonably 

speedy time. Obviously the taxes need to be collected under the 

current system. If no negotiations are taking place, well then 

that’s when the force of law comes into place. But certainly 

negotiations, in my mind, would be the preferred method but 

they need to be expedited; they simply can’t drag on for years. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If I could just respond briefly, that is in 

fact what happened with the White Bear situation; is what I 

said, is that the line departments responsible for these things 

proceeded in the normal way that would have been proceeded. 

Because our responsibility as a province is to administer the 

Criminal Code when it comes to casinos. So the Criminal Code 

required that no means no. 

 

And so the first attempt to have no mean no, led to the armed 

confrontation and what not, which then led us to go the next 

step, to a negotiated settlement, because any court agreement 

would have taken too many years for it to have any meaningful 

effect on the conflict. And so a negotiated agreement became 

the solution. And so that was very much what happened in that 

situation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  One final comment. Unfortunately, 

Madam Minister, it’s back into the court again on the original 

Bear Claw Casino, unfortunately. And perhaps . . . I’m not sure 

what can be done and what will happen in that case but it’s 

unfortunate that it’s heading back into the courts again. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If I could clarify, the issue at White 

Bear is not over jurisdiction; the issue is over a narrow legal 

point about whether or not non-awareness of a law constitutes a 

valid legal argument. This is a lawyers’ debate that’s going on. 

It really has not much to do with the larger issue. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

(1730) 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Chair of committees, with leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Chair of committees. In the 

Speaker’s gallery, I’d like to introduce today a constituent of 

mine, Mr. Gordon Gunoff, who is down probably on business 

today in Regina. So I’d like all the Assembly to welcome Gord 

Gunoff here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister now to introduce 

her officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right is Ken Pontikes, the deputy minister of Municipal 

Government. Directly behind him is Ron Davis, assistant 

deputy minister of municipal services. Behind me is Ron Styles, 

the associate deputy minister for housing. On my left is Brij 

Mathur, the associate deputy minister for culture and recreation; 

and seated behind him is Larry Chaykowski, director of finance 

and administration. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 

Minister, welcome to your officials. Madam Minister, we’ve 

been over . . . either in question period or discussing the 

municipal Bills that are on the floor this session, we’ve been 

over the $29 million cuts — the 17 to urban, the 12 to rural. 

We’ve been over the main farm access program being 

cancelled. We’ve been over the futures program being 

cancelled. We’ve gone over the percentage of grid road 

assistance being lowered. All these things have led to what . . . 

the situation that municipalities of all kinds are in. 

 

And I think the question, Madam Minister, and the main  



1836  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

question that I have for you in today’s estimates is the stability, 

or lack of, in the funding for municipalities. I’d like to quote 

you a quote that SUMA has come out with in one of their 

revenue-sharing fundamental papers, but it says, 

“Revenue-sharing grants in Saskatchewan are lower in 1997 

than the initial pool established in ’98”. And they go on. 

 

And I’m sure, Madam Minister, you’ve seen the chart that 

they’ve came out with from where the amount of money in 

1978 that was being spent on . . . and this chart actually is just 

for urban revenue sharing, but how it went up till about the 

peak of 1986 through to 1990. 

 

And then in 1991, and I believe that was the first year your 

government was elected to power, how it started to drop. And 

we’ve went from a 60-some-million dollars the first year you 

dropped from . . . oh I believe it’s about 68, and all the way 

down to 1997 where it looks like we’re less than 30 million. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I guess the question that I hear from all 

municipalities right now, keeping in mind the cuts that they’ve 

had to endure, is where are we heading with revenue sharing for 

municipalities? And I realize, Madam Minister, this may not be 

a fair question because to ask you to go beyond ’99 would 

probably be a waste of time, because I would presume we’re 

going to be on that side and you’ll be on this side after that, to 

do with what you’ve done to municipal governments. 

 

But where are you heading, Madam Minister, with revenue 

sharing? I think the municipalities would like to know when the 

bleeding is going to stop. Will there be more cuts next year? 

Will they be at an even stand-off? Will they at least hold their 

own? Or will we be at the point next year where maybe you will 

be returning a little of this money back to them? Can you give 

them a feel here today of where we’re really going to be 

heading in the next couple of years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 

changes that will need to be made as a result of reassessment, as 

a result of the 1996 census where population numbers will be 

taken into account at different rates in the future. And in terms 

of the size of the total pool, it has been a trend nationwide for 

provinces to reduce transfers to municipal governments over 

time as it has become a trend for the federal government to 

reduce transfer payments to provinces over time. I can’t speak 

to the exact number. 

 

It is too bad in a way; it’s unfortunate that in the previous 

administration the amount of revenue sharing was de-coupled 

from the true revenue-sharing formula that was established by 

the Blakeney government in 1978. Because once it became an 

arbitrary pool, it became a target, I guess, for reductions when 

those were needed. 

 

But we listened to the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan 

when they said they wanted more money for health, more 

money for education, more money for highways. Very seldom 

— if ever — in the surveys that we did, which were open 

questions, did they mention increases in transfers to municipal 

government. 

 

So it were to meet the requests and the obvious priorities that 

Saskatchewan people placed on funding, then in the absence of 

large amounts of new dollars and in the face of back-filling for 

federal reductions, if some departments were to get more, then 

some had to get less. And that’s what happened when the cuts 

to revenue sharing were announced a year in advance to give 

them time to plan in the budget for 1996-97. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I know where 

you’re coming from; you go by population when you’re dealing 

with these grants. 

 

But I would like to remind you that the amount of grain and the 

commodities and stuff like that that are moved on rural roads 

out there have not changed and probably, if anything, will 

increase with the short-line rails being closed right now, shut 

down. I think that you know as well as I do the load on, 

especially RM (rural municipality) infrastructure out there, is 

increasing; the cost is going to be increasing. 

 

And I don’t believe . . . And I think you know this yourself, 

Madam Minister, that four out of five of the RMs that I’ve been 

talking to said they’re raising their mill rates. And I think we’re 

only passing the buck if we just . . . we keep our house in order 

here, but in turn make them raise their taxes to the degree 

they’re going to have to. 

 

So I would hope somewhere along the way here we can find a 

way to quit the funding cuts. Politics aside, I don’t believe they 

can handle much more of this. I really don’t. And the services 

they are providing out there are hurting now, but they’re going 

to hurt a lot more if we keep doing what we’re doing. 

 

Madam Minister, I only have a couple more things because 

we’ve covered many of our points, either in question period or 

somewhere along the way. But the regional parks is a bone of 

contention with me. We’ve gone from $2 million in funding 

down to, I believe, 75,000. And I think where I have a problem 

with this is that the tourism industry in this province is 

collecting many tax dollars through the tourism that is being 

provided by many of the municipalities that are funding these 

regional parks to keep them open. 

 

Would you care to comment on how we can justify cutting the 

funding to these regional parks when the Government of 

Saskatchewan is actually the big winner in having these parks 

open? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’ll start with the last 

question first. With respect to regional parks, the funding of 

them is not in my budget. It’s in the SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management) budget. So your 

question would more appropriately be directed to the Minister 

for the Environment. But I do know that in this year’s budget 

we did allocate considerably more, an increase in dollars, to be 

directed towards the parks system. But you could ask the 

minister how that’s over time to be allocated between the 

different park systems. 

 

I have to make sure to correct you on one point. You seem to 

feel that the population was a highly determinant factor in the  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

revenue sharing. And I did mention it as being part of it and 

that it will be adjusted on the basis of the new census, but it’s 

not the major part. What we’ve changed the formula to reflect is 

not to recognize administration at all in any kind of 

municipality but to recognize the amount of . . . the dollars that 

are spent at the service level. So if two municipalities of equal 

population, if one has a larger administration and more 

administrative costs, they will receive less revenue sharing than 

another community of similar size. 

 

Also on the rural roads, I agree with you, but I think it was 

important for us to take a pause because the transportation 

system, as a result of the accelerated rail line abandonment and 

changes in the transportation system generally, are forcing a 

radical transition. 

 

And to make sure that municipalities didn’t go ahead on a local 

basis and build roads to facilities that will be, in two or three 

years, abandoned, I think we need to have a complete 

transportation study such as been undertaken by the 

municipalities in the south-west. And of course this year a new 

classification, an entire reclassification of the road system, will 

be conducted by the Department of Highways. And so we will 

be in a better position to priorize funding for roads based on the 

new classification system next year. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I’m glad 

to see you say that there’s going to be a transportation study 

done. I feel we should have had this done a number of years 

ago, and we wouldn’t have the big grain facilities building in a 

spot that was not conducive to the road system that’s in the RM 

that it happened to be built in — or for that matter the highway 

system that might be as much as 10 or 20 miles away from the 

facilities. So I think we have to be looking at this, and it will 

save us all a bunch of money. 

 

Another question, Madam Minister — and we touched on this 

last year — I just wonder if the policy has changed for the 

government to do with the low rental housing units. And I think 

you know the situation I have in my constituency of Stockholm, 

but I believe there’s others, where some of these little towns are 

actually growing and the need is greater for them. And some of 

the towns are shrinking, and the need is less. And I know the 

town of Stockholm especially is still in great need of more 

housing units. Has the policy changed there at all, or is there 

any chance of more units being for a community such as 

Stockholm? 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are some 

programs that we have initiated such as relocating existing 

housing from communities where the population, for whatever 

reason, has declined. Where we have vacancies, chronic 

vacancies, we try to work with the local housing authority to 

allow those units to be moved. There’s a cost to that too, but 

there’s a cost of maintaining them while they’re vacant. And the 

cost of relocating on a new basement in a community that has a 

need for housing is considerably less than constructing a whole 

new unit there. 

 

The other issue that we still have to work through yet is the 

federal-provincial agreement that we reached for our Housing 

Corporation to take over the federal social housing portfolio in 

Saskatchewan. And that will free us up in a way to establish our 

own priorities for housing. Where so often in the past where it 

was a 75/25 funding arrangement, often our funding, in order to 

capture the 75 or 50 per cent of federal funding, our dollars 

would flow to their priorities. Where now we will be in a 

position to make those decisions independently of what other 

. . . because there’ll be no federal program out there, we’ll be 

able to tailor our programs to meet Saskatchewan priorities, 

including those in small, urban villages and towns in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 

welcome the minister and her officials here today. 

 

Madam Minister, this deals somewhat with SAMA, but 

indirectly. I wonder if you would happen to have the formula 

for farm assessments? The formula . . . how it’s determined 

what a piece of land is worth as far as the assessments for tax 

purposes are concerned. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 

information with me. It would be found as part of the SAMA 

assessment manual. If there’s any general policy that you would 

want to inquire about, I am familiar with that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well a constituent called, Madam 

Minister, and wanted the formula; so I wonder if it’d be 

possible if you could, unless it’s a whole book . . . you know, is 

there a simple formula written down, A plus B plus C, etc., and 

what the A’s and B’s and C’s stand for? Is there a formula 

actually in place that you could pass on to me? Because he is 

concerned about how the values are determined. 

 

And secondly, what he is interested to know is — and I believe 

he may be mistaken in this particular case — he wanted to 

know if the farmers, when they have to send in their written 

information on an appeal, he says to SARM; I think that’s to 

SAMA they would have to send that in, wouldn’t it be? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes, the member is 

correct in that it would be SAMA that they would have to send 

it in to for action. It’s possible that SARM may have requested, 

as a result of trying to maybe get a handle on what’s happening 

throughout the province, a copy and that would be at their 

discretion. But in order to get action, they would have to 

approach SAMA. 

 

The values are still determined basically the way they always 

have been, based on the productivity of the land for the purpose 

of growing cereal crops, which may or may not be as relevant as 

it used to be with the diversity that we’re having. But then there 

are other factors. 

 

One that is controversial is their policy of assessing a quarter 

section based on the predominant use. So if you had 81 acres 

out of 160 that was in production and 79 acres that was in 

pasture, it’s contemplated that they would use the — that’s an 

extreme example — but that they would use the predominant  



1838  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

use, where they used to have a more detailed field sheet which 

would take off sloughs and pieces of bush and so on. 

 

But generally the people who assess farmland for SAMA are 

seasoned and well-qualified agrologists, but you would be able 

to get an information package or an outline, I think, for your 

constituent on the practice directly from SAMA. That would be 

your best avenue. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. When you 

say predominant use, are you indicating then that the entire 

quarter section — let’s say some of it’s in cultivation, some of 

it’s in bush, some of it’s pasture — would all be assessed as 

cultivated land? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, if cultivated land on 

the basis of the proportion of the acreages was the predominant 

use. This is a SAMA policy and it’s one which has engendered 

some controversy to date that I’ve become aware of and I’m not 

surprised. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Madam Minister, I think when 

people in my area find that out it’s going to be somewhat 

controversial also, because on average we’re probably looking 

at 20 to 30 acres of sloughs per quarter section. Now if you 

happen to be from the Regina plains where you got a hundred 

and sixty acres from wall to wall and it’s all cultivatable, fine, 

but in a lot of areas of this province that’s not the case and 

those other . . . those non-productive lands need to be taken into 

account and to decrease the assessment. You can’t simply count 

all of the land as being productive, Madam Minister. 

 

Does the municipality, in an appeal situation, also have to file 

their information within 10 days of an appeal? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the usual practice in 

our legislation hasn’t . . . our changes in legislation haven’t 

changed that, is that the appellant would receive the 

information he needs relative to his assessment and others that 

he wants to compare with, from the municipality, and then the 

SAMA staff would be at the appeal, at the court of revision, as 

a resource base to explain the rationale for the assessment that 

they have arrived at. But I’m not aware that any time limit 

accrues to a municipality. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Madam Minister. On 

the predominant-use taxation assessments, I think I see a 

problem developing there, and not in the area of what the tax is 

owing or what the assessments will be. But within this province 

we have programs within SERM to try and encourage the 

saving of bush, the saving of habitat, and if you’re going to 

count, under SAMA, all the land as being productive when a 

portion of it is not — it’s in sloughs or whatever — you’re 

going to see more and more people now trying to drain those 

sloughs and push the bush off of them so that they do have 

some productive value out of that land which they are paying 

taxes on. 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, unless your government is 

prepared to see that happen, you are going to have to go back to 

SAMA, and to the drawing boards, to provide some sort of a  

relief for those non-productive lands; or you are going to see a 

good portion of the habitat, a good portion of potholes across 

Saskatchewan, eliminated simply because of the needs of the 

producers to get some production from those lands on which 

they’re paying productive taxes. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, of course this can 

work both ways. Wherein there might be a smaller portion, less 

than 80-acre portion for example, of a quarter section, that is 

highly productive and the balance was sloughs or bush, which 

would then form the predominant use. That farmer would reap 

the benefit of that by having the whole quarter assessed at a 

lower level. 

 

But I did receive a number of representations about this. In fact 

I first learned of this policy. It’s an administratively driven 

policy. It’s not part of the manuals, and it’s not any part of 

instructions from us. But a number of municipalities and 

council members brought this to my attention, and we did ask 

SAMA to review this. Because it’s a departure from past 

practice, where every acre that was a pothole that you couldn’t 

seed in the spring, you could expect to receive relief from that 

through the appeal process. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Madam Minister, I think as this 

becomes known throughout the province, you’re certainly going 

to have much more hue and cry on this particular issue to get 

some relief. Or as has happened in the past with the quota 

system, farmers had to put land into production to gain access 

to quota, and that destroyed habitat even though the land in the 

long term may not have been in production that often. Once you 

ran the plough through it, you now had quota acres. 

 

The same things is going to happen here. People are going to 

drain those wet lands. They’re going to push that bush to try 

and get some production from those lands because they are 

paying taxes as if it was productive land. And they’re going to 

have to recoup some of that, Madam Minister. 

 

On another issue . . . and I’m not sure whether your department 

deals with this because initially it was under Intergovernmental 

Affairs. And it’s dealing with the Internet developments 

through the infrastructure programs. Does you department deal 

with this, or has somebody else got it now? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the entire 

infrastructure program was transferred to our department from 

Intergovernmental Affairs during 1996. That was before it was 

known that there would be an extension to the program. I think 

it was placed in our department as sort of a wind-up to the 

previous program. Now we have assumed the administration or 

part of the administration for the extension as well, and it is 

housed in our department. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Then 

what’s happening with the Internet programs that were put in 

place in various communities around this province? I know that 

Lampman has one. They received, I think it was in the 

neighbourhood of $30,000 to set up a server and to supply 

Internet to the community. People in the community had to buy 

memberships to participate in it. What’s happening with those  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

programs now that they’re facing much stiffer competition from 

SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there was a federal 

program. I’ve been trying to remember the name of it. It just 

escapes me. But it was separate and apart from the 

infrastructure program. And I think that in order to access the 

capital for that program, that municipalities had to demonstrate 

an operating plan, and operating funds, once the capital was 

delivered under the program, to set the system up. 

 

If you have any particular problems or concerns that you want 

to inquire about, I can certainly undertake to give you fuller 

information on any individual circumstance. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Madam Minister, then is your 

department administering any Internet development projects 

and funding? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, our activity and 

funding would be limited to what is being done within the 

provincial library system. Where they are . . . They’ve 

undertaken a huge project of linking . . . in effect, making 

interlibrary borrowing province-wide by having the entire 

provincial collection available and accessible. And they’re 

developing, on a pilot basis, some home pages for the Internet, 

but that wouldn’t constitute a major portion of their budget or 

their activity; it’s just part of it. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So under the infrastructure program, 

since it was carried on again this year — in all likelihood 

because it was an election year by the federal government — 

can you . . . will this program carry on again next year, or what 

kind of a position is that going to put the libraries in if this 

funding is all of a sudden stopped? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the infrastructure 

program in the original program and the extension was capital 

money; so it wouldn’t relate to the ongoing operations. 

 

But as part of the electronic highway, if you like, being part of 

infrastructure, I’m assuming that applications for that kind of 

infrastructure, to the current extension of the program, will be 

considered in the same light as they were in the first round. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  How many libraries actually accessed 

this program to go on-line to provide access to the library 

facilities across the province? And are all libraries going onto it 

or is it just simply the central locations such as Regina, 

Saskatoon, Weyburn, Estevan, Yorkton, or are all the branch 

libraries also going on-line? 

 

I know that a number of them, particularly in our area, were 

already tied in through bulletin boards, into the central libraries 

in Weyburn, which is our district. And are they now using the 

Internet rather than bulletin boards? And is the whole province 

going to be tied-in and all the libraries in the province going to 

be tied-in? 

 

(1800) 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is that it’s still work in progress and the goal is to have 

every library in the province linked. And about a third of them 

are now; so it’s a mixed situation out there now. Some of them 

are on the integrated system, and some of them are still using 

the bulletin board. But the goal is to migrate them all onto the 

same system. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  How long will it take for all of the 

libraries to get up and running on the Internet, the integrated 

system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the goal is three years, 

and that will be reliant on the sustainability of funding 

throughout that process. But provided that that’s sustainable, 

we’re looking at a three-year horizon for everybody to be 

connected. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Are we in the first year or the second 

year of this process now? 

 

I’m concerned that we’re going to end up in a situation like we 

did with SaskEnergy, with most people being able to access 

gas, but some being left out because the program is cut off 

before it was totally completed. My concern is that some of the 

libraries are going to be left out because all of a sudden, two 

and a half years after the program started, the funding is cut off, 

or two years after the program is started the funding is cut off 

because the infrastructure program . . . there’s no longer a 

political need for it because the election has passed, and money 

won’t be available. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we passed the 

enabling legislation last year, in the last session a year ago. And 

it’s certainly our goal to have a completely integrated system. 

And we are, I would say, in the first year now because the 

legislation last year, the first move to bring people on-line in the 

last few months, and so we are on track. And I’m optimistic 

about the availability of funding to complete the project 

because it’s very important, and it will lead to some 

administrative efficiencies that will save money. So there is a 

pay-back on that investment very definitely. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Is this particular program a three-way 

split with the federal government, the provincial, 

municipalities? Or is it a municipal . . . I mean, excuse me, a 

federal and provincial funding? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this particular program 

. . . I think we have a bit of a misunderstanding here . . . is that 

there was a strictly federal program, not part of the 

infrastructure program — which the program name escapes me. 

And that was directed towards electronic highway and 

information infrastructure. And that wasn’t part of the 

infrastructure program. So that this part, the linking of libraries 

provincially into one catalogue system, for example, for access 

is part of the normal funding that the province provides through 

the municipal budget, and it’s not part of the infrastructure 

funding. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister.  



1840  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

That’s it for my questions, and I would like to thank you and 

your officials for coming in. Thank you. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 24 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  That ends the estimates for Municipal 

Government. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I just simply want to 

thank my officials for their attendance and diligence and thank 

the members of the opposition for their questions. Thank you. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair:  I would, before we start, ask the minister to 

introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening 

we’ll be assisted by, to my left, Bonnie Durnford, who is the 

associate director, child and family services; directly behind me, 

Bob Wihlidal, from our budget branch; Neil Yeates, associate 

deputy; Phil Walsh, our director of income security; and Con 

Hnatiuk, the deputy. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to your 

officials, Minister. I have presented questions a couple of times 

in the last few weeks and I just have a few more. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve noticed that over the last few years the 

number of people on social assistance has dropped 

approximately 1 per cent and that spending for SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) has dropped about 7 per cent; 

so I’d like you to explain the decrease in the spending. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again I think we talked about 

this in one of our other opportunities. The spending decrease 

that the member refers to represents the transfer of those monies 

to Post-Secondary Education to fund the Youth Futures 

program and the provincial training allowance. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Yes, I recognize that we did discuss that, Mr. 

Minister. However, you know my concern remains that a 

number of people will not be able to access training and so on, 

especially given the fact that training is something projected 

into the future and this spending has been decreased as of the 

budget, I presume. 

 

When I look at social assistance allowance, and under your 

regulations and from what I know and understand, that one 

adult on social assistance gets $195 a month. Is that correct? Or 

maybe you could clarify what it is right at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, that is correct, but the amount  

that the member mentions is the amount of money provided for 

personal allowance. In addition would be any special needs, in 

addition would be any supplemental health, and in addition 

would be accommodation. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I noticed 

that in Alberta the allowance for one adult is $229 per month. 

So I guess I’m referring to the level of assistance in 

Saskatchewan as compared to Alberta and other provinces. And 

there was a news report out that we do have substantially lower 

levels of assistance than other provinces. And I’m wondering 

why that is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We try, Mr. Chair, as best we can to 

match our allowance rates with two factors — that being the 

need, and the other factor being our fiscal ability. 

 

During the 1980s I watched, and many watched, as the former 

government significantly reduced the rates paid under social 

assistance. We’ve been incrementally trying to rebuild some of 

that loss that happened in the 1980s. We have, even in the most 

desperate of circumstance financially for our province in the 

early 1990s, we have resisted . . . and have never reduced 

benefits. 

 

While our benefits are lower than some other jurisdictions, they 

will be higher than yet some other jurisdictions. In some 

jurisdictions the cost of living will be greater. The Alberta cost 

of living may in fact be somewhat greater than it is in our 

province. That’s not to say we’re not sensitive to the needs of 

social assistance recipients. We’re sensitive also to the fact that 

our rates are low in comparison, and we’ve been trying 

incrementally, as we’ve been fiscally able, to try and bring them 

up. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if you 

could project into the next fiscal year — or even within the next 

few months — do you see that the assistance that is being given 

to recipients will be lowered below 195 per month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair. I would anticipate no 

reduction of benefits. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I just want to go over to 

some of your budget measures, and I noticed the government 

has committed 500,000 additional dollars for school supplies 

and fees for families receiving social assistance. Now is that 

$500,000 going to be going to people that are . . . Is that part of 

the working income supplement or is this for all families with 

children? 

 

(1815) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair, that money is separate 

and apart entirely. This $500,000 is dedicated to providing 

school supplies for families with school-aged children and it 

represents about a 25 per cent increase in that narrow category. 

 

Since becoming minister, and even long before becoming 

minister, one of the areas that I have felt it has been a real 

burden on families with school-aged children receiving social  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

assistance, is the matter of providing for those fees and costs 

and supplies and books that are due at the start of the school 

season. As a parent I know that those can be quite dramatic. 

And so with this small amount of money, we’re putting it 

directly to those families with children who will be going into 

school. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I note that there are about 39,000 

children benefiting from social assistance and the $500,000 in 

additional funding means that each child would get about 13 to 

14 dollars. And so I wonder if the minister believes that that 

funding is going to be adequate to genuinely assist them with 

those supplies for school, that they do need very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to clarify again, Mr. Chair, this 

money is directed just to those families who have children 

going into school. So it’s not by any means all of the children 

on social assistance. We would have a large number of children 

who would be under school age. And so the monies are targeted 

to that group of children who’ll be going to school. It’s a large 

number of children, but to do the mathematics correctly would 

be to take that amount and apply it just to the school age 

children, and it does represent a 25 per cent increase to that 

support. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well I thank you for that clarification, Mr. 

Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to now move to child protection 

workers, particularly. I know I did speak with you before about 

child protection case-loads, but I don’t think I specifically asked 

you how many child protection workers there are in the 

province at this time. Could you give me those numbers, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, approximately 110. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister. As you know very well, 

we have been speaking in the House a bit about concern over 

child protection. You have indicated to me that the average 

case-load is 26 children per worker. But I understand from 

some of the studies that came out of British Columbia that the 

average — average — case-load, recommended case-load, is 12 

to 15 children; and 26 seems to be quite a lot, quite a number of 

children for any child protection worker to have to deal with. 

 

You’ve mentioned that your government is committed to 

helping children. So what my question is, is why aren’t there 

enough caseworkers here to meet the needs of the children in 

the province, and to ensure that any children that are getting 

protective services are adequately served, and completely 

served in the way that they would have absolutely great 

monitoring of their situation being done. And then there 

wouldn’t have to be a question about what are happening to 

children that in fact have ended up dying under the system, or 

children that are dealing with the abuse and neglect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m not entirely sure where 

the member brings to bear the 12 case-load number. It will be 

recommended I’m sure, by some agencies, and it may well be 

the ideal we should all be aiming for. But as I survey the 

circumstance across Canada, two provinces now have actually 

set standards, case-load standards, and in Alberta the standard  

has been set at 23 cases per worker; in Nova Scotia it has been 

set at 20 cases per workers In other provinces, for instance in 

Manitoba, urban Manitoba, the current case-load is 36 per 

worker; in British Columbia it’s 34; in Ontario it’s 28; New 

Brunswick it’s 20. We’ve seen a decrease in the case-load of 

our child protection workers. We reached a high of 36.6 in 

1993-94. We’ve been able to bring that down now to 26. I agree 

it would be to all . . . to the advantage of all if we can bring that 

down. 

 

It is I think important to point out though, when we’re talking 

about the 26 cases per worker, this is an average number. There 

may in fact be workers who have a higher case-load but may be 

dealing with more . . . less traumatic conditions. If a case-load 

is lower it may mean that they’re dealing with much more 

intensive interventions. So that’s an average number. 

 

It’s also I think important to realize that the caseworker is often 

but one of a number of people who may be involved with that 

family, by either from the department or from community-based 

agencies. It is our goal, as again we’re able, to bring the 

case-load down. We’re anticipating next year, with the child 

benefit coming into place in the national program, that 

resources that can be made available to us through that program 

— as we have committed to the federal government — will be 

returned to the care of children and family, particularly those at 

risk. 

 

And we’re hoping that some of those resources may in fact go 

to serve to bring the case-load down even further. We’re 

making progress. We’re about where most provinces are. We 

think we can be doing a little better. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I can pretty well anticipate your 

answer for the next question I have, but nonetheless I feel it’s 

important to ask it because I am concerned about the process 

which child protection workers go through if they have been 

notified of children in need of some protection. 

 

Are you convinced in your mind that there are clear policy 

directives that follow an absolute process wherein the child 

protection workers can follow, in order that are sure that they 

were scrutinizing and monitoring every situation absolutely 

adequately? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, yes, I have a high degree of 

confidence in the process. And I have even a higher degree of 

confidence in many of those people who are serving as child 

protection workers. Now that’s not for a moment to say that if 

there are suggestions of improvements that can be made to this 

process, we’re more than willing to look at them. I believe we 

have a very . . . like a good process. And as I’ve met them, we 

have some exceptional people doing the work. But if there’s 

other things we can and should be doing, we’d sure be looking 

at them. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are some of the child 

protection workers left sort of to their own judgement when 

they come upon a situation, in as far as what step they may take 

next, or do they have to follow a given guideline of policy 

directives? 



1842  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No. No worker is sort of working solo. 

Each worker will be working with other workers and with a 

supervisor in making decisions. There is a risk assessment tool 

that they all use and some clear process and protocol. So there 

will always be, I think at the end of the day, some human 

judgement required in a family circumstance, but there are 

colleagues, there are supervisors, there’s risk assessment tools 

and they’re a clearly defined process. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Do those risk assessment tools include follow-up 

to a situation that they’ve come upon? If they believe something 

is or can be resolved at the time of intervention, is there a 

follow-up that they must adhere to in order to ensure that their 

assessment in fact was right on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, absolutely. The answer 

is absolutely. And it may require different action in different 

circumstances, but in each and every case there is the 

follow-up. 

 

I had a unique . . . or an interesting experience at one time about 

a year ago where I found myself on radio, advising that if 

anyone is concerned or suspects abuse or neglect that they 

should report. That was broadcast on a Friday night and my 

phone at home rang most of the day Saturday with reports to me 

directly, which I passed on to the department, to the workers, 

and each and every one of them was followed up. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I guess what I’m referring to, Mr. Minister, is 

where situations have been reported to the department and the 

department has certainly sent over a social worker or child 

protection worker, but there are instances that I’ve heard of 

where the worker has come to that place, to that home, and 

basically left without doing anything or without helping, and so 

the abuse goes on and on and on. 

 

And neighbours are trying to help but they say they’re getting 

into the middle of things. And it’s actually an expression to me 

of people’s concern over the inadequacy of the system to really 

follow up on some of these situations and deal with them 

appropriately. 

 

So I just wanted to make that comment, not in any adverse way, 

but simply to bring it to your attention, so . . . I know that social 

workers do try to do their part, but I also know that their 

case-loads are heavy. And I know that we might, might have 

maybe a little more funding spent on child protection workers 

to assure that children are not falling between the cracks. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you could . . . you had mentioned that you had 

made . . . there are risk assessment guidelines and so on given 

out to child protection workers. I wonder if you would be so 

good as to forward to me any of the documents you have 

whereby child protection workers follow a given process, so 

that I may look at those things myself. And I would be pleased 

to have that sometime within the next week; it doesn’t 

necessarily have to be today. 

 

I’d like to turn my questioning over to something I mentioned 

just a few minutes ago to the minister responsible for Indian 

and Metis Affairs and also Northern Affairs. This concern is  

about battered women in the province and the need basically for 

transition houses, etc. I asked the minister if she would be able 

to forward to me a list of the transition houses for battered 

women that exist in northern Saskatchewan. And she did 

mention that there was one in Sandy Bay and there was also one 

in La Ronge. Other than that I don’t believe there are any that 

exist from what she said. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the very real need is there for assistance for 

women because there is a lot of battering going on and at 

unacceptably high levels; women that are coming forward and 

in need of help in this way. So in view of the fact that there are 

only two transition houses, as I understand it, in the North, 

north of Prince Albert — and that is certainly not enough — 

I’m wondering what else your department is doing to assist 

women in this very great need? 

 

(1830) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I was just trying to clarify in 

my own mind. There are the shelters and transition houses 

directly funded by Social Services. There are some examples of 

shelters in the province that are funded by Indian Affairs 

Canada, in which we purchase spaces when the requirement’s 

there. 

 

We do have the two shelters in the North. I’ve had the 

opportunity only to tour the one at La Ronge; I’ve not toured 

the one at Sandy Bay. And they are doing very valuable work. 

 

As the member will know, in this budget year we’ve increased 

some resourcing to the transition houses and to their staff. We 

think that’s an important ingredient. 

 

We work with the provincial association of transition houses in 

developing policy and in determining how best to meet the 

needs, particularly in areas of the North or in rural 

Saskatchewan where the populations may be smaller, the 

communities are smaller, and how to try and meet the needs in 

what we might describe as rural Saskatchewan and the North. 

 

As the member will know, we took a step as this legislature to 

pass the victims of domestic violence assistance Act which, 

now having been in place a year and more, is beginning I think, 

to show some real benefit in the homes and the communities. 

 

The whole roots of family violence, of abuse against women 

and children, the root causes here are something that I think we 

all need to be working at to try and address. Again these are not 

simple root causes to get at. And as we all know, this in some 

ways becomes an intergenerational thing; so children observing 

abuse and living with abuse tend to become the adult abusers. 

 

We have taken steps in this budget year. We’re always looking 

for innovative ideas to deal particularly with widely dispersed 

populations and rural populations and so on. I know another 

example of some innovation that is happening is to use some of 

our Sask Housing stock even if just to provide a safe shelter 

without the significant staffing that will often go with the 

transition house, but even to provide some of those facilities as 

a safe shelter. And I happened to tour one, actually in your  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

constituency, where that seems to be meeting a certain need — 

just to have a place for women to go to in that hour of need. 

 

Again we go back to our domestic violence Act, and we are 

hoping that the more we can do to allow women and children to 

stay in their own home and remove the abuser, the better. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad you made 

reference to the safe houses that are out there, but I do know 

that there isn’t any funding from the department in many cases 

in rural Saskatchewan for any kind of services within those 

houses, like counselling. And also some of these are in small 

communities whereby the abused cannot find transportation to 

them. And I understand that the police help in some instances. 

 

But for a battered woman to have to go to a small, small 

community she’s unfamiliar with without knowing anyone 

around, without having anybody in that house other than the 

shell of the building, for them to have to deal with that kind of a 

thing, without having someone close by to counsel and to 

assure them of their safety is really, I feel, not adequate and 

quite ineffective as far as really helping the person. 

 

Mr. Minister, speaking of the victims of a domestic violence, I 

know that the federal and provincial governments have recently 

released a report on the Saskatchewan Victims of Domestic 

Violence Act. It did come into effect on February 1, 1995. Now 

the Martin-Wilson report also made recommendations about 

that Act, and the Department of Justice here has not acted yet. 

So I’d like to know when the department’s studies will be over, 

the studies of these reports, and when will the minister take 

action? 

 

And although you’re not the Minister of Justice, this does 

involve you because as Social Services certainly does cross over 

here. I’d like to know if the minister is going to commit to 

further education for front-line workers about what resources, 

legal or otherwise, are available for battered women. I’d like to 

know if the minister will commit to a public education initiative 

to raise awareness about the tragic and unacceptable levels of 

domestic violence and its causes and solutions. 

 

And I’d like to know if this government is going to address the 

many women’s concerns out there that are battered, by 

providing funding for safe houses in smaller communities. I 

think safe houses need to be there. And I think you’ve 

suggested some ways they might be, through buildings that are 

in existence right now that could be used. But I also know that 

we need funding to ensure that there is some counselling, some 

care, and maybe medical help and someone there to protect 

them while they’re in those safe houses. 

 

So I’m asking the minister whether he and his government will 

commit to this kind of funding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think the record of this 

government, and particularly reflected in this most recent 

budget, indicates significant commitment to the issues that the 

member raises. This was the government that passed that 

legislation, took that stand and passed that legislation. You 

don’t find that in many other jurisdictions. 

This year we provide, in this budget, $3.7 million to provide for 

10 shelters across the province. We have nine sexual assault 

counsellors and importantly, seven, now seven, outreach 

programs that reach out to people in their communities where 

they live. And in addition, as I mentioned before, we provide 

per diem payments to the federally operated shelters in our 

province. 

 

We’ve also provided funding to the Provincial Partnership 

Committee on Family Violence, and that encourages the 

networking that should and must go on between the government 

and community-based organizations. We now have eight 

communities, working in partnership in eight communities to 

address family violence and several more have indicated — 

initiated and indicated — that they want to build partnerships 

there. 

 

As I pointed out, we have provided in this budget new and 

substantial resources to all community-based organizations to 

improve the working conditions for their staffs. We’ve worked 

this year to develop an equitable funding formula for the 

transition houses in the allocation of staff. And there’s some 

money in this budget to those shelters who require additional 

staff. 

 

I want to say in regards to the review of The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act, of course we’re going to be very 

sensitive to that review. If there is legislative change, I know 

that I and the Minister of Justice and indeed the government in 

total will be looking at those changes. 

 

And I can say in response to the member’s question that we are 

definitely committed to the issues and I think that’s 

demonstrated in this budget and things that we have done. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d just 

like to ask you the process that takes place when there is 

violence taking place in the home and there is a call that goes in 

and Mobile Crisis goes to that home. What process do the 

workers with Mobile Crisis go through and what do they follow 

. . . how do they follow up on a situation after they’ve gone into 

a home and do indeed see that there has been violence and 

children are either involved — or scared to death, basically — 

and basically the home is amiss at the time? 

 

So could you tell me just what the Mobile Crisis workers are 

expected to do in a situation like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mobile Crisis, Mr. Chair, as the name 

suggests, is a crisis unit only. They would enter the 

circumstance and make their assessments of the circumstance, 

and from there then they would refer to appropriate agencies, 

which may be many or varied. 

 

In some cases, it may mean contact with the law enforcement, 

with the police — city polices or mounted police. It may mean 

contact with the health district, with various health providers in 

whatever community. 

 

It may mean referral to the Department of Social Services if 

there are issues of child protection here. It may mean referral to  



1844  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

a transition house circumstance that we’ve talked about. It may 

mean application of The Victims of Domestic Violence Act that 

we’ve talked about. 

 

Mobile Crisis — those folks are, as the name suggests, crisis 

interveners. They would then assess the circumstance and then 

refer to the appropriate agencies. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve 

heard about some problems revolving around that also and I 

feel it is my duty to let you know. So again please don’t take 

this as a personal affront; it’s not. 

 

But I understand that because of the lack of transition houses 

whereby to take children and spouses — whoever may be 

involved in the violence — and have a place for them . . . the 

fact is transition houses are full and there’s not enough room in 

the inn for them. So the word that I’ve got is often Mobile 

Crisis workers — not always but often — they will look at the 

situation and the children or the spouse will be protected 

overnight, only to be put back in the same situation over and 

over again. 

 

So this doesn’t seem to meet the needs that are out there again, 

and I ask the minister to comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, while I give every due regard 

to those people who are working at the community level of 

working at our transition houses, I think it’s fair to say that the 

member makes a point. There is room for a broader range of 

services. We would like to have that full gamut of services 

available to all of our people in all communities when they’re 

required. 

 

We’ve been working under some pretty difficult circumstances 

as a province; I think the member would admit that. Things 

have not been easy over the last number of years, and we have 

not seen large numbers of expansions. I’ve outlined some of the 

things we’ve been able to accomplish; I think some important 

things. But there are a wide range of services that I think you 

and I and many people would like us to move towards. 

 

I think we move towards them gradually, won’t happen 

overnight. But we’ll move in the correct directions if we’re 

always in contact with the people who are really providing 

those services, and in this case we’re talking about shelters and 

so on. The provincial association of transition houses is a body 

that we work very closely with in trying to develop policy. 

There’s lots of room to go; I admit that. I hope the member 

would also admit that we’ve come some ways in some pretty, 

pretty difficult circumstances. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your comments and 

mine, I guess, reflect on the need to recognize that many of 

these children that are returned to their homes are in need of 

child protection through Social Services, but I don’t know if the 

process or adequate process is in place for monitoring a 

situation well enough when in fact a number of those children 

. . . If they can’t even get as far as a transition house, how is 

there any tracking or any recording of their situation? And 

they’re ending up back in that home again. 

Now that is a cause for grave concern. Those are some of the 

children that are sometimes statistics; and they may not be 

under the Department of Social Services’ care, but it is possible 

that they should have been. And so these are the kind of things 

that have been brought to my attention. And, Mr. Minister, this 

is why I believe that when it comes to our children and it comes 

to families in that sense, we should ensure that a priority of 

government is the children and protection of our children. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to just ask you a few questions 

surrounding agreements with native bands as far as family 

services goes. Which bands or reserves have agreements with 

Social Services? And I would like to know if you could give me 

a listing of those. I understand it’s 10, and possibly 11, because 

you just made an agreement the other day with the Beardy 

Reserve. 

 

And I would like some clarity on also who has what jurisdiction 

when you in fact make agreements with bands for family 

services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m very happy to provide for 

the member the actual lists of the reserves, the bands that where 

now we have either agreements signed or both signed and 

operational. There are now a total of 15 agreements which are 

signed — check that. There are 16 — I signed the one this week 

. . . last week. 

 

So there are 16 signed; 8 of them are now fully operational. 

And for instance, the Beardy’s agreement, which we signed this 

week, they hope to be up and running by fall of this year. I 

mean there’s a fair bit of work that needs to be done to put the 

processes in place on reserve. So the others will come on 

stream. 

 

We’ll be very happy to provide the member with the names. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what is the 

status of the James Smith Band in regards to the authority they 

may have for their own family services right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do not at present have an 

agreement with James Smith. There are some discussions going 

on. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe you have 

received a letter from . . . I hesitate to say the name of this 

person because I do respect that he has contacted you; however, 

it is a person from the James Smith Band, and he’s 

encountering some difficulty regarding who has custody over a 

child. 

 

This child is being bounced back and forth because the band 

members claim that they have got the authority to determine 

where that child goes. And in fact there has been no agreement 

with the James Smith Band by the provincial government, and 

so the provincial government social worker is getting into this. 

And I think the child right now — after a Queen’s Bench court 

case — the child right now is in a safe situation. However, there 

was a lot of ruckus going on over who had custody of this child 

and who had the right to do it. 



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why this kind of a thing 

happens? And who communicates with the bands about their 

duties and their rights? And if a band is taking authority where 

they should not be and the minister has been informed of this, 

have you in this case . . . I could forward you the letter. I 

believe you’ve seen it. But I’m wondering if in this case, you 

have made some sort of contact with that band so that you 

clarify for them who has the authority so this kind of thing does 

not continue to go on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it would not be appropriate 

for me of course to discuss that, any individual case, in the 

House. But let me say generally these are rarely happy 

circumstances — most often very, very difficult circumstances 

where there may be conflict between parents, between families, 

or between other agencies or groups. And this is, in some cases, 

a band. 

 

Some of these circumstances reach the point of court 

proceedings. In the case of a court proceeding, anyone may seek 

to become an intervener in that proceeding, and that’s the law 

of Canada. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I’d like to thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to 

make mention again that in cases like that, it is the children who 

suffer. And if we’re ensuring that the children . . . we’re doing 

everything that children do not have to suffer, I would hope that 

you will provide myself and people in that area with some 

assurance that cases like that are being looked into, and future 

cases like this can be prevented. 

 

And at this time, I’d like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d 

like to thank your officials. And I will turn the questioning over 

to my colleague from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a few quick 

questions I’d like to run through here, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talked in your . . . last year, your government 

in the throne speech talked about a number of welfare reforms 

you plan to undertake. To date, what have you done to fulfil the 

promises that were made in last year’s throne speech? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We have, Mr. Chair, I think made 

significant progress. I might have hoped we’d be a little further, 

but we’ve made some real, significant progress in my view. 

 

One of the centrepiece recommendations in the reform of social 

assistance was to establish the child benefit. We’ve made, I 

think, some significant process now, not just provincially but 

nationally, bringing on other provinces and the federal 

government. We’re not there yet, but we see somewhat of a 

road map ahead. We’d like to see a longer road map to the 

federal government. 

 

We made changes this year to the Family Income Plan as a 

bridge to the child benefit. That’s point number one. 

 

Point number two, we now have established the training 

program, the youth training program. It has been removed from 

Social Services into Post-Secondary Education where we think  

it’s more appropriately delivered. The Minister responsible for 

Post-Secondary has made announcements in that regard. 

 

I was happy to join with the Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education to, point three, to establish a pilot project for the 

Youth Futures concept which we discussed. In our 

consultations with the community — which were quite 

extensive — it was quickly pointed out to us that our concept of 

the Youth Futures program was a very complex undertaking. 

Perhaps even I was too ambitious in suggesting that we could 

implement this on a province-wide basis immediately. 

 

What we have done is worked now with the community of 

Prince Albert to put the Youth Futures program in place. It will 

begin this fall. The committee is in the community now 

establishing it. 

 

(1845) 

 

The employment and maintenance supplement is a program 

now that has been deferred for budgetary considerations next 

year as a result of the onset of the child action plan. And so it’s 

the one major plank there that has been put aside. 

 

We also talked in our redesign document about improving 

accountability within the system. We’ve taken further steps in 

that regard, now having linked all of our systems with the 

federal systems, and so that further step in accountability is now 

in place. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Talking about 

accountability, I was just going to raise another question in that 

regard. Manitoba just implemented a 1 800 fraud line and I’m 

wondering if you can just . . . if there’s a simple way of just 

explaining what you’re doing on this accountability feature so 

that indeed the funds that are meant for recipients in need are 

available to them rather than abused by someone who’d take 

advantage of the program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we have, in the province, 

regional offices of Social Services. They serve as our point of 

contact with the general public. On a daily and a weekly and a 

monthly basis, calls are received to our regional offices pointing 

out issues where the public, or people who have some 

knowledge, will have concerns. 

 

Each — I guarantee the member this — each and every call that 

is reported to our regional offices is followed up. Our tracking 

of the calls indicates that we receive more calls through our 

regional offices in this regard than we would . . . or than does 

Manitoba through its 1 800 concept. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, there still are a number of people 

on social assistance in this province. I’m wondering if you 

could give me an idea of the percentage of children on 

assistance who . . . or I mean the percentage of people who 

would be children. And also, do you have a number that would 

indicate how many families . . . or single-parent families who 

are on social assistance as a result of the inability to receive 

funds through their court-ordered maintenance payments? Do 

you have any such figures, Mr. Minister? 



1846  Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we’d be very happy to 

provide all of these charts and tables to the member; that might 

be simplest. 

 

Let me just say in reference to his first question, the number of 

children would represent today — April 1997 — 43.6 per cent 

of the total numbers of people being supported on social 

assistance. But we’ll provide all the information by chart form 

to the member. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. Another issue that 

we’d raised at length in the last session was regarding 

post-adoption services. 

 

And at that time I believe you had cut Christian Counselling 

Services from any financial assistance. Mr. Minister, what have 

you done to date? Is Christian Counselling receiving any funds 

this year? Are they still without funds? And how many . . . I 

guess I would have to ask you is, regarding the post-adoption 

services, what’s the average length of wait for a couple waiting 

for an adoption? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do not now provide 

funding in this budget year to Christian Counselling. They are 

supported by the community. We do have a program 

arrangement with them. 

 

In terms of the wait for adoption, if one is seeking an infant, it 

can be up to five to six years. And that’s essentially because 

many, many, many people now choose to keep their infants. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You can see that I’ve 

got a number of questions here, but I’m trying to just go 

through some that I think are very important. One I should get 

off is, have you got your global answers to the questions that 

we had sent to the department? If they’re not with you tonight, 

you could certainly send them to our office; we’d appreciate 

that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other day you announced a joint initiative 

with the Minister of Justice in regards to tougher sentences for 

individuals who would take advantage of young children acting 

as prostitutes on our streets. At the time, though I commended 

you and I still commend you for the action that’s being taken or 

for the attempts to come to better action, but one of the things 

that still disturbs me, Mr. Minister, is I think we’re missing out 

on one of the key ingredients, and that’s the fact that we have to 

ask ourselves, why do we have young children — children as 

young at 10 years old — on the streets? 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, in some ways there’s an underlying 

problem that has to be addressed. And some of the things that 

I’ve heard . . . and I think it even was mentioned on a program 

on TV a couple of weeks ago — actually about three weeks ago 

— where parents were even putting their children on the street. 

And I think that’s rather unfortunate. If it is, it’s sad. 

 

And while we’re going to criticize the individual who would 

seek the avails of this individual . . . or these individuals, what 

about the people who would ask them, or require or whoever it 

may be, how do we . . . what are you doing to make sure we  

address and get these children off the streets in the first place? 

And I think at the end of the day as well, I think people who 

would force young children, or for whatever means, should be 

certainly held accountable. Someone’s got to be responsible on 

the other side as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Chair, I can only agree with 

the member. Having children on our streets is the result of a 

wide range of, in some ways very complicated issues that 

results in children on our streets, children who will be selling 

their bodies for profit, whether it be money or for drugs. 

 

And the solutions, if the member or any member of this 

legislature has the magic solution, we should implement it 

immediately. The solutions are not simple and I know the 

member knows that. 

 

The point the member makes, that there are some family causes 

in some cases and we need to be dealing with those family 

causes — it may be family breakup; it may be drug or alcohol; 

it may reflect on abuse that happened to parents when they were 

children — all of these factors are there. 

 

But I share the member’s view that as parents we have to have 

some responsibility for the children that God has given us. And 

how we can meet the needs of those parents, and therefore the 

needs of their children, is a challenge. We’ve implemented a 

number of programs, as the member knows — family support 

programs, parent-aid program, children-at-risk programs — but 

it just takes an ongoing, I think, an ongoing and concerted effort 

by our entire community, by our entire society. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to 

thank you and your officials for your responses over the past 

number of weeks on the different occasions we’ve had to 

certainly stand and debate some of the issues. Needless to say, 

there’s a lot more . . . a number of other areas we could 

certainly get into and debate as well. 

 

But I just want to close by saying, Mr. Minister, while there’s 

some areas that I certainly want to applaud you and your 

officials for working on, there’s some areas that I feel more 

needs to be done. We’ve recognized that. And I think at the end 

of the day our working together to try and create a better family 

environment, and certainly work to build better families, is 

something that is important and is essential. 

 

And having said that, I’d just like to again thank you. And 

certainly we want to give the . . . I understand and I see the 

Premier is itching and ready to go. We want to have a chance to 

chat at him as well, so we won’t delay the process. 

 

But I look forward to further debate in the future in regards to a 

number of these issues and will certainly indicate, Mr. Minister 

— and I thank you as well — I think I mentioned a couple of 

questions the other day I’ve got to get a little bit of information 

in writing to you so you can respond to them. Thank you for the 

work of your office and the staff in responding to questions. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps just before we vote  



May 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

these off I want to say a word of thanks to members of the 

opposition for their questions. And a very particular thanks to 

the officials who have joined us in this legislature to assist in 

our deliberations. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Chair, while we’ve been joined by four 

or five individuals from the department, they simply represent 

the entire Department of Social Services, which represents 

2,000-or-thereabouts individuals across the province who are 

serving the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . and part of the entire civil service, as the Premier points out, 

who are doing an excellent job, in sometimes some very 

difficult circumstances, at serving the people of our province. 

So by thanking the officials who have joined us, I want that 

thanks to be extended to all the employees of the Department of 

Social Services and the public service in general. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 36 agreed to. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1801 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1802 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1803 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................1809 

  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1835 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Closure of Big River Tree Nursery 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1803 

 Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................1803 

 Air Ambulance Award 

  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1803 

 Artist Rosa Gebhardt Recognized 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1803 

 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1804 

 Canada Day Poster Challenge 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1804 

 New Addition to Hudson Bay Hospital 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1804 

 Owner of Ambulance Service Marks 40 Years 

  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1804 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Child Protection Services 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1805 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1805 

 Saltcoats Reassessment 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1805 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1805 

 SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1806 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1806 

 SaskTel’s Failed Venture in the United States 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1807 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1807 

 Silver Sage Casino 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1808 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1808 

 David Milgaard Case Review 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1808 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1808 

 Apology for Remarks About Reform Leader 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1808 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1808 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 



 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1809 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1809 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 229  The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (Indians off-reserve) 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1809 

 Bill No. 230 — The Farm Security Amendment Act, 1997 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1809 

 Bill No. 232 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 1997 (Appointments Review 

Committee/“ARC”) 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1810 

 Bill No. 237 — The NORTHERN Act 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1810 

MOTIONS 

 Extension of Leave of Absence for The Speaker 

  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1810 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 236 — The Chief Electoral Officer Accountability Act 

  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1810, 1814 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1812 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1813 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1814 

 Bill No. 227 — The Saskatchewan Health Bill of Rights and Responsibilities Act 

  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................1815, 1818 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1816 

  Lorje .........................................................................................................................................................................................1818 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1819 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1819 

  Lorje (privilege) ......................................................................................................................................................................1820 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1821 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1823 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund  Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1824 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1824 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense  Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1827 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1827 

 General Revenue Fund  Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25 

  Crofford .........................................................................................................................................................................1827, 1833 

  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................1827, 1832 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1831 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1832 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1833 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense  Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25 .................................1835 

 General Revenue Fund  Municipal Government  Vote 24 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1835 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1835 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1837 

 General Revenue Fund  Social Services  Vote 36 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1840 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1840 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1845 


