



















































Hansard: May 07, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1449 

 May 7, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again 

would like to present petitions to do with the creation of a 

regional telephone exchange. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. The community that this petition is from is 

Choiceland, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to support the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

A question to the Minister of Health: (1) what was the 

average waiting time 10 years ago to receive test results for 

a biopsy on a potentially malignant sample after a test was 

performed; (2) what was the average waiting time five 

years ago to receive test results for a biopsy on a 

potentially malignant sample after the test was performed; 

(3) what is the average waiting time today to receive test 

results for a biopsy on a potentially malignant sample after 

the test was performed; (4) what is the average waiting 

time from the point where an individual is diagnosed with 

cancer and the point where they meet with a doctor to 

discuss treatment options; (5) has this average waiting time 

increased, decreased, or stayed the same in the last five 

years, the last 10 years, and by how much? 

 

And I so present, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 47 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) did any government-run 

pension plans invest in Bre-X in the 1995-96 fiscal year; 

(1)(b) if the answer to question no. 1 is yes, list which 

pensions invested in Bre-X; how many shares were 

purchased and at what price; were the Bre-X shares sold 

and at what price; (2) did any government-run pension 

plans invest in Bre-X in 1996-97 fiscal year; if so, which 

pensions; how many shares were purchased and at what 

price; (2)(b) if the answer to question no. 2 is yes, list 

which pensions invested in Bre-X; how many shares were 

purchased and at what price; and were the Bre-X shares 

sold and at what selling price? 

 

I so submit. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, 44 grade 7 and 8 students seated in your gallery. 

The students are here today from a school in my constituency, 

Wilfred Hunt School. I’ve had an opportunity to visit Wilfred 

Hunt in the past and I’ve always been greeted in a warm and 

friendly manner. I know students have participated in the war 

memorial dedication and recently Arbor Day; so they are a very 

active school. 

 

The grade 7 and 8 students today are accompanied by their 

teachers, Bryan Hicks, Rochelle Anderson; and interpreter, 

whom you can see working in the gallery, Jodi Kerr. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting with the students after question 

period in room 218 to enjoy some refreshment and answer any 

questions they have following question period. So I’d 

encourage everyone to present their questions and answers in a 

decorous manner. 

 

I’d ask everyone to join me in welcoming the grade 7 and 8 

students from Wilfred Hunt School. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in your gallery I would like to introduce three 

individuals from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. First 

Ms. Carol Moen. Carol is the recently re-elected president of 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; and also from the 

membership from the federation, Mr. Fred Herron, and Mr. 

Derwyn Crozier-Smith. Please welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

third party I too would like to welcome to our legislature this 

afternoon, Carol Moen, president of the STF (Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation), and people from the executive, Fred 

Herron, and Derwyn Crozier-Smith. 

 

I’m meeting with them later on this afternoon for what should 

be an enlightening conversation. 

  



1450  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I want to join the official opposition 

critics in Education in welcoming Carol Moen, president of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; general secretary, Fred 

Herron, and Derwyn Crozier-Smith to the legislature. I hope 

that they have an interesting afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you to 

members of this Assembly, some guests in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is a very special day for Jayne Whyte, who has just come 

from the annual mayor’s luncheon sponsored by the Regina 

chapter of the Canadian Mental Health Association. 

 

This luncheon is held annually during Mental Health Week. 

And the luncheon . . . or at this luncheon Jayne was the 

recipient of the Canadian Mental Health Association National 

Consumers Participation Award. Jayne received the award for 

her leadership in the community. She is not only recognized in 

Saskatchewan but across Canada for her dedicated work and 

leadership in the mental health field. 

 

Accompanying Jayne is Rev. Erin Shoemaker, United Church 

minister at Balcarres, and Brenda McLaughlin, a staff person 

with the senior education centres here in Regina. If they could 

stand and be recognized, and I would ask all members to 

welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Pangman Personal Care Home 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Sunday I was 

proud to take part in a sod-turning ceremony for the Deep South 

Personal Care Home in Pangman. A number of towns, villages, 

and RMs (rural municipality) in the vicinity have been working 

towards this day and it’s good to see their work come to 

fruition. I congratulate them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this personal care home will be integrated with the 

health centre, which will be upgraded with an additional added 

integrated ambulance garage. This project is the first of its kind 

in Saskatchewan, but it is another model of the partnership and 

cooperation which make our province unique. 

 

The health centre, funded by the South Central Health District, 

will be attached to the Deep South Personal Care Home, 

operated by a non-profit community board. The two 

administrative bodies will work closely together to ensure 

competent and caring service for its clients. 

 

I wish to commend the Pangman advisory committee and the 

Deep South Personal Care Home Corporation for their 

commitment and leadership in this new venture. They have  

already raised over $600,000 and the project will begin next 

week and be completed by October. 

 

It is exciting to be the first to do something, but it’s also 

daunting because in many respects you’re flying solo, with 

many obstacles to overcome. But this dream has become a 

reality because of the cooperation of many local communities, 

of governments at all levels, of the Department of Health, the 

Department of Municipal Government, and of many individuals 

who worked tirelessly to bring this new partnership about. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

DryAir 2000 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize a new St. Brieux industry, DryAir 2000, 

founded by Dr. Pierre Bourgault, a professional engineer. 

DryAir 2000 manufactures grain dryers, a project that has been 

15 years in the making. The company recently completed its 

new manufacturing plant in the booming town of St. Brieux. 

 

Dr. Bourgault credits the vision of local farmers who have an 

interest in the concept of grain drying efficiencies that far 

outperform anything else in the market-place. DryAir 2000 

plans to manufacture between 30 and 50 units in its first year, 

and the first year’s production soon will be sold out. 

 

Among personnel involved in DryAir 2000 are Claude 

Bourgault, John Gallays, Maurice Boyer, Sean Steliga, Marcel 

Fagnou, Don Assié, and Jack and Kelly Stevenson. 

 

Congratulations, DryAir 2000 — another success story in the 

community of St. Brieux. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

North-west Regional Victims Services Association 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Being a 

victim of crime can often be a very traumatic experience for 

many people. Having one’s life threatened or having your 

possessions stolen from your home bring forward a multitude of 

emotions in people. Coping with these emotions is often very 

difficult. Having someone to turn to or having an organization 

dedicated to providing services for such victims can be a 

tremendous help to individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Northwest Regional Victim Services 

Association, headquartered in Meadow Lake, is one such group. 

This organization relies on an entire community effort. 

Cooperation between the police, community members, and first 

nations people is essential to its successful operation. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the countless hours and 

exhaustive efforts of the many volunteers who donate their time 

to the organization should also be acknowledged. It is the 

volunteers who make the Northwest Regional Victim Services 

such a success. This community program has proven itself since 

its inception a few years ago. Today it is being looked upon as  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

being a model for other such groups throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to congratulate Northwest Regional Victim Services for 

its community focus and the success it has enjoyed. I’d also 

want to wish them continued success in the future. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Young Business Entrepreneurs 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing can lift the spirits 

of those of us who are looking at the wrong side of, shall I say 

39, as contact with bright, enthusiastic, and energetic young 

people. 

 

Last Saturday night I was at the first banquet awards for the 

Young Business Entrepreneurs program for north-west 

Saskatchewan. This was put on by Northwest Community 

Futures. Eleven awards were given out to students from grade 8 

to 12 for excellence in youth entrepreneurship. The awards were 

in areas such as best business plan, outstanding promotional 

material, and exceptional customer service. 

 

The winners came from North Battleford Comprehensive, 

Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and St Walburg. I was especially 

impressed that in business plan after business plan given by 

these young people from our smaller communities, they began 

their work by saying: I came up with this idea because this isn’t 

available in our community. 

 

They are committed to Saskatchewan and committed to their 

future with us. I congratulate Pat Redl, general manager of 

Northwest Community Futures, Dennis Barnett, chairman of the 

board, and all of the young participants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This week, May 

5 to 11, has been proclaimed Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 

in Saskatchewan. The purple ribbon campaign commemorates 

all Saskatchewan women who have died as a result of violence. 

 

Violence against women is one of our society’s serious 

problems. In Saskatchewan between 1991 and 1995, 35 women 

died as a result of domestic violence. One is too many; 35 is a 

disgrace. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what protects the perpetrators of violence 

against women is silence. Victims of abuse need to realize that 

they are not alone and that there are services and resources that 

they can call upon. The purple ribbon campaign is intended to 

heighten public awareness of the fact that domestic violence 

will not be tolerated in this province. 

 

This government unveiled trail-blazing victims of domestic 

violence legislation in 1995 as evidence of our commitment to 

women, but of course more needs to be done. 

 

As members of this Assembly, we must do all we can to show 

our deep and personal commitment to ending this social 

tragedy. We can begin by wearing a purple ribbon, and we can 

continue by fighting for public policies that will help to keep 

the women of this province safe. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This evening in Prince Albert the local YWCA will 

honour a number of local women whose contributions to the 

community really have made a difference. 

 

The 1997 Women of Distinction awards ceremony will honour 

Linda Jensen for her contributions to art and culture. Linda, a 

water-colour painter, is a founding member of the Kyla Arts 

Group. She is also active in the music community in P.A. 

(Prince Albert). She was the first woman to chair the Prince 

Albert Co-operative Health Centre and has been active in 

decision making in the health community for over a decade. 

 

In the health, sports, and fitness category, Louise MacDonald 

will receive the award. Louise is the youth ministry coordinator 

for the Prince Albert Roman Catholic Diocese. Before that, she 

worked for the city’s parks and recreation department at the arts 

centre coordinating arts and playground programs. An avid 

cyclist, runner, and cross-country skier, she leads this category 

by her example to all of us. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, Gail Szaunter will receive honours 

for her work in the community enhancement category. Gail is 

the director of the Children’s Choice Child Care Co-op, and has 

the particular honour of being nominated for this award by her 

staff. 

 

Sandy Peterson will receive the award for business and 

professional category. Sandy opened her own shop, Esquire II, 

following The Bay’s decision to leave Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these women really do deserve our 

recognition for their contributions towards our community and 

towards our province. And I want to congratulate them all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

On Living with Cerebral Palsy 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Cerebral palsy is not a disease. It is not 

progressive nor life threatening. It is a physical disability which 

results in lack of control over movement and posture, and in 

impaired speech, sight, and/or hearing. We all probably know 

someone with CP (cerebral palsy). 

 

We can only begin to appreciate the courage necessary for them 

to get through the day, to perform the most simple physical acts 

which we take for granted. 

 

At Twenty-Fifth Street Theatre in Saskatoon, audiences will be 

given the opportunity until May 18 to enter the world of one  

  



1452  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

individual who undertakes these basic, pedestrian acts of 

courage daily. 

 

In the play Scraping the Surface — A Life in Progress, we are 

given a gritty and very funny look at what it is like to grow up 

with what society calls an affliction. 

 

The play is written and performed by Lyle Victor Albert, who 

has cerebral palsy himself. In his play he uses shaving as a 

metaphor for the courage it takes for him and others like him to 

journey through life. Just imagine the bravery it takes to put a 

razor to your face if you’re what he calls jumpy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this Assembly we were privileged to 

host Rick Hansen, who has taught the world something about 

courage under adversity. 

 

I encourage all who can to attend Scraping the Surface. You 

will be entertained, and you will see another example of the 

tenacity of the human spirit. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Nations-Health Districts Partnership 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

people have always understood the value of a partnership and 

cooperative problem solving. And we continue to build 

partnership, with first nations people of this province. 

 

Our government has signed seven agreements with health 

districts and one with SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations) to encourage the hiring of aboriginal 

people in the health care sector. And there is evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, that these agreements are starting to work. 

 

In the last five months, at least 14 aboriginal people have been 

hired for various positions in the Prince Albert Health District, 

including management and front-line work such as nursing and 

support such as maintenance. 

 

Last year, Shawn Dagenais was hired as the new program 

coordinator for the Successful Mothers support program. 

Shawn’s work demonstrates that a better relationship with 

health care clients means a better quality of health care — 95 

per cent of her clients are first nations people. Shawn’s clients 

feel comfortable dealing with her because they feel she 

understands them and their culture. 

 

Saskatchewan is committed to a true partnership with the first 

nations communities of this province. Mr. Speaker. The success 

of this agreement proves we are making great strides towards 

that goal. I congratulate the Minister of Indian and Metis 

Affairs and I congratulate the Prince Albert Health Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

children of this province who are forced to sell their bodies 

have waited and waited and waited for some sign from this 

government that it cares and that it will forward legislation that 

will protect them. While the Minister of Social Services agrees 

that these children are the true victims, he refuses to make 

legislative changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds of Saskatchewan children 

working the streets of this province and falling victim to 

pedophiles. And this government has an obligation to do all it 

can to protect them from further abuse. 

 

And so I ask: does the Minister of Social Services have reason 

to believe that children under his care are involved in 

prostitution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know that 

she and I have had some discussions about these issues as late 

as just a very few moments ago. We are in full agreement, in 

full agreement that the issue of children on our streets and the 

abuse of those children by adults is a matter of child abuse. And 

there should be and there can be no misunderstanding about the 

will of this government, and I believe this legislature, in dealing 

with this very serious issue affecting children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there may be occasion of a child on the street in 

the cities of Saskatchewan who has had involvement with the 

Department of Social Services; indeed we are trying to reach 

out to those children. And as I’ve indicated to the member 

earlier today, there will be announcements tomorrow, Mr. 

Chair, to further show progress in addressing this very serious 

issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister knows that many if not all children engaged in street 

prostitution, solvents, and drugs, are well-known to his 

department. Yet this government has done little to help them. 

Where are the safe houses? 

 

My private members’ Bill includes a measure that provides for 

the government to set up transitional safe houses for child 

prostitutes. These houses would offer appropriate treatment and 

counselling to these victims of child abuse. Experts know that 

foster homes alone aren’t the answer for children who have 

been on the streets. 

 

Will the minister admit that Social Services does not provide 

for a comprehensive treatment, protection, and recovery time 

that these children desperately need in order to leave the streets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I have shared some of the 

information, in fact a great deal of the information about 

understandings that we have and what we intend to do with the 

minister only yesterday . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . with the 

member, I’m sorry, only yesterday. 

 

She recognizes — I believe that all members in this House  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

recognize — that together this legislature wants to address this 

issue in the communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

But let me just say this, Mr. Speaker. From one end of this 

country to the other end of this country . . . I have here a 

clipping from the Vancouver Sun talking about what this 

government is doing for the children of Saskatchewan. I have a 

copy here of an article from the Charlottetown Guardian, 

Prince Edward Island, talking about what the Government of 

Saskatchewan and particularly the Premier of Saskatchewan is 

doing for families and children in this province. And coast to 

coast, Mr. Speaker, the nation is watching. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in my 

deliberations with the minister I heard nothing of some concrete 

measures like safe houses, and so that is my concern. The 

children of this province cannot wait any longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the continual delays by this government on the 

child prostitution problem translates into a lack of resources and 

protection for these children. Without concrete legislative 

changes, this government is failing to address the tragedy faced 

by hundreds of child prostitutes in Saskatchewan. 

 

When will the minister assume his responsibility to offer these 

child victims the protection and the treatment they need and 

bring in changes to Saskatchewan’s legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member and I 

yesterday talked about some of the initiatives that this 

government is involved in — initiatives that are happening in 

the communities of Saskatchewan. 

 

That member is fully aware that we have dedicated, in addition 

to the amount of resources, the array of resources through the 

child action plan, that member is aware we have dedicated 

specifically a quarter of a million dollars to projects in this city 

and Saskatoon and other cities affected in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she knows that. And I’m disappointed again, 

sincerely disappointed, that she would use this question period 

to try and make a political issue out of what I thought was an 

issue, I thought was an issue that we would work together on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to ask if the 

minister has ever visited our inner cities on a Friday or Saturday 

evening to see firsthand what’s going on . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I have. Yes, I have. And I would say that 

if he’s done that, he would realize that foster care is not the 

solution. We need safe homes. Fostering will not work for these 

cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government proved earlier this session that 

prompt action is possible when they want it. The IPSCO Bill 

was introduced, given three readings and Royal Assent all 

within a few hours. And yet the minister won’t accept my  

colleague’s Bill. He won’t introduce his own Bill. What is 

going to happen here? 

 

Ottawa has acted on this issue. Manitoba has; Alberta has. This 

is not a partisan political issue. This is about restoring public 

confidence. This is about children under the care of the 

minister, who are working on the streets. We need some moral 

leadership from this government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Does the member have 

a question? And if he does, I would ask him to put it now. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I want to know from the minister what 

clear indication of commitment and caring can he give the 

people of Saskatchewan this day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member may want to 

talk to his bench mate, with whom I have shared information 

about what this government intends to do and will announce 

tomorrow — in addition, in addition to the vast array of 

programs under the child action plan; in addition to $250,000 

committed in this budget. 

 

That member stands in this House and says that we should pass 

legislation in a day. I ask that member, has he consulted with 

the chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations? 

Has he consulted with the various reserves in our province, 

which this legislation would have a direct impact on? Has he 

done that consultation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way you make public policy. You 

don’t stand in this House attempting to get headlines for your 

political movement while trying to deal with a very significant 

issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Prime Minister 

Chrétien said in this city that government is about working to 

make a better country. And I can’t possibly imagine anyone 

running for public office who doesn’t passionately believe that. 

 

When my colleague raised the issues of child poverty and child 

prostitution she was labelled a discredit to this institution by 

members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the discredit is not this 

member; the discredit is what is going on on our streets, the 

discredit is the abuse of our children. 

 

The people of this province are looking for some moral 

leadership from their elected officials and all we hear from the 

Minister of Social Services is that he’s come up with another 

quarter of a million dollars. We want something better than that. 

The people of Saskatchewan want some clear commitment from 

the minister. 

 

Has he anything better to give us than say he’s going to throw a 

quarter of a million dollars at the problem? Will he commit to 

safe houses? That’s what’s really needed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



1454  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, day after day, time after 

time, I will work with the communities of this province before I 

would work with that caucus because, Mr. Speaker, the 

communities of this province and the people who are working 

on the streets of our communities know a whole lot more, a 

whole lot more about this issue, than the member from North 

Battleford. 

 

Now he raises, he raises . . . I cannot believe it, Mr. Speaker. I 

cannot believe that he would stand in the House today and raise 

the issue of the Prime Minister’s visit to Regina yesterday. 

What a spectacle that was, Mr. Speaker. A Prime Minister of 

Canada who hid, who hid from the public, who refused to speak 

to the media, who refused to speak to the media, and didn’t 

even have the courage to speak to university students at the 

University of Regina. 

 

He would raise that as an example of national leadership? 

That’s the kind of leadership we don’t need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

appears today that SaskPower is one step closer to purchasing 

50 per cent of Guyana’s electrical utility company. Reports 

today indicate that SaskPower has inked the deal for $30 

million for this utility. Will the minister in charge of SaskPower 

confirm if these reports are correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, what I will confirm is 

what I have confirmed in this House previously: that 

discussions with respect to the Guyanese government and the 

purchase of their electrical utility have taken place — and have 

been taking place — over a number of weeks. 

 

I can also confirm that a letter of intent has been signed. 

 

I can also confirm that that will just further this process and 

clears the way for substantive negotiations and the completion 

of all due diligence reviews that will then be brought as a 

recommendation to the SaskPower Commercial board, that will 

from there be taken to the SaskPower board for scrutiny, and 

that will then come to Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

I can also confirm that no decision has been made, and that all 

measure of due diligence will be made to ensure that if any 

investment is made, that it will be secure and will generate a 

reasonable return for the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s 

what I can confirm for that member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Government of 

Guyana will not say how much its power utility loses each year. 

SaskPower officials are mum on the issue as well. 

 

The credibility of this government is shot. They’ve blown $16 

million in the gigatel fiasco. They’re charging Saskatchewan 

people $14 million through a reconstruction charge, and they 

 can’t even keep the power on in Melfort. Now they’re 

apparently prepared to sink about $30 million of Canadian 

funds into this venture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has clearly demonstrated it has no 

business sense; this is a risky venture at its best. Will the 

minister table all documents relating to this event today which 

will justify SaskPower investing in the project? If not, will he 

get out of the project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a 

few words about credibility. And let me begin by describing the 

performance of members of the Liberal caucus in this 

legislature in the last few moments, and as a matter of fact, in 

this session of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has shown competence with 

respect to the management of Crown corporation assets, and we 

will continue to do that. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have 

been very good stewards, since our election in 1991, of the 

public purse. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well, that the 

people of Saskatchewan recognize it. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if this opposition wants to 

develop some credibility with the people of Saskatchewan they 

should quit their political grandstanding and they should start 

dealing with the real, substantive issues in this province — and 

that’s job creation for the people of this province; that’s debt 

reduction on behalf of the people of this province; and 

developing a strong economy for the future on behalf of the 

young people, the young men and women in this province. And 

that’s what they should be doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also for the minister responsible for SaskPower. I’m glad to see 

that our Liberal colleagues have finally realized this is an issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, on May 1, SaskPower signed a letter of intent to 

purchase half of the Guyana Electric Company for $22.65 

million U.S. (United States), or nearly 32 million Canadian. 

You must be very proud of this signing, Mr. Minister, since you 

didn’t even bother to inform the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now both you and the Government of Guyana are refusing to 

disclose how much money the Guyana power company is 

currently losing. Larry Christie of SaskPower says that will be 

disclosed after the deal is completed. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan deserve the answers 

now while you’re crossing the t’s and dotting the i’s, before you 

spend the money. How much money is the Guyana electrical 

company currently losing per year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me say to this 

member that no money has been spent at this point. The people 

who are negotiating on behalf of SaskPower have been working 

with the Guyanese negotiators. They have come to a point 

where they can sign a letter of intent which describes an 

understanding of the circumstances that can lead to further  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

discussions. 

 

I want to say again, as I said to that member, no decision has 

been made, no money has been spent. There is a process by 

which the decision making will be made, which includes the 

board of SaskPower Commercial, which includes the board of 

SaskPower, and which includes Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, based on all of the information that will be 

brought to these boards and the scrutiny of professionals and 

people who will be able to assist us in making a decision, we 

will make a decision as to whether to proceed with the deal or 

whether not to. At this point no decision has been made. I’ve 

described for you the process and I think . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, you have signed a letter of 

intent. You’re informing everyone except this legislature and 

the people of Saskatchewan. It’s time you informed us. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year you conducted a public review of Crown 

corporations and I doubt that there was a single person who said 

SaskTel should be risking taxpayers’ money in third-world 

countries. Didn’t the NST fiasco and losing the $16 million 

teach you anything? Why are you gambling even more 

taxpayers’ money on an even riskier venture? 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s pretty easy for you and Jack Messer to gamble 

with other people’s money. You and Messer remind me of the 

officials of Bre-X, playing with other people’s money. Mr. 

Minister, would you invest your own money in this deal? 

Would you take your MLA pension money and invest it in an 

ailing company in an unstable, third-world, South American 

country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I will say 

is that the management of all of our Crown corporations are 

doing what they need to be doing at this point. They’re dealing 

with a deregulated environment that was proposed, put in place, 

by your federal counterparts and by the Liberals, who in fact 

put the deal together. 

 

What we’re doing is restructuring. We’re reorganizing these 

corporations so that they can compete in a deregulated 

environment. Now the members opposite might want these 

Crowns to act as if they were in a monopoly situation that they 

were in in the 1970s and the 1960s, but the facts are not thus, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The facts are that these corporations, if they’re going to be a 

success in the future, need to prepare, need to restructure 

themselves, and need to look at their investment opportunities 

where they can diversify their income flow. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite, we aren’t sticking 

our heads in the sand; we’re moving into the next century along 

with these Crown corporations. And I think the people of  

Saskatchewan expect us to do just that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Security for the Prime Minister 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 

for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, it seems now that Jean 

Chrétien has borrowed your Premier’s bubble, only now he is 

enlisting the services of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police). While it is the job of the RCMP to protect the Prime 

Minister from harm, I don’t believe it’s the job of the RCMP to 

protect Jean Chrétien from an embarrassing photo op. 

 

Mr. Minister, as minister responsible for funding the RCMP in 

this province, do you think it is the job of the RCMP to be 

setting up private meetings with Jean Chrétien just to avoid 

public criticism of his policies; and are the RCMP extending the 

same services to other party leaders who visit the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll 

answer the second question first, and the answer is yes. The role 

of the RCMP and their VIP security services is to provide 

security services when people need them. They’re in the public 

life. And that includes all of the members of this legislature 

should that need arise. 

 

What happened in this particular case, and it’s not quite 

accurately set out in the media reports, is that the RCMP are 

required to do a pre-screening of what kinds of events the Prime 

Minister goes to. There was a question raised by some of the 

students that they would like to meet with the Prime Minister. 

The RCMP advised the students that the person to talk to was 

from the Prime Minister’s office and that they should make an 

arrangement for a meeting with that person. The arrangements 

for the meeting were made with the staff from the Prime 

Minister’s office, and when the arrangements were made, the 

RCMP were informed of what the arrangements were and they 

provided the security. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Business Regulations Review 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 

Minister, Saskatchewan continues to lag behind neighbouring 

Conservative provinces in job creation. One of the reasons for 

this, identified by small-business owners, is the tremendous 

amount of bureaucracy and red tape they face in starting and 

running a business in this province. In your Partnership for 

Growth document you promised a complete review of 

Saskatchewan’s business climate, including business regulation, 

to be completed by March of this year. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s May now. When will this review be 

completed and when will you be sharing it with the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

  



1456  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member talks 

about the review of the regulatory system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We did make a commitment in Partnership for 

Growth to reduce the amount of regulation in the province by 

25 per cent over the next 10 years. That review is under way, 

and the member will be pleased with the report and review 

when it’s completed in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, last year I 

introduced a private members’ Bill calling for a complete 

review of 800 sets of regulations on the books in Saskatchewan. 

Today I’ll be re-introducing that Bill. But it only . . . there’s one 

problem. We had to reword it because there are now 866 sets of 

regulations on the books. 

 

Mr. Minister, since you made the commitment to reduce the 

number of regulations, you’ve actually added 66 new sets of 

new regulations. Mr. Minister, in fact this binder represents the 

total . . . only the table of contents, the table of contents for the 

regulations on the books in the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to make good on your 

promise to cut red tape? Will you start today by supporting our 

Bill for a complete review of all business regulation in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, obviously when we 

made the commitment in Partnership for Growth to reduce the 

amount of regulation by 25 per cent, we agreed that 

governments of every political persuasion, and identifiably the 

Devine government during the 1980s, added hundreds of pieces 

of regulation — hundreds of pieces of regulation. 

 

And I would say to you . . . and go through the book, go 

through the table of contents and the index, and find out how 

many your premier, Mr. Devine, put on the books. We’re going 

to go through those as well. 

 

We’re going to fulfil the commitment to reduce the amount of 

regulation by 25 per cent. And whether it was the Thatcher 

government or the Devine government or the Blakeney 

government or our government, we are going to reduce the 

amount of regulatory pieces in the province. 

 

So for the first time we agree on something. But I say we’re 

going to do a good job of it and we’re going to get rid of some 

of the useless regulation your government put in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Information on Amusement Companies 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like many 

other communities, people in Wadena are in the midst of 

making preparations for their annual summer fair. As part of 

this process, they have to look for an amusement company that 

does rides, that has a safe and reliable record. 

When Elmer Hrynchyshyn of the Wadena Fair Board contacted 

this government to get a list of licensed amusement companies, 

he was informed that his board would have to file a freedom of 

information request. 

 

Will the Minister of Municipal Government explain why such 

important information is not readily and openly available to our 

communities and why they have to pay for it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the involvement of the 

Department of Municipal Government is simply in the safety 

and the proper operation of amusement equipment that’s 

available to the public. We’re not an advertising source or a 

directory. This is a competitive business and our relationship 

with those businesses is simply as a regulator of the safety 

features and not in the market-place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, hundreds of communities 

will be holding local fairs this summer and fall, and the safety 

of thousands of children in this province will be entrusted to 

these respective amusement companies. The fact that this 

government would force communities to cut through a 

bureaucratic red tape to determine which of these companies is 

properly licensed is ridiculous. The fact that they have to pay 

$20 to get this information is unforgivable. Will the minister 

make a commitment that this information will be made 

immediately available to people, to the fair boards, and make it 

free? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, there obviously, there is 

a cost to this regulation and particularly when these businesses 

are mobile and move from one community to another. It’s a 

very complex business and seasonal and carries a cost. This is 

the role, is to have cost recovery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 233  The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 62, The 

Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

65, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 234 — The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement Revocation Act (No. 2) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that a Bill to revoke The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Student Working as Guest Page 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Before orders of the day, some of the 

members may think we have a stranger in the House, but we do 

not have a stranger in the House. I want to introduce to the 

members Ms. Camille Marinier, who is working as a page today 

as part of the high school work placement program with 

Archbishop O’Neill High School. I would like to introduce her 

to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  I’m pleased to introduce to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you and through 

you to members of the House, a guest from my constituency, 

Brenda Slimmon, in your gallery. Brenda is my constituency 

assistant, looks after the business of the office in Rosetown and 

looks after the management of the business of both offices. 

 

Additionally to that, she is one of Rosetown’s solid citizens. 

She and her husband are partners in the Western Sales 

enterprise which, you’ll remember, last week celebrated its 50th 

anniversary. 

 

She and her choir just performed an Easter cantata, which she 

led, in the Rosetown community at Easter time. She spends her 

spare time driving her kids around to track and field events 

around the province. 

 

We’re honoured to have a citizen such as Brenda visit us today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I respectfully request that this question be 

converted to notice of motion for return. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The question has been returned to 

motion (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61  The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 1977 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes some minor changes to how 

corporation capital tax is calculated for financial institutions. It 

also expands the definition of financial institutions to include 

securities dealers. These changes apply to taxation years 

beginning after July 1, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every province in Canada has a capital tax on 

financial institutions. But by working together we can simplify 

and streamline how taxes like these are collected. Over the past 

few years the provinces and the federal government have been 

discussing how to better integrate capital taxes with the federal 

large corporations tax. 

 

The Canadian Bankers Association has, in principle, endorsed 

greater coordination of capital taxes. It means financial 

institutions could benefit from greater efficiency and long-term 

cost savings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes within this Bill will move 

Saskatchewan close to that goal. They are an important first 

step toward full integration. We will keep working with the 

federal government and banking institutions to bring further 

improvements to this part of the tax system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Corporation Capital Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 63, which is An Act to amend The 

Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 

 

This Bill implements the budget decision to maintain the  

  



1458  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

1997-98 statutory funding for the Meewasin Valley Authority at 

the same level as last year. This is the fourth year that the 

province has maintained funding at this level, permitting the 

Authority to continue an excellent level of service in 

developing, conserving, and enhancing the river valley. 

 

This Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from 

the city of Saskatoon, the University of Saskatchewan, and the 

province. For 1997-98 this funding will be $1,870,760 in total. 

 

I take this opportunity to commend the Authority on a 

worthwhile year and look forward to their continued 

stewardship of the river valley. I move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of Bill No. 64, which is to amend 

The Wascana Centre Act. 

 

This Bill implements the budget decision to maintain the 

1997-98 statutory funding for the Wascana Centre at the same 

level as last year. This is the fourth year that the province has 

maintained funding at this level, permitting the Authority to 

continue an excellent level of service in developing, conserving, 

and enhancing the park, the lake, and the legislative grounds. 

 

This Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from 

the city of Regina, the University of Regina, and the province. 

For 1997-98 this funding will be 1.421 in total. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all members appreciate the importance 

of the Wascana Centre, not only to the residents of Regina but 

to all the people of the province. Thanks to the continued 

support of the partners, we enjoy the beautiful setting for the 

many facilities that benefit the people of this province. 

 

Within Wascana’s boundaries we find the Royal Saskatchewan 

Museum, the Science Centre, the Saskatchewan Centre, the 

Diefenbaker Homestead, the University of Regina, several 

government offices, and of course, the legislative buildings. A 

rich variety of uses indeed. 

 

Furthermore, the Wascana Centre is a great attraction for 

naturalists and environmentalists, and a focal point for 

thousands of citizens, young and old, coming in winter and 

summer alike, to enjoy the park and its recreational facilities. 

 

Wascana is unique among Canadian capitals and we should all 

be very proud of it. We should resolve to maintain its integrity 

and plan for its enjoyment by future generations, and this is 

achieved through the partnership of the participating parties — 

the province, the city, and the university. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this Bill. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 26 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 51 — The Arts 

Board Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife 

Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 21  The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  We’ll start by having the minister introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 

Madeleine Robertson from the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understand that 

. . . Mr. Minister, first of all, welcome to your official. I 

understand that the purpose is to set up a registry system, and I 

wonder if you would be good enough to talk for a minute about 

the registry system. Who will operate it? Will it link into some 

of the other registry systems presently in operation in this 

province? And how will it be financed? And what is the basic 

purpose for a registry system on condominiums? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Basically this registry we plan to run  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

through the corporations branch. And it’s primarily a request 

from the consumer protection, consumers’ association groups, 

who want to have access on a fairly quick basis to who the 

boards of directors are of the condominium corporations. Plan 

for financing would be simply a cost recovery of the 

information. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I wonder if the minister would be good enough 

to talk a bit more about the financing of it and the cost recovery. 

The last time Justice estimates were up, the minister shared with 

the House that the Land Titles Office collects double the fees 

required to run our land titles system and the rest is just thrown 

into general revenue. And the same applies for the personal 

property registry, that again it collects double the fees necessary 

to operate and the rest of the money goes into general revenue. 

So these are actually huge hidden taxes, and I’m wondering if 

condominiums will also become another large hidden tax. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I guess we’re starting off on some of 

these great big schemes and devious ideas that seem to be 

generated once we start questioning. Practically, what we’re 

talking about here is a simple business names registration 

adjunct to the corporate registry. It’s a very simple thing, and 

we don’t intend to have some huge fees, and practically, that’s 

the simple answer. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I don’t want to come across 

as peddling conspiracy theories, but I have to remind the 

minister that it was his word that land titles fees collect double 

what we need to run the land titles system, and personal 

property registry fees collect double what we need to run 

personal property registry. So I really would like to hear more 

from the minister as to what he intends to do to make sure the 

condominium fees don’t also result in a large hidden tax. 

Because as I say, this is not a conspiracy theory on my part. I 

mean the minister has told us that the registries he presently 

operates are in fact large hidden taxes. And that’s his words, not 

mine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would appreciate if this member would 

stop his daily practice of putting words into other members. It’s 

very difficult to operate in this forum, where we try to share 

information and respond to the concerns of the public, when 

you have one person who continually puts words into other 

people’s mouths and then uses them in ways that are 

inappropriate. 

 

What we’re doing here, very simply, is responding to a major 

concern in the public. We don’t come forward with this kind of 

legislation from the Department of Justice without consultation 

with many groups. 

 

One of the concerns that was consistent across the board of 

condominium owners, of businesses that dealt with 

condominiums, of the contractors and the developers who built 

condominiums, one of the issues was always, well who’s on the 

board; how can we get the information about who’s on the 

board; how can we contact these people? 

 

We’re doing a very simple thing. It’s going to cost a fee but it’ll  

be a very nominal fee. And I guess what I would reiterate for 

the member, the fees are not taxes. They’re simply a way of 

financing the access to information for those people who are 

interested. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well I certainly wholeheartedly agree with the 

minister that that’s the way fees are supposed to work. But I’m 

not putting words in anyone’s mouths when I say the 

information this House receives is that land titles fees collect 

double what we need for land titles. Personal property fees 

collect double what we need for personal property. 

 

Will the minister commit to returning these fees to run the cost 

of the service? And if that’s the purpose of the condominium 

Act and the new registry, I completely agree. But will the 

minister then give a commitment that fees for service will 

remain just that — fees for service — and will not build up a 

large surplus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well practically, I think the member 

knows my response on those other issues. They relate to the 

Torrens system which we have in Saskatchewan and how we 

finance that. And there are some questions. But as we move into 

our next program we’ll be looking at fees as it relates to that 

whole area. 

 

But I think practically, what I would say is, as it relates to this 

Act, we’re going to have a fee that reflects the nominal nature 

of some of the information that’s required, and that’s it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Now I understand, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the 

requirement for developers to obtain bonds is being moved out 

of the statute and will become a matter of regulation. I’m 

wondering if the minister would discuss that, and if I’m correct 

on that, as to what the reason for that change is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well that’s once again not accurate. The 

requirement for the bond will be in the Act but the details of 

how that requirement is to be met will be set out in the 

regulations to reflect the fact that the banking industry, the bond 

industry, will change. And there may be some things that we 

need to do that would not then require us to go back into the 

Act. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I understand that the 

Act is also to strengthen dealing with condominium units where 

common expense funds are not paid. 

 

I’m wanting to ask the minister if this is in fact a problem; has 

this been an issue? And what new steps are proposed and why 

this is considered to be required? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think it’s been a major problem, 

but it has been a problem a couple of times. And so when 

during the consultation this arose and there was a simple 

solution, we put it in the Act. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Will the minister advise if this will be a paper 

registry system or a paper-free registration system? Is this 

basically . . . it’s a computer registration we’re talking about, or 

will it be a paper registry system? 

  



1460  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think practically, it will have both 

aspects, but for people who have access to the corporate registry 

system, they would be able to access it quite easily 

electronically. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Does the minister have an indication yet as to 

what effect, if any, that reassessment has had on the popularity 

of condominiums in this province? We hear projections that 

condominium living is the type of living of the future. Is the 

province expecting a large expansion in condominium living, 

and is that going to be affected by reassessment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I have not heard anything about that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, just before I do that I’d like to thank 

Madeleine Robertson and others in the Department of Justice 

for their extensive work on the amendments to this Act which 

have taken place over the last few years; and with that, thank 

you. 

 

I’d like to move that we report this Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  As committee members start deliberations on 

Bill No. 30, we’ll start by having the minister introduce his new 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 

afternoon, Darcy McGovern, legislative services; and Kathy 

Hillman-Weir, who is the Master of Titles. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just wish to 

say that we have reviewed the points of this Bill and we are 

satisfied that these amendments are sensible and necessary, and 

we have no problem with any of the contents therein and no 

questions. So I won’t have any questions for the minister and 

his officials today, but I would like to thank them for their 

attendance. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Just before I make that motion, I’d like to 

thank the officials who’ve been with me, and also the officials 

and the people throughout the legal community in 

Saskatchewan who assisted us in dealing with the matter of the 

personal property registry last fall when the initial problem 

arose with the computer program at the registry. So with that,  

thank you. I would move that we report this Bill without 

amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

 

The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his new set of 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 

afternoon Susan Amrud, who’s the director of legislative 

services, and Barb Hookenson, who is the executive director of 

court services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again I don’t have a 

lot of problem with this Bill; I see most of the changes as being 

necessary updates. But I do have a couple of questions for the 

minister. 

 

First of all I note that the list of persons who cannot act as 

justice of the peace has been expanded now to include 

municipal councillors. And it seems to me that in some of our 

smaller communities, you know, the leadership of those villages 

is very likely already serving in the capacity of mayor or 

councillor. And I’m just not sure why we would want to 

exclude those persons from serving in this capacity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s a simple answer there. The people 

who sit on local councils do have the power to make laws 

which then may be the subject of an application or hearing 

before a justice of the peace; so it’s a conflict of interest. 

 

And we practically have had situations where people who are 

justices of the peace that get elected to a local council, that we 

ask them to resign. And in fact if people want to be a justice of 

the peace and they are an elected member now, we say no, they 

shouldn’t. But it’s basically a conflict of interest. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Can the minister tell me how many justices of 

the peace we have presently who live on first nations reserves, 

and if that is part of the commitment of the department to 

having a justice of the peace on a first nations reserves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not able to answer the question with a 

specific number but we do have first nations justices of the 

peace and I think some of them would live on first nations land. 

Some live within communities where they serve as JPs (justice 

of the peace). But if you wish, I could get that number for you 

and provide it later. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes. I won’t delay the Bill for that purpose but 

I’d appreciate receiving that information later, Mr. Minister. 

 

And could you give us an indication generally of the number of 

justices of the peace then in the province serving, and those 

who are conducting hearings and those who are not. 

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, I’ll give you these numbers if 

you’ve got your pencil handy there. There are 189 regular 

presiding justices of the peace. There are 13 victims of domestic 

violence justices of the peace; there are 4 traffic court justices 

of the peace, which totals 206 who would be in the presiding 

category of justices of the peace. As well there are 41 court 

officials who are justices of the peace. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — One of the issues addressed in this legislation 

is, of course, discipline. And so I have to ask the minister 

whether this has in fact been a problem for his department or is 

this simply addressed in the legislation out of an abundance of 

caution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that the simple answer to that 

is, in consultation with the chief judge of the Provincial Court, 

who has a role in supervision in the whole area of justices of the 

peace, this was something that he identified that maybe needed 

some further clarity in the process. And when he raised the 

question and we looked at it we agreed that we could maybe do 

some things in a more straightforward manner and providing 

some further checks and balances for everybody. And so we 

agreed to go ahead with that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m content. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I would propose a House 

amendment. I would like to move that we: 

 

Add the following Clause after Clause 9 of the printed Bill: 

 

 “S.S. 1988-89, c.T-19.1, section 5 amended 

  10(1) The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 

1988 is amended in the manner set forth in this section. 

 

  (2) Subsection 5(3) is amended by striking out 

‘Section 12’ and substituting ‘Sections 12.1 to 12.9’. 

 

  (3) Subsection 5(4) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

   ‘(4) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3): 

 

    (a) the actions of a traffic justice may be reviewed 

pursuant to sections 12.1 to 12.9 of The Justices 

of the Peace Act, 1988 in accordance with those 

sections; and 

 

    (b) the traffic justice may be removed from office 

in accordance with sections 12.1 to 12.9 of The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988’ ”. 

 

I so move. And these are consequential amendments, obviously, 

to this Act. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, as a result of the last amendment, I 

propose another amendment to the long title of the printed Bill. 

And I move that we: 

 

 Amend the Long Title of the printed Bill by adding “and to 

make consequential amendments to another Act” after 

“The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988”. 

 

I also do that in the French version. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  Now I invite the minister to move that the 

committee report the Bill with amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, just before I do that, I’d like to thank 

my officials for their assistance. And I therefore move that we 

report this Bill with amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  We’ll start by . . . I’ll invite the minister to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is 

Lawrence Krahn, who is the executive director of the medical 

services and health registration branch of the Department of 

Health; and behind Mr. Krahn is Ms. Lauren Donnelly, who is 

with the acute and emergency service branch of the Department 

of Health. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the officials for 

all their assistance today. I really don’t know how I could have 

moved this Bill through third reading without their assistance. 

And I do now move that we report this Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now  

  



1462  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I move that the amendments be now read 

the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that Bill No. 22 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 7  The Cancer Foundation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1515) 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have with us 

this afternoon in the Speaker’s gallery, two guests from Regina, 

Mr. Allan Appleby and his daughter, Lindsey. Members will 

know Allan as the representative of the World Wildlife Fund 

here in Saskatchewan, and that we appreciate the efforts that 

he’s doing in protecting our natural environment here in the 

province. And we also want to wish Lindsey best wishes on her 

studies as a third-year geography student at the University of 

Regina. 

 

I’d ask all members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have  

today with me Harvey Fjeld, who is the vice-president of 

irrigation and agricultural services. As members will know, the 

Water Corporation is headquartered in Moose Jaw. And the 

estimates are a little earlier than we had expected, so Mr. Fjeld 

and I will attempt to ask all of the questions as our officials are 

in transit from Moose Jaw. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  And welcome, Mr. Minister, and to your 

officials. And I’m sure that we won’t be so hard on you that 

you’ll feel like you can’t do it. 

 

I had a number of calls lately about the water . . . Buffalo 

Pound, and I’m wondering if you can give me an idea of the 

regulations and any agreements that were made on the levels 

that are required and when the opening should be of the gates at 

that place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena, the levels on large water 

bodies in the province, whether it be Buffalo Pound or other 

water bodies, are generally in consultation with cabin owners 

and farmers, people who are affected by run-off conditions and 

spring conditions. 

 

There are operating levels that are established. There are control 

mechanisms on Buffalo Pound that will, over the course of 

good water management this spring, reduce the water levels to 

the operating level which is consistent with what it was in other 

years. In terms of the timing, I think that it’s fair to say the 

corporation spends a lot of time with farmers who live 

downstream, people who may be in the valley system below, 

and work with them to determine the amount of run-off and 

how long it would take to bring that down to normal operating 

level. 

 

What I can do is undertake to get for you the plan and how it 

will impact on users on the lake and downstream as well. I can 

get that for you, and we’ll send that across in writing if you 

would like. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand from 

previous dealings with Sask Water that when there’s an 

agreement the operating levels are probably designated not so 

much at a certain date as at certain times. And I’m just 

wondering, there’s some concern that until the Moose Jaw 

creek subsides that perhaps the gates at Buffalo Pound should 

be closed. And I’m wondering if there’s any consideration 

given to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I have just been joined by 

Wayne Phillips, who is the vice-president of finance and 

corporate services for the corporation. And he was able to help 

me with this question. 

 

I’m told that every year the run-off conditions are somewhat 

different than they are at others. And as you will know, there 

was a great deal of water in terms of the inflow and the amount 

of water in that area this spring. And the impact certainly on the 

Qu’Appelle system has been monitored based on the inflow, on  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

how much is being retained in Buffalo Pound itself, and then 

the impact as it would relate to the Qu’Appelle chain and the 

Qu’Appelle system and people living down river. 

 

And as I said a little earlier today, what they’re attempting to do 

is allow as much flow as they can, based on the inflow and 

based on the levels, and basically trying to manage the 

downstream flow so as not to impact adversely on owners of 

land in that particular area. 

 

And so what I can and will undertake to do is to get for you sort 

of a targeted date in terms of where they expect to be, based on 

what they know of the inflow, and then again the impact on the 

users downstream. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your 

other official. I understand that the valley has been backed up 

west of Lumsden to north of Highway No. 2 now for over six 

weeks. And I’m wondering . . . the farmers in that area of 

course, are very concerned about when and if they’ll ever get 

onto the land around there. I’m wondering if the structure . . . if 

the arrangement for opening the gates has been changed to 

allow the farmers to proceed with any plans at this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, as you will know, last year was 

particularly a wet year as well, and Last Mountain Lake is one 

of the water bodies that’s impacted downstream from Buffalo 

Pound. Last year it was filled and we really did have some 

difficulties with respect to cabin owners and damage from wind 

and ice packing up on the shores. So it became a difficult 

problem. 

 

The water level in Last Mountain is higher than we had 

anticipated because we didn’t get the amount of evaporation 

that we would I guess, have assumed to be in a normal year. 

That didn’t happen. So what we’re trying to do is really balance 

the outflow from Buffalo Pound to Last Mountain, keeping in 

mind the landowners, the farmers, who really do want to get on 

their land. 

 

So it’s trying to . . . the difficulty always is trying to balance the 

needs of cottage owners and home-owners around the shore 

edge of lakes with those who have requirements with respect to 

agricultural needs and who want to get on and seed their land. 

 

So really it’s just a matter of on a day-to-day basis trying to 

manage the water, based on new moisture that might come into 

play, based on the run-off and the speed of the run-off; but to 

sort of balance the needs of the cottage owners, the landowners, 

and people who live . . . and are impacted by the flow of that 

water. So it really is a balancing act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does the minister and his officials feel that the 

structures and more specifically the bridge in that area is 

adequate? Or is this run-off one in twenty-five, or one in a 

hundred, where you feel that it’s not going to happen often 

enough to have to worry about changing them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, certainly this year is not 

considered to be a major flood year in that particular area. They  

are above average, the water levels. And as they record these 

circumstances on an annual basis, I am told that this would be 

above a one in ten average year. So maybe every decade you 

might see this kind of water level. 

 

With respect to infrastructure, much of the infrastructure in the 

Qu’Appelle chain was built many, many years ago. Some of 

them, as you will maybe recall reading history or if you are a 

Saskatchewan history buff, you will know that a lot of this was 

make-work projects during the 1930s, funded by the federal 

government. So much of the infrastructure in the Qu’Appelle 

chain is old but certainly there have been some improvements 

over the years. 

 

The fact that infrastructure and management of infrastructure — 

that nature — is a very costly initiative. Certainly we do what 

we can to ensure that we have as much control and as much 

management over water flow through infrastructure as we can. I 

think it’s fair to say that there are always areas where we would 

like to see improvements. 

 

I look at Manitoba, and I think all of us certainly have a lot of 

sympathy with people in southern Manitoba who are 

experiencing this year a very, very unique situation. Some of 

the infrastructure was put in place based on the history of 

perhaps the last 25 years, 30 years. This year it certainly wasn’t 

adequate. I guess in hindsight they might have developed a 

different kind of infrastructure. But I think what we try to do is, 

based on sort of an average flow and maybe even a little bit 

above average, determine what is required for water 

management. 

 

In some circumstances mother or father nature will determine 

and make their own decisions for us. So we’re not always able 

to anticipate the kinds of circumstances that nature shares with 

us. I think we’ve been, frankly, very fortunate this year in 

Saskatchewan, in that the amount of moisture that we had, the 

weather really did cooperate with us in terms of a sort of a 

staged progression of run-off and of melting of our snow. So we 

were fortunate here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I guess I would just close my remarks by saying that the 

infrastructure, over a period of years really has served the 

people well — other than very exceptional years — has served 

us very well. When you’re doing business or when you’re living 

in an area like the Qu’Appelle — it’s susceptible to unusual 

circumstances — and difficulties do arise when you’re living or 

when you’re doing business in an area that’s in a flood plane or 

that’s in a river valley. 

 

We’ve attempted, as other administrations have, to put in place 

for average and a bit above average circumstances, that kind of 

infrastructure. But in terms of Buffalo Pound, Last Mountain, at 

this point we’re trying to work with the local people, the people 

in that area, to ensure that the run-off doesn’t impact any more 

folks than has to. And certainly we’re cognizant of the fact that 

farmers are anxious to get on their land and we’ll work certainly 

with them to assist in whatever way we can. 

 

(1530) 

 

  



1464  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a question on 

Fishing Lake. Now I know that we’re very fortunate in 

Saskatchewan because we’re not Manitoba this year, but there 

are a number of cattle owners and landowners around Fishing 

Lake who don’t feel too fortunate. 

 

I know that there’s been ongoing discussions with Sask Water 

and the landowners in that area to determine if we can alleviate 

some of the flooding problems that they’re having. I’m 

wondering if you can just give me an update of what’s 

happening and any proposal that Sask Water may be working 

on to solve their major flooding problems there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Fishing Lake has been a 

particularly difficult problem in that it’s a land-locked lake. The 

natural water level . . . There really are no drainage, additional 

drainage capacity in that area. 

 

A number of cabin owners have built below, frankly, what was 

recommended to them many years ago. The level that was 

indicated could be a difficulty, and they really have experienced 

some problems. 

 

There was a group formed to look at some solutions and to 

bring a decision in terms of what they might do as a solution to 

the Water Corporation. I’m told that a decision was to be 

expected sometime in the end of May. At this point, and I am 

told by the officials, we haven’t had any kind of a decision in 

terms of their willingness to participate in infrastructure. 

 

When they do bring to us a decision, we’ll certainly work with 

them. And if it’s a decision to proceed with some kind of water 

management, some kind of an outflow, certainly we’ll work 

with them. 

 

It’s a very major chore in that if there’s going to be a control 

structure put in place on that lake, there are going to be people 

who live downstream from Fishing Lake who are going to be 

impacted. There will have to be discussions, consultation, 

because there will be some impact if an infrastructure piece is 

put in place. 

 

But I think what we will do as the normal course of action, if 

they bring to us a recommendation, we’ll have a look at this. 

We’ll see if we can assist them in terms of developing a plan for 

infrastructure, keeping in mind that there has been in that area, 

and there is being undertaken right now, a major study by the 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Canadian governments in terms 

of the Assiniboine basin and the management of that particular 

area of our province. 

 

So we would want to look at their proposal. We’ll work with 

them to see if we can effect some kind of a long-term solution. 

It’s an awful lot of money, in terms of whatever solution would 

be chosen there. So hopefully, we can find something that can 

work for them. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I understand you’re saying that 

you’re waiting for the local group of people there to bring 

forward a proposal to you? I’m wondering if there has been any 

survey or any work being done by Sask Water to indicate if  

there is a solution to give to the landowners from Sask Water. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told over a period of time there 

have been a number of conceptual studies done, and part of that 

work has been done by government agencies. It would appear 

that a solution to that is in the neighbourhood of a million 

dollars plus. I’m not sure if inflation is factored in from when 

the last numbers were done. But certainly it is an awful lot of 

money. 

 

And then as I’ve indicated previously, there would need to be a 

lot of work and consultation done with people living 

downstream. But as yet we don’t know what their decision is 

going to be, but we’ll certainly apply the technical expertise that 

we have internal to the corporation with respect to engineering 

and those kinds of developments if in fact they choose to take 

that route. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I understand that at one time there was a 

possibility of working with Ducks Unlimited in some area to 

determine if there could be monies, shared costing for some 

project there. I also understand that about 28 farmers that are 

landowners that are involved in works in that area, and out of 

that, well over nine-tenths of them are interested in going 

ahead. 

 

I’m just wondering if there’s . . . I guess I’ll be interested to 

hear when you have heard back from a group or if you have a 

proposal that could be offered to these landowners because it’s 

the third year in a row that there is a problem at Fishing Lake. 

And I guess I’ll just end by asking if you’ve been talking to 

Ducks Unlimited at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As is the course in a lot of the 

preliminary discussions, local communities and local people 

will involve Ducks Unlimited in an attempt to try and develop a 

multi-purpose use, and if in fact it’s possible to have Ducks 

Unlimited finance some kind of a wetlands project in that area. 

 

I’m sure that the people in that district will as a matter of 

course, try and involve Ducks Unlimited, and PAWBED 

(Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 

Development) as well. There are a number of different 

organizations that have been involved in drainage and in water 

management. And all of these are options — Ducks Unlimited, 

PAWBED. Certainly the Water Corporation will work with 

them if the decision to proceed with some initiative is, you 

know, requested of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, just a few questions to the 

minister. It certainly would be inappropriate, after his officials 

drove so hard to get here on time, to not at least raise a few 

concerns with them. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, we asked the question — I don’t know, 

maybe it was a week ago —about the release of water out of the 

Alameda dam. I think at that time you stood up and you said, 

well it’s due to an agreement with the Tetzlaff brothers. The 

fact is I think . . . or the information we had was, the indications 

were that there was actually more going out than was coming 

in. 

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

And in view of the concerns, certainly downstream . . . but it 

would seem to me, Mr. Minister, when we look at . . . if I 

remember that project right, the Alameda dam was certainly put 

in place to allow for water or movement in . . . across 

international boundaries rather than holding it all, through 

international agreements. 

 

But a concern I have, Mr. Minister, is that we’d be releasing it 

now rather than possibly storing some of that water and 

releasing it at later date when there might be a call and then 

you’re forced to maybe release more than what would’ve been 

considered the natural flow across the international boundary, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could respond to that, 

and why there is a release taking place at this time? Why it is 

even a larger release than has been coming into the Alameda 

project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can say to the member opposite 

that the total inflow had been stored in the Alameda reservoir. 

It’s now being brought back to an elevation of 552 metres, 

which is the agreed level as per the Tetzlaff agreement. 

 

I have to say to the member, when there is a request for water as 

per the international agreement, we are required under that 

agreement to supply the water to North Dakota and that area of 

the northern United States. 

 

I want to say as well that we had, as a government when we 

were newly elected, some very difficult negotiations with the 

Tetzlaffs, as the member will know, in that we were wanting to 

complete construction of that project. There was legal 

proceedings that took place that disallowed us from doing that 

at that time. We entered into negotiations; found a compromise 

with respect to the Tetzlaff brothers. We were able to reach an 

agreement — a five-year agreement — that allowed for a level 

of 552 metres. 

 

That agreement is expiring very shortly. We will be in your 

community and others in that area — people who are interested 

in using that facility for recreational purposes — determining 

with them what an appropriate level would be for recreation, for 

irrigation, and a level that we will attempt to maintain over the 

long haul. 

 

So really that’s the background. That’s how the water flow has 

been managed this spring. And that’s as for all . . . both the 

agreements with the Tetzlaffs, but as well with the international 

apportionment agreement that was signed some time ago as 

well. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if the 

international agreement would call for a release just now. You 

mentioned about lowering the water level. I can appreciate that. 

 

It would seem to me, based on the way we experience water 

flow in the spring and the fact that it flows in and then it 

disperses, in many cases areas that it floods, even if it stays on 

for a while longer than even just the time period we’re in right 

now, creates for those of us who are in the farming sector . . .  

who recognize if water sits on a plain for even another period of 

two to three weeks, the hay harvest is certainly much more 

enhanced by the presence of that water. 

 

And I can appreciate the difficulty you had with the Tetzlaffs, 

as it wouldn’t surprise me if some of your members sitting here, 

prior to their involvement in politics, quite opposed to the dams 

in the first place, would not have necessarily opposed the 

Tetzlaff brothers and their opposition to the dams. 

 

And after just going through the debate on the Condie hydro 

project, it maybe would have been best at that time to have 

expropriated that property. Because I think at the end of day 

we’re all going to come to a consensus, and I think your 

government has also recognized the fact that water is an 

important part in our province and that the two dams down . . . 

the Alameda and Rafferty are playing an important role, even 

today, in that area of the province. 

 

You indicated, Mr. Minister, that there’s about a year left on 

that agreement with the Tetzlaffs. When the agreement’s over, 

what level of water then will the dam be allowed to hold? 

 

And I guess if I could have offered one thing, I think for the 

residents of the Moose Mountain, White Bear area, if they 

would have been able to pump some of that flow from the 

Alameda creek up into the two lakes there, they would have 

appreciated that rather than releasing it to go south. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, how long does this agreement go? And then 

you indicated you’d been into discussions, but what do you 

perceive as being the appropriate level for the level of water in 

the Alameda project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials with 

respect to the apportionment agreement, that would have been 

an agreement, first of all, that was signed by the Government of 

Canada and the Government of the United States. That was 

done certainly at a time when the provincial government of the 

day, the former administration, would have been a signatory to 

that, thereby indicating what the apportionment is. 

 

When that request comes, which is how the water was released, 

the timing was a request of North Dakota as well, and the body 

that studies that. That is part of the agreement that was signed 

prior to 1991. 

 

The reason for the request was that they wanted water with 

respect to Lake Darling. And so that’s basically why the water 

was released. The amount was based on their request and that’s 

sort of how it proceeded. 

 

With respect to a level, I don’t think it . . . I think it’s fair to say 

that we would offer certainly, the Water Corporation would 

offer technical expertise and advice if we were asked. I think 

that it’ll be determined based on consultation with people who 

live in that area, who know the area, who know the riverbanks 

or certainly the banks of that water body, and who have an 

understanding of their requirements with respect to irrigation 

and respect to recreational use. 

 

  



1466  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

I mean the lake is not there to serve the Water Corporation; the 

lake is there to serve the people of Saskatchewan and the people 

who will come to Saskatchewan when that lake is developed to 

a point where it can attract tourism. 

 

As well, people who are irrigating will know what’s best for 

their needs, and the discussions that we will be involved in over 

the course of the coming months will, I certainly hope, reflect 

the needs and the requirements of the people in that area. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I can 

appreciate North Dakota calling for the water right now on the 

basis of the fact that water’s been moving through the system. 

 

So it basically has the system saturated. You’re not going to 

lose a lot by releasing it now. So that certainly is . . . if they 

want to increase their levels in Lake Darling, now’s the time to 

call for it rather than July when part of the system bed has dried 

up and it’s going to take a tremendous amount to create an 

absorbent material again so that the water indeed flows freely. 

 

The other question I have, Mr. Minister, when this agreement 

with the Tetzlaffs is over and you do this consultation process, 

if a level . . . let’s say — and I’m just going to throw a 

hypothetical example out — if a level of 2 metres above or 6 

metres above the current level is agreed to, that would certainly 

indicate that there’ll be some water backing up on land the 

Tetzlaffs own. 

 

Has the department in their current agreement come to an 

understanding of the amount that they would currently pay for 

the Tetzlaffs over land that would be flooded, or is that 

something that you will have to negotiate down the road when 

you determine what the level of Alameda will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, the agreement has I guess, 

already been struck with respect to the acquisition of the 

Tetzlaff’s land, and they have received in the agreement the 

same amount that everyone else in that area has agreed to. 

 

The other component of this is that the Tetzlaffs have also 

agreed that they will abide by whatever level is determined 

through the process that we’re going to be embarking upon next 

year in 1998. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure residents of 

that area are going . . . are looking forward to that day. I know 

it’s been an area of contention for quite a period of time. 

 

Mr. Minister, another area of concern in my area certainly, the 

Kenosee Lake and White Bear Lake, lakes, as a result of the 

fact just the way they’re situated and the level of water. And 

I’m wondering if Sask Water is involved or even monitored or 

contacted regarding water levels and whether there is any input 

as to what can be done to address those levels. 

 

One of the things that was done a number of years ago was 

certainly when we had some dry weather, working together 

with the Department of Environment to clear out channels to  

make sure that there was a release of water from back in the 

park to allow it to get to the main lake. And I’m wondering 

whether or not there will be an anticipated flow into the lake 

this year; whether there would be an increase. What are some of 

the issues that have been brought to your attention as a result of 

the low water levels? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As the member will know, and 

having had my officials take me on a tour of your area and 

Kenosee Lake last year, I had the opportunity to experience 

some of the topography in getting an understanding of the 

difficulties that . . . Kenosee Lake sits a little higher than one 

might think, and I guess the only way naturally to achieve an 

incremental level of water in there is through run-off, spring 

run-off. 

 

That hasn’t been the case in the past while. So I guess over a 

period of time there has been some look at perhaps ways to 

import water into it. 

 

As well, there’s been restrictions put on irrigation and the 

consumption that comes from the lake over a period of time. 

The water levels are still low, but certainly if there is some 

interest in ways to increase the level, we’d be willing to look at 

that. 

 

Just while I’m on my feet — and I certainly don’t . . . and I’m 

not doing this in any argumentative way at all — but there was 

some discussion earlier on with respect . . . in-house, with 

respect to the management of the Alameda, the 

Rafferty-Alameda watershed. There was what I determined to 

be some inaccurate reports in some of our provincial 

newspapers. 

 

So subsequent to that I’ve written a letter to the editor of the 

Leader-Post. As well I’ve forwarded a copy of the office of 

state engineers from the water appropriation division of the 

North Dakota state in which they indicate the reason that they 

requested the water. And so I would like to . . . I’ll pass these on 

to the member because I think it would be important 

information for him. 

 

We were quite concerned, given the conditions, the water 

conditions in the Red River Valley in Manitoba, that there 

might be some undue concern in terms of our water 

management and that we were inappropriately acting. And I just 

want to put on the record the process that had been taking place, 

just to clarify the fact that we had done due diligence with 

respect to water management and done it in cooperation with 

both the North Dakota state and the Manitoba government and 

the committee from all three of those areas that manage that 

particular flow. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Minister, another question I want to direct to you is 

regarding release down through the Qu’Appelle chain. Last fall 

there was . . . a release was started because of the anticipation of 

a fair bit of water moving through the system — a release that 

created some problems for individuals who enjoyed fishing on 

the water. And it went on for a substantial period of time. 

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1467 

And I guess the question that was asked was, if there was . . . if 

it was perceived that the water levels were high and that a 

release was needed well before the spring run-off started, the 

question was asked why the release wasn’t begun earlier when 

the lakes were still open. And maybe that’s something that your 

department could give consideration to. 

 

I know that individuals who went out fishing would find that 

they get out to the lake and all of a sudden there was a foot or 

two of water on it again, and then there’d be another level of 

ice. And I’m wondering how that is managed and if that’s 

something that can be given consideration in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I’ve found very interesting the 

time that I’ve spent as the chairman of the Water Corporation 

board — the water management and the reasons things are 

done. And I guess for every action there is a reaction. And 

sometimes they don’t make sense to me so I have to inquire of 

the officials as to why some of these things are happening. 

 

With respect to this circumstance, there was some consideration 

that the oxygen level in these lakes were very, very low. And 

there was some concern that there would be a great deal of fish 

kill. So some of the water was released in order to attempt to 

get some oxygen into the lakes and into the water. 

 

I noted that there has been some fairly significant fish kill this 

winter, and it’s always certainly something that we attempt to 

avoid. Because there are so many folks that use our lakes and 

use fishing as their area of recreation. And so certainly we 

attempt to work with SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management) and to work with the departments that 

monitor the water quality and monitor the quality of the habitat 

for the fish. 

 

And so we, based on input from them and to try and anticipate 

as well run-off, try and manage that. It’s certainly not an 

exacting science, I find, the management and control of water. 

You never know how fast the run-off is going to take place; you 

never know how fast the inflow is going to take place. It’s all 

determined on weather. You never know if there’s going to be a 

major rain in the spring. You never know if there’s going to be 

a wind that’s going to push ice blocks against cottages. 

 

But one of the things that I guess we are fortunate in, that the 

monitoring of the quality of habitat for our fish has been 

developed over the years to the point where the Water 

Corporation can work very cooperatively with SERM to ensure 

that we have a healthy fish habitat and assist where we can in 

that regard. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

guess the question that would arise out of that in the way the 

releases came and the fact that there were almost three levels of 

ice that actually developed as a result of the fact that there was a 

good cover and then water flow . . . Now whether you had the 

full advantage of replacing that oxygen or whether it just 

flowed through because there was a fair cover of ice on the 

lakes already, is a question that certainly I’m sure your officials 

are currently working on in regard to what took place last year. 

 

It would seem to me that the Qu’Appelle chain as well, the big 

run-off doesn’t necessarily come with the spring. There’s a fair 

bit of run-off or water released through the system as the water 

from the west finally starts to hit our system and hit our 

province, maybe more so the Saskatchewan River basin. But I 

think it’s something that certainly we wanted to raise, just to 

bring to your attention, and I appreciate those comments. 

 

The other day I think we did mention a little bit about irrigation 

and I’m wondering, is there increased activity and interest in 

water irrigation or land irrigation, first of all off of Lake 

Diefenbaker, and any other projects throughout the province, 

Mr. Minister? Maybe you could give us an idea of what your 

department is doing and what kind of requests are coming in in 

relationship to what would have taken place in ’95 and last year 

and then this year. Are we seeing a progressive increase in the 

interest of the farming community or individuals with small 

market gardens looking at irrigating parcels of land and making 

it more productive and value added to our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I think it’s fair to say that . . . 

let me come at this from two areas, I guess. Firstly, the amount 

of money that the government has invested over the period of 

years in developing an irrigation infrastructure around the 

Riverhurst, Lucky Lake areas, Lake Diefenbaker, some south of 

that, has I think, really started to evolve in the last short while. 

 

We’ve been working with irrigators to attempt to assist them, to 

facilitate diversification and value added production, which is 

really something I can say that we haven’t been over the past 

very successful in doing. We’ve put an infrastructure in place, 

we’ve spent something in the neighbourhood of $200 million. 

There have been some very good successes and some very 

positive successes in terms of that overall infrastructure. But we 

certainly need to work together to do more to create more value 

added. 

 

The interest in terms of smaller operators, those that may want 

to irrigate, you know, a 10, 5 acre patch continues to remain. 

And I think, as the agriculture community in our province has 

come to understand, in order to survive there has to be a change 

in the way they’re doing business. The days of growing wheat 

on irrigated land, I think are . . . there was a lot of reality 

brought to bear when we were looking at $2 a bushel wheat. 

And certainly the attempt to enhance the incomes for some of 

the people involved in agriculture, irrigation agriculture, is 

something that we will continue to strive for. 

 

So I’m told that first nations in the Qu’Appelle Valley, they’re 

looking in the Qu’Appelle Valley, are interested in expanding 

irrigation. The Alameda area, they’re looking at somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of 8,000 acres. 

 

So quite clearly there is interest. We’re going to continue to 

work with the agriculture community and people interested in 

expanding their ability to make a diversified living on some 

irrigated land. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you’ll agree 

that, well we tend to live in what a lot of people would consider 

— I still consider it — a picturesque and a beautiful province.  

  



1468  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

When it comes to agriculture we can have some real highs and 

we can have some real lows. And water in this province is 

something that is a very precious resource. And the fact that 

more people are expressing an interest indicates that people are 

basically, if you will, looking at ways of protecting themselves 

against that next cycle of dry period. And at least trying to 

guarantee that they’ve got a way of providing for the productive 

factor, which means income, not only to their individual 

resources, but to their communities. 

 

So I think I’d certainly be reticent if I didn’t compliment your 

department and your officials for what they’re doing in 

promoting irrigation in this province, working together with 

people; and I know it’s not strictly wheat. 

 

Wheat, I don’t think, is a viable operation when it comes to 

irrigation. But there are a lot of crops, I think, that we’re 

growing in this province, even 10 years ago we didn’t even 

think of growing, and a lot of that is as a result of irrigation. 

And certainly the potato industry looks like it’s got an area to 

expand, and I think irrigation is an area . . . is one of the reasons 

that that expansion is taking place. So we just want to commend 

you for that. 

 

Mr. Minister, one final question here. Did your department 

receive our global questions? Some of the other departments, it 

seems to me, have not. I’m wondering if there’s a response 

ready for those global questions and if not, how soon can we 

anticipate receiving the response? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that the officials are 

working with my office now to prepare the answers to the 

package, and we will certainly undertake to get it to your office 

as quickly as they have it compiled. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s certainly assuring 

to know that some of the ministers are at least noticing what’s 

coming into their office because we’ve had some . . . some 

offices have indicated that they haven’t received it and we’ve 

had to go back through it again. That’s about three weeks ago. 

 

But I would like to thank you for your responses. To your 

officials, I thank you and wish you well as you deal with the 

issue of water in the province of Saskatchewan, and all the 

requests that come your way. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister, and that’s a nice jacket. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the members 

opposite are done their questioning. I would like to thank them 

very much for their questions. It’s part of what keeps the 

department on its toes and what keeps my office on its toes, is a 

very, I think, positive exercise that we go through here. 

 

I want to also thank my officials for their assistance, and I want 

to compliment the member from Moosomin on his tie. 

 

The Chair:  I appreciate the fluidity of the situation, 

Minister. 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Item 1 — authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

The Chair:  And on the same page, SaskEnergy advances, 

authorized by law, and there are none in this year. Are there any 

questions? 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair:  As we begin, I’ll invite the minister to introduce 

his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I’m very pleased to have with me 

this afternoon: Doug Moen, who’s the executive director of 

public law and community justice — he’s right here — Betty 

Ann Pottruff, who is the director of policy, planning and 

evaluation; and over here I have Richard Quinney, who is the 

executive director of the public prosecutions branch. And 

behind me I have Tammy Pryznyk, who’s the executive 

assistant to the deputy minister; and Elizabeth Smith, who is the 

director of the administrative services branch. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Welcome to the minister and your 

officials again this afternoon. Of course I have asked a number 

of questions before. I do have a few more and I understand my 

colleague from Moosomin has some questions. 

 

I would like to turn for a few minutes to the Martin report, and I 

note that there was a recommendation for some increased 

staffing arrangements there. And the minister’s response did 

refer to that indeed there would be some increased positions — 

I believe three — that would be done through reallocation. And 

I would ask the minister where these positions are and what he 

means by reallocation if there in fact have been cuts in other 

areas of the department in order to make way for these 

positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the plan is to have actually five 

positions, and three of them we haven’t decided finally where 

they’re going to be. There’s going to be some decisions later 

this week, early next week. Two of them will go to Prince 

Albert to be part of a pre-charge screening project. 

 

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

Mr. Hillson:  Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you. Would the 

minister indicate, are these in fact new positions or are these 

contract positions which are being transferred into permanent 

positions? Are we actually talking about new people on staff? 

Are we actually talking about a new staff complement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Hillson:  So, Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s no contract 

positions being cut to make way for these positions that the 

minister is discussing this afternoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The Martin report of course talked at some 

length about resolution of complaints against prosecutors and 

said that the minister and the minister’s office should not be 

involved in the resolution of complaints. And that was one part 

of the Martin report that, according to your response, you flatly 

rejected. 

 

And I’d ask you, are you and your office involved in complaints 

against prosecutors, and have you been involved in complaints 

against prosecutors and personally involving yourself in those 

complaints? Why did you reject the Martin report on the 

handling of complaints against line staff solicitors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the response that I’ve 

provided the day that we released the Martin report did set out 

the rationale. And I will try to explain that again briefly, and if 

you have some further questions I’d be happy to respond to 

them. 

 

But basically the point is that, as the Minister of Justice, I’m 

responsible to the legislature. And I think it was important that I 

would have notice of concerns or questions as one avenue for 

the public to make complaints if there were complaints about 

the prosecutors. And so for that reason the suggested system 

would have kept the minister out of the process so I wouldn’t 

have known about them and wouldn’t have been able to 

respond in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I think there’s a slight difference though in 

concept here, Mr. Minister, in that you’ve talked about being 

kept informed. That of course could be done by the regional 

Crowns sending a copy of complaints and their resolution of 

same to the minister’s office. 

 

The Martin report talks about your involvement in complaints 

against prosecutors, so I have to ask you, have you been 

personally involved in complaints against prosecutors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer is that there have 

been very few complaints against the prosecutors. And where 

this recommendation and why we’ve responded the way we 

have is that practically, the regional directors of the Crown 

prosecutors or the director for the province handle all of those 

complaints. But the recommendation was that I wouldn’t have 

any access to the correspondence after they’ve been resolved. 

So that what we are suggesting is that we maintain the present  

system that works quite well. 

 

And I can’t remember being involved in any complaints against 

prosecutors myself, other than to be advised about situations 

where people complain about the justice system in general. And 

then often it’s the prosecutor, it’s the judge, it’s the court clerk, 

it’s how the court-house itself was built, or where it is — all 

those things. And you end up with a broad, general complaint. 

 

Those kinds of complaints come, and I need to be able to 

respond in a general way. And I also then need to be able to 

respond about what kinds of questions they have about 

prosecutors. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I accept that answer. But you are saying then 

that you never personally involve yourself in the discipline of a 

staff solicitor . . . of a prosecutor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No. I mean that’s not the process. And so 

I’m not involved with that. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The Martin report seemed to identify this as a 

problem area. And your response is that you have to be 

informed. But I still think there’s a difference between your 

being informed and your having to be involved, which is what 

the Martin report was flagging. 

 

And it seems to me that, you know, you’ve oftentimes made the 

point, quite correctly, that the Minister of Justice does not 

involve himself in the decision to prosecute, and in how a 

particular case will be handled, and of course to say you’re 

absolutely right on that. But messages can go out to prosecutors 

by how they are treated. And so I still don’t see why if all 

you’re saying is you need information, why you can’t adopt the 

Martin report. You say there’s no problem; Martin says there is 

a problem. Why don’t you just simply adopt the report, and that 

doesn’t preclude you from being advised of what was done. 

 

It simply takes you out of being an active participant in how 

these matters are handled, and say you’ve already told us that 

you completely agree with the long-standing principle that you 

are not an active participant in the decision to prosecute or in 

the handling of particular individual cases. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well basically the response that I gave 

before, and the point that we’ve made is I want to retain the 

ability to actually see and hear about the things, and be 

informed — if I use your words. And that’s slightly different 

than what Mr. Martin recommended. 

 

Practically what happens is the matters are dealt with by the 

director of public prosecutions, and the highest that it actually 

would go is to the deputy minister. And that’s where it’s dealt 

with by the permanent head of the Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, another different but none 

the less related issue comes about in the case of the way we 

handle spousal assaults, particularly of course the issue of what 

do we do when the victim no longer wishes to cooperate with  

  



1470  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

the prosecution. I know it’s a difficult area, and you have a sort 

of “no exceptions allowed” policy except by head office, and 

the Martin report has recommended that there be more 

flexibility. 

 

And first of all . . . two questions on this. First is, when will you 

be able to respond to that? I know you haven’t yet; you say you 

have to look at it. 

 

But secondly, this is just one of the issues in which Martin 

seems to be saying we have experienced senior regional 

Crowns. I think they’re all 20-year people and more. And yet 

there seems to be a real move to take away all discretion from 

them. But these are competent, senior people — to say 20-year 

people — and yet sometimes even very mundane and minor 

day-to-day decisions are being taken away from these people. 

 

You know, if a 20-year prosecutor isn’t able to make some of 

these day-to-day decisions when he or she has the full 

knowledge at his fingertips — instead here she has to phone 

somebody in Regina and try and explain the situation in Regina 

to somebody who doesn’t have a feel for the case — it seems 

that it’s a very unnecessary bureaucratic step and it’s taking the 

decision away from people who are far better able to make that 

front-line decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the basic point in central 

directives . . . and as I’ve said before, we’re going to be 

reviewing all of the different ones. And, you know, there were 

some examples given. One was spousal abuse. There’s also 

impaired driving, there’s hockey violence, I think maybe 

obscenity. And part of the question there is that you want to 

have consistency across the province so that an incident in one 

place will be treated similar to an incident in another place. 

 

I agree with you wholeheartedly about the prosecutors that we 

have. And the continual dilemma in dealing with many 

experienced prosecutors is trying to provide the independence 

so they can do their job on a day-to-day basis, but also make 

sure that it has some connection with what’s happening overall. 

 

So I think that the identification of that area and looking at 

some of those policies is helpful for us because it forces us to 

look internally at how these things have been set up — some of 

the policies are 15, 16 years old — and so we’re going to do 

that. Also it allows for perhaps some further education of the 

public in some of these areas in that we can have some 

discussion with some of the groups that are affected and see 

whether there are some of the ways that we do things that 

should be changed to better meet the needs of the public. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank the minister for that answer, but I think 

though that we agree that one of the . . . as you say, one of the 

themes of the Martin report that comes up more than once is 

that we have centralized into head office decisions that the 

regional Crowns could easily make. 

 

And while the minister is quite right that there has to be some 

consistency of standards throughout the province, surely that 

can be done by general policy guidelines that still allow the 

flexibility which just has to occur from case to case. And if we  

had general policy guidelines within which the regional Crowns 

are expected to operate, then that gives us the consistency of 

framework. 

 

But of course what we have here is not general policy 

guidelines but orders that under no circumstances can very 

senior Crown solicitor 4s — many, many years experience in 

the field — can they make these decisions. And this didn’t 

make much sense to Martin; it doesn’t make much sense to me. 

And he seems to be suggesting that we’ve simply centralized 

into head office in a completely unnecessary and unjustifiable 

way that is also, he seems to suggest, demoralizing line 

prosecutors. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that it is in two areas where 

there are these very specific orders that have been made by 

previous ministers, and that’s, you know, we’re reviewing those 

directives and attempting to figure out how we should deal with 

that. 

 

I think one thing that is not emphasized in your questions is the 

fact that there is still much discretion around the issue of 

sufficient evidence to proceed, and it’s not until you’ve decided 

there’s sufficient evidence that you then get into the next 

question of whether to charge. So there is discretion there. 

 

But I think practically what we are trying to do is get the best 

advice we can from these people who have done a review for 

us. And what that does is it creates the discussion both within 

the department of public prosecutions and also I think within 

the community. And we’re going to take a look at these and set 

up what we need for the 21st century. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Just one more question in this area then, if I 

may. The fact is though, Mr. Minister, you knew long before 

you engaged Mr. Martin that the practical effect of the spousal 

abuse policy, well-intentioned and all as it is, but the practical 

effect of it is that in all too many cases the woman who gets 

beaten up on by her partner ends up being arrested for her 

failure to cooperate with the prosecution while the guy walks 

out of court. And that’s been flagged as a problem long before 

the Martin report came along. And so I really have to ask you, 

how long is it before we can expect something to come from 

you on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well unfortunately I think maybe I have 

to use a comment that I’ve used quite a number of times in this 

Assembly which is you’re making a generalization that is not 

accurate. And what I would say is that there are very few cases 

like this. And they’re difficult cases and they need to be 

reviewed and we need to adjust the policy to have the 

flexibility. But I emphasize that there are very few of these 

cases. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I wish to ask the minister in a totally different 

area, is any consideration being given to removing right to 

counsel for automatic life imprisonment cases or will that 

continue to be under right to counsel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I know this is an issue that I have 

discussed with the officials in the Legal Aid system as a  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

concern and we have been looking at it in a number of different 

ways. At this point we haven’t made a decision to go ahead, but 

it is something that is being looked at. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — For those cases where right to counsel exists, 

would you tell me how many hours of preparation are allowed 

to the counsel selected and what the per hour fee that the 

counsel is entitled to charge for his or her services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I don’t have the exact figure, but it’s 

basically the private bar tariff that’s paid. And the number of 

hours . . . I can find the exact numbers, but probably in a way I 

should be asking you as a former director in this area, and 

maybe you can even tell us. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I wasn’t trying to be cagey with the minister, 

but the figure that I recollect, but will not swear to, is 15 hours 

at a very low hourly tariff. And what I was building to was to 

say that I’m sure the minister will agree with me that that is a 

terribly low figure for preparation of a murder trial. 

 

So if we’re going to have right of counsel, a freedom of choice 

of counsel, this is simply not adequate, surely, for a person 

being expected to prepare a first degree murder case, and I trust 

the minister would agree with me that either the counsel would 

have to donate a lot of free time, or in the alternative, it would 

be a pretty horrendous situation if in fact that was all the 

preparation counsel did for a major case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that that limit that you talked 

about is a concern. I guess what I would say is that I know from 

many years at the bar that the Legal Aid staff counsel are 

usually the lawyers who really understand the defence work 

even in the . . . well especially in some of these very serious 

cases. 

 

And that what you’re really talking about is the right to choose 

not to use somebody who works for Legal Aid and how you 

fund them. And I guess practically that’s an option. But I think 

we have very good counsel throughout our Legal Aid system in 

Saskatchewan who can do the job adequately, and that’s 

basically the system that we want to promote. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the problem I think that 

both the prosecution and Legal Aid systems have is that 

basically they are staffed, as I see it, according to their 

day-to-day routine responsibilities, i.e., Provincial Court and 

other larger cases have to be fit in around it. 

 

Now one of the side issues of all of the horrendous large cases 

we have had is that when they come into these two systems, the 

prosecutions and Legal Aid, there simply isn’t the flexibility on 

either system for a lawyer to be taken out of those offices 

involved for six months or a year. 

 

And I do know that Martin referred to specifically the issue of 

commercial crime, but has any thought been given to special 

units of small number of lawyers in both systems who would 

have some flexibility to be slotted in where they are required, 

where we have a special problem that’s going to take a lawyer 

out of the system for, say, the better part of a year? 

Or does the minister feel that — touch wood — we won’t have 

to be facing a lot of these cases again where all of a sudden we 

have some huge prosecution that may involve two years of 

time? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think as it relates to the prosecution 

side, the creation that we’re working on now of an economic 

crime unit speaks exactly to what you’re raising — is that you 

end up needing some specialized people who are dedicated to 

certain cases that take much, much more time than the regular 

day-to-day cases. 

 

On the Legal Aid side, I think that there have been informal 

ways of trying to do this that the director does. But I mean it 

seems to me like a good idea that should continue to be 

discussed, and so I thank you for the suggestion. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if I can return to Legal Aid 

for a minute. One of the difficulties I see is that civil and 

criminal of course are in the same office and they are not of 

course on the Crown side — you have civil side and you have 

prosecution side. And what I see is that despite the very best of 

intentions to serve the civil side of Legal Aid, who are basically 

the women, the sheer pressure of court dates means that there is 

little choice but to give the priority to the criminal side. 

 

Because you simply . . . you have, you know, X number of 

cases coming up on criminal docket tomorrow. That has to 

come first; you don’t have any choice in that. And so even with 

the very, very best of intentions the criminal clients have to 

come first, and the civil clients have to make do with whatever 

time is left over after you’ve covered the criminal docket for the 

day. 

 

So I wanted to ask the minister, have you flagged this as a 

problem, and have you thought whether you should separate the 

two so that you can have some of the same policy as you do on 

the civil and criminal side of prosecutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there are two responses to 

that. One of them is, for this year we have an extra $500,000 

available — or I guess it’s over the next few years — to deal 

with the increased load around the child support guidelines. 

And that goes into the civil law side. 

 

The other thing is that at the federal-provincial-territorial Justice 

ministers meetings, this is an issue that all the ministers across 

the country have identified and have included in discussion with 

the federal minister as well in how we try to deal with how the 

funding for Legal Aid is set up. Also there have been some 

changes recently in the way the funding is shared that have 

meant that some of these things aren’t as clearly designated as 

they were before. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Some 

questions . . . and I’m going to just continue on this train of 

Legal Aid for a few minutes. Number one, Mr. Minister, could 

you give me a bit of an outline as to what process a person goes 

through, and who qualifies for Legal Aid? 

  



1472  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay, I can give you my two-minute 

lecture on this if you’d like, but probably you could ask the 

member there from the opposition and he would give you a lot 

of the practical aspects to it. 

 

But basically there are three tests to determining eligibility for 

Legal Aid services. One is a financial test, and practically the 

rules are you either are . . . if you’re receiving income from 

social assistance, you qualify; if you have, your financial 

resources are basically at social assistance levels, you qualify; 

or the cost of obtaining legal services from a private lawyer 

would reduce your financial resources such that you would be 

at social assistance levels. Those are sort of the three ways you 

qualify financially. 

 

Then the other thing we have to look at is whether the services 

are actually provided, and this goes to some of the questions we 

were dealing with earlier. We provide services for federal 

criminal matters, both adult and youth. There are services 

provided in family law. And in certain rare circumstances some 

other matters may arise where a person’s livelihood is in danger 

or where they may suffer extraordinary hardship. So it’s a 

possibility of extending that. 

 

The other question is a straight professional question where the 

matter is assessed, that if the lawyer says . . . if this is a case 

that would go ahead in the normal course, then it’ll go ahead. 

And so it’s basically assessment of the possibility of success on 

the case. So it’s those three tests. 

 

I think practically, you also asked how you’d get to there. And I 

think the answer there is that the number is in the phone book; 

you phone and you make an appointment. Usually there’s an 

interview with somebody who would do the assessment part. 

 

If it’s not a straightforward case, it would go to one of the 

lawyers or perhaps the regional director. If there’s not a 

resolution at that stage and it’s still not sorted out, it then goes 

to the provincial director of Legal Aid. And there are appeals, 

you know, at that level that are handled. But that’s fairly rare. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And certainly 

you’re alluding to the member from Battleford and his 

knowledge, having worked in that field for awhile. I certainly 

did seek some advice on a couple of occasions. 

 

I must admit and acknowledge the fact that I was certainly 

pleased with the response I received from Legal Aid in a couple 

of circumstances with individuals — without getting into 

particulars — and the way they responded. I think we’re still 

looking at one. I conversed with you on a couple, and I thank 

you for that. 

 

But I just have to bring the point forward, and this goes back to 

a decision, back last year in the case of one of my former 

colleagues, ended up in court to see whether he could seek the 

services of Legal Aid. And that’s why I’m asking the process. 

 

It seemed like the prosecutor in that case was bound and 

determined to almost, if you will, put the person under before 

he even had a chance. And I don’t know all the circumstances  

there. But based on what you have given for the requirements to 

seek Legal Aid, Mr. Minister, it almost appeared to me, just 

from following and observing some of the proceedings, that 

some of these requirements may have been met there. And I’m 

not exactly sure what the process is. 

 

If you go to court, is that another part of seeking the assistance 

of Legal Aid? I think you mentioned you make a call to a phone 

number to seek the assistance of Legal Aid. Is the court process 

the final means to seek advice or to seek the services of Legal 

Aid, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think practically, without talking 

about any specific cases, if there is a decision about whether to 

provide Legal Aid made at a local level — and I think finally it 

is made by the regional director — and the person doesn’t agree 

with the fact that they’ve been denied the ability to get Legal 

Aid, then appeal can go to the provincial director. Those levels 

are there. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So when you’re talking of the Legal Aid 

Commission, does that then end up in . . . Is that the court 

process that’s followed when you’re talking about Legal Aid 

Commission, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission is a board of commissioners who are appointed. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

know where things sit currently with regards to the ongoing 

debate regarding the judges and the legislation. Is this process 

before the courts or still before the courts? Where are we at at 

this time? I believe the judges have indicated they certainly 

were going to take your department to task versus legislation 

and what they understood was agreement in a piece of 

legislation. Is it before the courts? And when do you anticipate 

you may have a response to the concern that’s been raised in 

this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I can say quite simply the matter is 

before the courts in the sense that at this time both parties are 

completing their examinations for discovery, and I know that 

the examinations for discovery have been going on this week. 

 

Mr. Toth:  When you say examinations for discovery, Mr. 

Minister, is that a process that takes place prior to a court 

proceeding? And based on what I’ve seen happening over the 

last period of time, we can then anticipate that this could be an 

ongoing process. It could take up to even a year, a year and a 

half — is that what you’re anticipating, before there’s a final 

ruling on this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the matter is before the courts and 

I’m not able to predict how long it will take. 

 

I think the answer to your question about examination for 

discovery: basically the parties file a claim; we file a defence; 

the parties examine the allegations that are made. Then requests 

are made to examine the various parties to the action, which 

means sitting down and under oath asking questions about the 

nature of the claim or the nature of the defence. That’s the stage  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

we’re at. Soon as this is completed, then there is a pre-trial, 

where the parties appear with a judge of the Court of Queen’s 

Bench and if the matter is not resolved at that stage, a trial date 

is set. 

 

Mr. Toth:  And I would have to assume, Mr. Minister, that 

that might be difficult. I’m not sure how you handle it, if the 

judge is taking you to court and the judge is in Court of Queen’s 

Bench. I guess I haven’t quite figured out how that process 

would be handled because maybe a judiciary person in this 

province may feel they’d be in a conflict to hear that. And I’m 

not sure — is that the process that would hold? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think there’d be any conflict at all. 

It’s two different levels of court. And so one is the provincial 

court judges are the ones that are involved in the lawsuit. Court 

of Queen’s Bench judges are all appointed by the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, in another related matter and this 

one just . . . You know as I was watching the news, observing 

the news last night, something really jogged my memory in 

view of a situation that’s arisen — certainly in this province as 

well — but I believe it was in, I not sure if it was the state of 

Washington or if it was in Washington, D.C. (District of 

Columbia) where last night it was on the news about a 

gentleman who had been drinking and driving . . . And don’t get 

me wrong, I think everyone is opposed to individuals who 

would decide to get behind the wheel of a vehicle after they 

have consumed an excessive amount of alcohol. 

 

In this case, Mr. Minister, a judgement came down; I believe 

the individual was charged with murder and a judgement of 

guilty was brought down on that case. 

 

The concern I have, and it relates to a current matter in this 

province with regards to a driving accident and a judgement and 

ruling in that case as well, and I guess I have some concerns 

when we start relating individuals who — maybe it’s 

indiscretion but not intent to — start driving around. I know we 

really want to take a hard view on people drinking and driving, 

and making sure that they recognize the severity. 

 

I’m not sure what type of a decision is going to be made in this 

case in the United States of America regarding this, but when 

you’re charged with murder it almost seems to me if that is 

because of an auto accident, that a murder charge basically 

dictates that a penalty of life or life imprisonment could be 

handed down. And I don’t know if an individual in that 

circumstance is a dangerous individual. 

 

And I’m not sure what your department is doing to try to 

address some of the issues that are now arising out of the 

drinking and driving issue, or driving . . . dangerous driving, 

when I think you may find that many individuals in these types 

of circumstances had no intention of injuring someone and 

aren’t the type of people that would go back into society with 

the intention of driving into another individual and causing a 

life to be lost. 

 

Is there some concern in the Department of Justice as to the  

level of — should I use the word compensation, or the level of 

time? And I say that because . . . Because of the fact that with 

murder, I think incarceration seems to be the type of penalty 

that would certainly be handed down. And I have a bit of a 

concern because I think we’re putting enough people behind 

bars that maybe should not be there. 

 

I think we had this debate last year. I talked to you about 

different circumstances that arise where we may be putting 

individuals . . . and incarcerating individuals in circumstances 

that it doesn’t really do a lot to enhance a person’s ability to be 

a good-quality citizen. 

 

And this is a concern I have: are we getting into a steamroller 

situation where we’re just opening up the door to incarcerate 

more people for circumstances that they may not have really 

had control over because of an indiscretionary issue that arose, 

such as drinking, or in the case in Moosomin, driving an 

ambulance and happening to pull out to pass under conditions 

that weren’t conducive? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I will try to answer your question. 

Basically I think . . . As you know, every case depends on its 

own facts, and so that’s the first thing to remember. But in 1985 

the federal government — and the federal government has the 

power to legislate criminal law . . . at that point there were some 

changes in Canadian criminal law that emphasized the severity 

of impaired driving causing bodily harm and impaired driving 

causing death. Those were new offences that were added. 

 

Another way that this can be dealt with as far as vehicles and 

negligence, there is a charge of criminal negligence causing 

death where, you know, the ultimate penalty, depending on the 

situation, could be life, which is a very severe penalty. I think 

that there clearly needs to be, you know, a careful review of all 

of the facts in light of some of the things that I think you’re 

getting at about the kinds of charges that are laid. 

 

And I guess that’s another area where I am pleased with the 

result of the Martin report, in that it emphasized that we in 

Saskatchewan do have many capable senior prosecutors — and 

well all levels of prosecutors — who look at the sufficiency of 

the evidence, make decisions there that are appropriate, but then 

also look very carefully at what kinds of charges should be laid 

and the appropriateness of those charges. Because it does go to 

the heart of some of the questions that you’re raising. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I don’t raise that 

facetiously, because I firmly believe that in some cases, maybe 

through public pressure, we start to feel we’ve got to really say, 

well that is wrong. 

 

Yes, we know it’s wrong. But if we hear someone has made an 

indiscretionary judgement call and driven out and then is 

charged with a murder . . . Murder, in my understanding, can be 

life imprisonment. And that individual may have never . . . Like 

I mean, I think people, after they’ve done this, there’s a lot of 

remorse; and unfortunately you can’t bring a person back. 

  



1474  Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1997 

We had individuals in the legislature yesterday that have 

received bodily harm as a result of vehicle accidents. And I’m 

not saying every one of them were with a drunk driver; every 

one had different circumstances. The unfortunate part, this 

legislature took away their ability to get proper remuneration 

for that loss, for that pain and suffering. 

 

And then on the one hand . . . like I begin to think, why should I 

carry a package policy any more, because I can’t be sued. The 

only reason I carry a package policy is to make sure I’ve got 

some protection in case someone sues me. But based on the 

legislation with regards to SGI, you begin to wonder, well 

maybe I should save that couple of hundred dollars. I don’t 

really need it because no one can sue me any more. And yet on 

the other hand, someone is left as a victim. 

 

We’ve got victims as a result of the SGI legislation that need to 

be addressed and I think it’s very imperative that we start 

looking at some of the . . . how we address this — the member 

from North Battleford — the victims of violence legislation. 

And you’re putting extra funds into another forum so that it can 

actually create more, generate more revenue than the current 

forum it’s in. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, we have to look at ways in 

which we can compensate victims for actual loss. Now I noted, 

and you probably noted, the individuals that were here 

yesterday. Some of those individuals do not have the ability to 

walk around, like you and I do, as a result of their accidents. 

 

One couple here from Prince Albert, he used to work in the oil 

patch and his income was in that $50,000 range or more. But, 

Mr. Minister, they are now living on social assistance. I think 

that’s criminal. I think it’s criminal that we basically treat 

people . . . that people are being treated that way. That all of a 

sudden they find an income they had . . . they were able to 

provide at a certain level for their families and now as a result 

of legislation that legislators in this province brought into being, 

they are left out in the cold. 

 

I think number one, Mr. Minister, we need to look carefully at 

how we set laws. And I agree with you, there are certain laws 

that we have no control over; they’re made at the federal level. 

But I’m certain that your department, working with your 

officials, you can bring to the attention of the federal minister 

some of the concerns that you have, and certain levels . . . laws 

and the penalties that are risen at. 

 

One of the other things I think that should be looked at is, in the 

case of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), well it 

doesn’t allow to sue. We’ve got a victims of violence fund that 

is building. Is there . . . how are those funds for the victims of 

violence dispersed? Would automobile accident victims injured 

in automobile accidents be able to derive some revenue? Can 

we use that revenue to compensate people for economic loss as 

a result of an automobile accident? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the first point I would make 

is that I would have a good heart-to-heart talk with your 

insurance agent before you make any adjustments on your 

personal insurance. 

The question that you asked, the victims fund is different than 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act and all of the things that 

happen there. And practically, the story on the victims fund is 

that the money that has accumulated in that fund has been used 

for victim services of various kinds as well as to fund the 

victims compensation part of the legislation. And in the last 

year, and I guess the last two years, the amount expended is 

greater than the amount that comes in on the surcharges on the 

various offences. And so the plan is to end up ultimately having 

a program that provides all the services at the level basically of 

what we bring in in surcharges. 

 

Given the fact that didn’t . . . we started the surcharges in 1989, 

when the previous administration was in power, and didn’t 

actually get the whole thing going until after our administration 

started. There was an accumulation of funds at the beginning; 

we’re still working with that accumulation of funds. It’s to the 

advantage of victims in Saskatchewan that it’s there but 

ultimately we’re going to have it set up so that it’s basically as a 

break-even proposition. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, another area of concern I’d just like 

to raise — and I certainly want to raise some questions with 

regards to the Martin report as well, but I may not get to those 

today — but there’s an area of major concern, and that’s in 

regards to this whole custody situation that arises. 

 

Mr. Minister, what we have on many occasions — and I think 

probably 99 per cent of the time — the wife in a situation 

generally tends to get custody of the children plus is also 

awarded a certain sum to compensate for those children while 

they’re growing up. But one of the major, one of the major 

problems that is arising — and has certainly been brought to my 

attention on a number of occasions — a very deep concern out 

there comes from fathers who have been granted access through 

a court order. 

 

They’ve been also ordered to pay a level of maintenance. And 

the access, it can vary. It will vary from case to case. We’re 

aware of that. And when a case like the one that I talked to you 

about moves out of our jurisdiction into another province, that 

even becomes more complicated. 

 

But the biggest concern out there, Mr. Minister, is that we are 

penalizing the fathers. And we recognize that there are some 

individuals that the term has been used —dead-beat dads — 

guys who have walked away from their responsibilities. There 

are also . . . while there are some . . . I’m not sure the 

percentages. I would think the percentage — and you can 

correct me if I’m wrong — would be . . . lean higher that more 

fathers who accept that responsibility, and certainly provide for 

their families. 

 

But the concern that arises where the spouse refuses to get 

access . . . or give access. And I’ve raised this question with 

you; I’ve raised this question with your office; I’ve raised the 

concern with some lawyers. I understand in order to get access 

now, number one, this father who’s actually gone to court as a 

result of a custody situation, has been ordered to pay a level of 

maintenance, has been given access, has paid so many dollars 

out of his pocket through this whole process, now has to go  

  



May 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

back to court through civil action to enforce, or to gain . . . 

make sure that he gets the access that was granted to him 

originally, which is another cost that comes out of his pocket. 

 

And I guess I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, if a maintenance 

order has been ordered, and we now make sure that it is 

followed up on — if you don’t follow up on it you lose your 

licence and your ability to drive, if you don’t keep up your 

maintenance orders — why isn’t there something in the system 

that basically says, yes, there was an award maintenance made 

on a level of maintenance. That award or that order also ordered 

you as a spouse to make sure that the male parent — or the 

father — had access to his children. 

 

Why isn’t there something that just says, listen, this is part of 

the agreement. If a wife decides she’s not going to give access, 

then it would almost seem fair and right and equitable for that 

father to refuse maintenance, but if he refuses maintenance he is 

taken to task right away. What is your department doing to 

address it, because it just seems to be totally out there that a 

person should then have to go back and take civil action to gain 

access. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I appreciate receiving that question. 

First I’d like to give you some interesting statistics. The 1995 

divorce statistics are compiled, and we have those now. And it 

shows that in Canada 68 per cent of the mothers receive 

custody, sole custody, and 10 per cent of the fathers receive sole 

custody, and 21 per cent of joint custody was awarded. So that’s 

the national figures right across the country. 

 

In Saskatchewan the numbers are 67 per cent mothers receive 

sole custody, 8 per cent of the fathers receive sole custody, and 

24 per cent receive joint custody. That’s just a little bit of a 

background. 

 

I think the specific questions you asked are very, very good 

questions. Because one of the things that’s happened over the 

last number of years . . . and I have to give you just a brief 

history. The federal-provincial-territorial ministers of Justice 

meeting about eight or nine years ago, set out three priorities for 

civil . . . or for the officials from all of the different jurisdictions 

to work on. And there are some specific committees related to 

family law. And the topics that were to be dealt with were child 

support guidelines and related issues, and custody and access 

issues, as sort of very high priorities. 

 

And the child support guideline project has taken a lot of time 

and energy, and we’re now in May 1997 and we’ve got that off 

and running. We’ll have to see how it all plays out, but we’ve 

got a system set up there. 

 

We in Saskatchewan, well . . . So federally the committee is 

continuing to work on that and will continue to work on that. 

Provincially, about a year ago after child advocate’s report, we 

ended up setting up a committee that’s looking at this. And 

we’re hoping to go with a general discussion throughout 

Saskatchewan on this issue. And I guess practically I would 

appreciate any, you know, ideas and information that you get 

from the constituents and others and so we can put it all into the 

mix. 

The other thing I would say is, our children’s law Act in 

Saskatchewan I think is really some of the most progressive 

legislation, if not the most progressive legislative in Canada, to 

deal with the issue of enforcing access. 

 

Some of the provisions that we have, which include creating . . . 

or new access for access that’s been denied or getting costs, 

hasn’t been used as much as we thought. But practically, we 

have some good legislation. But we’ll have to continue this 

discussion probably at another time. 

 

The Chair:  It now being past the normal hour of 

adjournment, 5 o’clock, the committee will rise and report 

progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1449 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1449 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1449 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1449 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1449 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1449 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1449 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Pangman Personal Care Home 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

 DryAir 2000 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

 North-west Regional Victims Services Association 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1450 

 Young Business Entrepreneurs 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 

 Purple Ribbon Awareness Week 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 

 Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1451 

 On Living with Cerebral Palsy 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1451 

 First Nations-Health Districts Partnership 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1452 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Child Prostitution 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1453 

 SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1454 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1454 

 Security for the Prime Minister 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

 Business Regulations Review 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1455 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1456 

 Information on Amusement Companies 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 233  The Saskatchewan Regulatory Reform Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1456 

 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1457 

 Bill No. 234 — The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act (No. 2) 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Student Working as Guest Page 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1457 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 61  The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1977 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1457 

 Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1457 

 Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 26 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 1997 .................................................................................. 1458 

 Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 ................................................................................................................................... 1458 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 ........................................................................................................................................ 1458 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 21  The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

 Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

 Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1460 

 Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

 Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1461 

 Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

 Bill No. 7  The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 50 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1462 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1462 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1464 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments 

 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 140 ....................................................................................................................... 1468 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments 

 SaskEnergy Incorporated .......................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Justice Vote 3 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 

 

 


