
























































March 6, 1997 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3185 
 March 6, 1997 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of Jack 
Hillson, Esquire, as member for the constituency of North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you, Mr. Jack Hillson, member for the constituency of North 
Battleford. He has taken the oath, signed the roll and now 
claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Hillson, I want to say welcome to the 
Legislative Assembly and I hope that your time here will be one 
that serves to be a record of honour to yourself and your 
constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 
hon. member for North Battleford take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PROROGATION 
 
At 10:05 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 
 
His Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the first 
session of the Twenty-Third Legislature. In thus relieving you, I 
would like to thank you for the work you have done. 
 
This Session’s work is a cornerstone in building a future of 
prosperity and security. You have successfully introduced 
legislation that supports Saskatchewan’s growing, diversifying 
economy and meets people’s expectations of strong social 
programmes and good government. Saskatchewan can look 
forward to the 21st century with a sense of confidence and 
security. 
 
You recognized the social and economic importance of the land 
to the people of Saskatchewan by passing amendments to The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. This action added 3,600 acres 
of crown land to the province's designated wildlife areas, 
protecting rare and endangered species. In consultation with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 21,500 acres were 
made available to satisfy specific band land entitlements. And 
now offenders who have disturbed protected wildlife habitat 
lands must restore and rehabilitate these lands. 
 
You have demonstrated a commitment to sustainable growth in  

our resource industries by passing The Forest Resources 
Management Act. The legislation provides a strong framework 
to ensure healthy economic growth is balanced with a healthy 
forest. It ensures public involvement in all levels of forest 
management planning, and supports the continued development 
of co-management and partnership initiatives. 
 
You responded to the recommendations of government, 
business and consumer groups by passing The Consumer 
Protection Act and The Direct Sellers Amendment Act, 1996. 
These acts offer additional consumer protection for vulnerable 
groups in society, such as the elderly and recent immigrants; 
encode quick and effective enforcement mechanisms to deal 
with businesses that intentionally victimize consumers; and 
provide new remedies that allow consumers and businesses to 
resolve their own disputes without going to court. 
 
In keeping with your commitment to high quality education, 
you improved rules governing the teaching profession by 
passing amendments to The Education Act. These provisions 
create clear and workable rules to ensure consistent and 
acceptable hiring practices across the province. 
 
You recognized the vital role that libraries play in education 
and information by creating a multitype library system that 
provides seamless service to Saskatchewan people. The 
Libraries Co-operation Act and The Public Libraries Act 
establish a network of university, school, public and special 
libraries to share service and resources. 
 
Across Saskatchewan there is a deeply held belief that access to 
health services must be based on need, not the ability to pay. 
You demonstrated your unwavering endorsement of this 
principle by passing The Health Facilities Licensing Act that 
prevents the development of a two-tier health system in the 
province. The government now has the authority to ensure that 
any future private facility coming to Saskatchewan cannot 
charge patients for a service that is covered by Saskatchewan 
Medicare. 
 
You ensured that donors and health districts would receive the 
maximum benefits from charitable donations by passing The 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards Act. This action 
allows people who donate more than 20 per cent of their net 
income toward a district health board or affiliate in a given year 
will receive a tax credit on the entire donation. 
 
You provided new tools to assist parents and children to obtain 
the support to which they are entitled by passing The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 1996. 
This legislation strengthens the ability of the Maintenance 
Enforcement Office to ensure that people who have been 
ordered by the court to pay child maintenance comply with that 
order, and includes last resort measures of licence suspensions 
and utilization of deferred pension funds. 
 
You chose to implement The Highway and Vehicle Statutes 
Amendment Act which is one of the toughest and most 
comprehensive measures in Canada dealing with drinking and 
driving. Harsher penalties for impaired drivers and closer  



3186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1997 

monitoring of new drivers will help to reduce traffic accidents, 
injuries and debts. As well they will help reduce the associated 
insurance and health care costs. 
 
You reflected your commitment to guarantee that all residents 
of Saskatchewan will have common access to emergency and 
protective services by passing The 911 Emergency Services 
Act. This legislation provides an opportunity for municipalities 
and emergency service providers to work together in the 
delivery of the service. 
 
You enacted The Public Disclosure Act which establishes a 
workable, effective process to allow for public notification 
about dangerous offenders in situations where it is necessary. 
Saskatchewan is the first jurisdiction in Canada to introduce 
legislation to respond to police requests for help in dealing with 
the difficult issue of releasing information in these cases. The 
Act strikes a needed balance by providing for an encouraging 
full consideration of the concerns of the community as well as 
the rights of the offender in making a recommendation 
regarding notification. 
 
You have demonstrated your commitment to good government 
at all levels by passing a new Election Act. The updated and 
modernized Act extends the right to vote by providing a 
mechanism for absentee voting and provision of mobile poles; 
improves access to voters by extending the hours of advance 
poles; provides for the establishment of a provincial tax credit 
system for political donations; and establishes a procedure for 
improving the accuracy of voters' lists and reducing 
enumeration costs. 
 
You enacted The Local Government Election Amendment Act 
that expands political rights at the local level and enables 
municipalities and school divisions to use computerized voting 
and vote counting. 
 
You chose to implement The Service Districts Act which 
provides a new framework for intermunicipal co-operation in 
the delivery of local services. It gives municipalities the ability 
to form a service district to achieve efficiencies without 
restricting or reducing the autonomy or powers of individual 
municipalities. 
 
You responded to the request from aboriginal groups that this 
government honour their constitutional rights by passing The 
Interpretation Amendment Act. This act now contains a clause 
that clarifies that provincial legislation does not abrogate or 
derogate treaty rights in any way. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of His Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 6th day of March, 1997, at 2:30 
p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:15 a.m. 



March 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 3187 

Error Made in Prorogation Speech 
 
On March 10, 1997, in a statement to the Assembly, the 
Speaker acknowledged that the prorogation speech which ended 
the first session of the twenty-third legislature contained an 
error. The speech stated that Bill No. 33, The Service Districts 
Act, had been implemented. In fact, the said Bill did not pass 
and was left standing on the order paper.  
 


