



















































Hansard: April 07, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 605 

 April 7, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with youth crime: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions are from Melville, Duff, 

Saltcoats, MacNutt. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of people throughout Saskatchewan 

that have been affected by big game damage. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from the community of Dubuc. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also present petitions. I will 

read the prayer for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of criminal 

charges; such task force to be comprised of representatives 

of the RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

The petition is signed by citizens from Regina, Mr. Speaker. I 

so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Sunrise Community Futures Development Corporation 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Small businesses are 

tremendously important to the growth and development of our 

provincial economy. The role and importance of small business 

to the economy is most apparent in rural areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our rural communities survive because of small 

businesses and the economic activity they generate. That is why 

I am very pleased to stand before this Assembly today and 

congratulate the creation of the Sunrise Community Futures 

Development Corporation, which is dedicated to community 

development in the south-eastern region of the province. 

 

This new community futures corporation, one of eight that 

exists in the province, will identify, promote, market, and 

enhance business opportunities throughout the area. Mr. 

Speaker, our rural communities cannot survive if small 

businesses do not survive. The community futures corporation 

is attempting to provide enhanced and additional opportunities 

for businesses which can lead to many positive returns for 

communities. 

 

The viability and sustainability of our rural communities rests 

with the success and growth of their small business. The local 

efforts of community futures corporation will help secure many 

of those business developments. 

 

I applaud the new Sunrise Community Futures Corporation for 

its dedication to the business, to the people, and to the 

communities of the south-east region. Through cooperative 

effort our rural communities can prosper. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Flood Disaster Assistance 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My constituents are   



606  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

thankful they were spared the storm which dropped record 

snowfalls across southern Manitoba. With a major employer in 

the area at risk due to flooding and ranchers hoping for dry 

weather during calving, everyone is thankful. 

 

Despite our good fortune to escape such a storm, the significant 

cost of repairing flood damage already incurred still remains. 

Some RM (rural municipality) officials I met with on the 

weekend suggest that, even without high deductibles under 

disaster assistance programs, they expect to lose the equivalent 

of 8 mills due to this government’s cuts to revenue-sharing 

grants. This will place a difficult burden on already strapped 

communities. 

 

Thunder Creek residents fear compensation will just be another 

matter of give a little, take a lot. While this government sticks 

to its inadequate compensation program, it will continue to see 

some $1.338 million in VLT (video lottery terminal) profits 

flow from terminals located in Thunder Creek, to its coffers, on 

an annual basis. 

 

It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, even if the members opposite give a 

little more, they’ll still be taking a lot. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Thorablott 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people have been blessed with a rich and vibrant 

cultural tradition; one that draws on the strengths of many 

nations from around the world. Saskatchewan Icelandic 

pioneers banded together in the grand Saskatchewan tradition of 

community and cooperation, to settle the region around Foam 

Lake, Fishing Lake, and the Quill Lakes. 

 

Naturally, being Saskatchewan people, they were 

overachievers, and settled the largest land area of any Icelandic 

community outside of Iceland itself. 

 

The Icelandic Club of Saskatchewan, Vatnabyggd, takes its 

inspiration from these early pioneers in their name, which 

translates as lakes settlement. This past weekend, the Icelandic 

Club of Saskatchewan honoured these pioneers by hosting 

Thorablott in Wynyard, Saskatchewan. 

 

This event pays tribute to Icelandic culture and includes a 

fashion show, traditional folk singing, folk dancing, and the 

telling of Icelandic fairy tales. There will also be an Icelandic 

buffet . . . there was an Icelandic buffet including such dishes as 

rulupylsa, which is spiced lamb, and skyr which is similar to 

yogurt, only better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events like this don’t happen by accident. This 

happened through the efforts of committed volunteers working 

together in that spirit of community and cooperation that has 

made Saskatchewan a model for all of Canada. Some one 

hundred people donate their time to this event, including the 

dancers and the choir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to live in a province with the highest 

rate of voluntarism in Canada, and I ask you and the Assembly 

to join me in congratulating Vatnabyggd on their hard work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Daylight Savings Time 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to acknowledge an editorial by Bruce Penton, owner of the 

Miner-Journal in Esterhazy and the World Spectator in 

Moosomin, and I quote: 

 

We are pleased last week to hear that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has decided to adopt daylight savings time 

on a two-year trial basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was ready to congratulate the government on 

their timely common sense. But after some thought, I seem to 

remember that it was the past minister of Municipal 

Government, Carol Carson’s statement that said if we switched 

to daylight savings time, we would lose an hour a day. Mr. 

Speaker, I was somewhat sceptical. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, on a serious side though, for our farmers 

and the many people involved in sports activities in the 

province, we would gain an hour at the right end of the day 

without having to get up at 4 in the morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people on the east side of the province agree 

with Bruce Penton but, woe to us, it was written on April 1 — 

April Fool’s Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Documentary Film, Percy, Me and Bobby McGee 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, today I want to draw to 

attention of members an award-winning film documentary 

that’s been produced by two Moose Jaw film makers and stars 

two very special Moose Jaw citizens. 

 

The documentary is entitled Percy, Me and Bobby McGee. The 

documentary stars Percy Rothwell and Bobby McGee, two very 

special constituents of ours, two best friends, two individuals 

who spent the first 40 years of their lives in institutions — 

many of them in the Valley View Centre, Moose Jaw — and 

two who now for some years have been living independently. 

 

The film is the documented version of their trip to Florida to 

witness the launch of the space shuttle Columbia. They 

travelled in a 40-foot motor home. Behind the 40-foot motor 

home they pulled a 30-foot blue Cadillac Eldorado convertible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were accompanied on their trip to Florida by 

Doug Patterson, producer of the documentary, and Jeff Beesley, 

director, from “light over canvas productions.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the film is the very touching story of Percy and 

Bobby’s journey — not only their journey from Moose Jaw to 

Florida, but their journey from institutional life to life in the 

community. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

Mr. Speaker, Percy, Me and Bobby McGee has already won the 

best documentary in the 1996 Saskatchewan Film and Video 

Showcase. It has been awarded one of the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living media awards, and now is 

nominated for Canadian awards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislature extends its congratulations to Jeff 

Beesley, Doug Patterson, Percy Rothwell, and Bobby McGee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Barb Gibb 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

bring to the attention of the Assembly the contribution of a 

young woman named Barb Gibb, who was a teacher in Dillon, 

Saskatchewan, which is a small community in my constituency. 

 

On Friday, February 14, Barb passed away at the age of 24 as a 

result of a motor vehicle accident. I want to spend a minute and 

share with the members of the Assembly the contribution which 

I am told Barb made to the community where she lived for two 

years. I do this in the hopes that maybe we can all learn from 

Barb’s example, that one person’s caring and compassion can 

have an enormous impact on communities such as Dillon. 

 

In the words of Don Thompson, the principal of Dillon school, 

quote: 

 

Barb was a teacher of great things. She taught her students 

how to read and to wonder about all things around them. 

She had a very special group of students who she was very 

proud of, proud of their progress and proud of their 

heritage. She believed that their heritage was so important 

that she done things to try and learn more about their 

culture. 

 

This young woman came from Dillon fresh out of university 

and truly became a full member of this northern community. 

I’m told that Barb understood life in the North was different and 

sometimes difficult, but she always understood that her life and 

her love for her students would really make a difference in their 

lives. 

 

In order to honour Barb’s memory, the community made a 

decision to create a special room in the school, called Barb 

Gibb Reading Centre. Barb Gibb’s short life taught us a 

valuable lesson. Saskatchewan needs more people like Barb 

who care to understand the rich culture of the northern people 

and challenges that they face. The problems of the North cannot 

be solved without the understanding, caring, commitment of 

everyone in this province, north or south. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gloria Lennox Honoured as 

Best Principal in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d just like to take a short period of time to offer my 

congratulations to Ms. Gloria Lennox. Ms. Lennox is the 

principal of Queen Mary Community School in Prince Albert 

and will be given an award this week in Saskatoon for being the 

best principal in the province. This honour has been awarded to 

her by the Saskatoon school-based administrators’ group. 

 

She has been the principal at Queen Mary for the last seven 

years and vice-principal for nine years prior to that. To be 

recognized as the best principal in the province is certainly a 

remarkable achievement, and I would ask that all members of 

the Assembly join with me in offering our congratulations to 

Ms. Lennox on receiving this very important award. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battlefords Community Players Win 

Saskatchewan Drama Festival Awards 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to 

some of our very talented people in the Battlefords. This past 

week was the Saskatchewan Drama Festival, and the North 

Battleford production from Battlefords Community Players won 

the entry as the best play in the festival. 

 

We also won the best director award. It was directed by Donna 

Challis who is a remarkably talented person. It is a credit to her 

remarkable abilities that as my campaign manager she was able 

to get me elected. But she has other talents as well which were 

recognized by the drama festival. 

 

The Community Players in the Battlefords have a long and 

illustrious history and these two most recent awards again 

underline the strength of drama in the Battlefords. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Public Prosecutions Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I am extremely concerned that 

public confidence in our Department of Justice has been 

seriously eroded in the last several years. Indeed it may not be 

much of an exaggeration to say that the Thatcher prosecution 

was the last high profile prosecution in this province that did 

not come to grief and lead to embarrassment. 

 

We now have a situation where our government, after reneging 

on a deal, is involved in litigation with its own judges that it 

appointed. We have for the first time in Canadian history, 

prosecuting a prosecutor for the conduct of his duties. Also 

possibly a precedent in Canadian history. We have the 

department re-prosecuting an accused when it publicly admitted 

that the first prosecution was wrong because of mishandling by 

the department. 

 

With widespread allegations of satanic ritual abuse that came to 

nothing, now we have a report. Why was it delayed for six 

months? Why has it sat on the minister’s desk for six weeks? 

What will be done to restore confidence to the public in our 

prosecution office and to the Department of Justice? 

 

  



608  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member is obviously anxious to get a copy of the report which 

he will receive within the next couple of hours. And I think that 

a number of his questions will be dealt with and answered at 

that time. I think that it’s appropriate that we wait until the 

report is provided to everybody. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I appreciate that the minister will be addressing 

as to what steps are being taken now to restore public 

confidence in our department, but can he tell us, though, why it 

has taken a year when it was supposed to take six months? Can 

he tell us if he is prepared to release the entire report and not 

just a laundered version of the report? And can he tell us why it 

sat on his desk for six weeks before he was prepared to release 

it to the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I will happily answer those 

questions, as I have very clearly over the last number of weeks. 

Basically, the report has been on my desk so that we can look at 

recommendations, and we’re providing that as well. The full 

report will be revealed, as I’ve always said. 

 

And I guess the big worry that I have is that a member of this 

legislature — and also a member of the law society — is taking 

on the independence of the prosecutorial branch. This is an 

extremely difficult job prosecutors have to uphold and work in 

our justice system. And the job is made even more difficult 

when members such as that person opposite raises the kind of 

questions that he does in a political manner; when they’re not 

political questions. And I think that he should seriously 

examine his role as a person who is part of this government and 

as part of this legislature and make sure that he understands also 

his role as a lawyer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, you talk about respect for the 

independence of the judicial system, and yet it was the 

minister’s government that said we needed an independent 

judicial commission, and that was set up by legislation. It was 

promised by the Minister of Justice’s predecessor, and now it 

has been cancelled. At the time this government said this was 

integral and essential to the proper and independent 

administration of justice. And yet this government cancelled 

this independent judicial commission and now accuses me of 

interfering in the justice process and the independence of the 

justice. 

 

Will you reinstate the independent judicial commission you said 

was so important to the independence of the judiciary and the 

proper administration of justice in this province and quit 

accusing the opposition of interfering in the justice system and 

its independence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I will just reiterate what I 

said before, that we all have a role as legislators to respect the 

independence of the prosecution, respect the independence of 

the judiciary. And it’s unfortunate that many of the comments 

that are made by members of this legislature end up causing 

great difficulty for the proper administration of justice. 

 

All I would say today is that, take a look at the report when it 

comes forward; ask some questions based on the review of the 

prosecutions; and we will then have some further discussion 

about how we can make sure we have the best justice system in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prairie Hog Processing Plant 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

was interested to notice in today’s Leader-Post that it indicates 

that there are over 30 Alberta communities that are bidding for 

a Maple Leaf hog processing plant that’s proposed for operation 

anywhere in the three prairie provinces. Mr. Speaker, this plant 

would employ as many as 1,500 workers and I think that it’s 

absolutely essential that Saskatchewan, being the centre of the 

prairie provinces, does everything it can to make sure that this 

plant is located in Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is twofold. Number one, do you know, Mr. 

Minister, if there are Saskatchewan communities competing for 

this very significant plant in Saskatchewan? And number two, if 

we’re unsuccessful and this plant goes to Alberta, what impact 

will that have on drawing the production that we hope to 

increase in Saskatchewan away from the Saskatchewan base 

and into Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 

member opposite has become aware of this important project 

because the stellar group who are involved in the request for 

proposal approached our department, I believe on March 17, on 

behalf of Maple Leaf. And there have been a lot of discussions 

with an interdepartmental committee — Sask Water, Ag and 

Food, Department of Economic Development and other 

agencies that would be involved in providing services if Maple 

Leaf was to decide to come to Saskatchewan. 

 

A number of communities have been involved in discussions. I 

don’t have exactly the number but there have been a number of 

cities and other communities in the province that have been 

involved. So I think all of the work that necessarily has to be 

done is being done. 

 

The member opposite will know that there is a lot of 

excitement, particularly about pork production in Saskatchewan 

at the present time, with the Wheat Pool’s announcement. And 

I’m very optimistic that we will have very positive result in 

processing as well as production here in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

Multiple Sclerosis Treatment 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, Canada has the highest rate of 

multiple sclerosis in the world, and Saskatchewan unfortunately 

has the dubious distinction of having the highest MS rate in this 

country. The development of Betaseron is thought by many to 

be a major breakthrough to those who are afflicted with this 

disease, yet this drug is not presently insured under the 

Saskatchewan drug plan. I think it is important for the minister 

to recognize that British Columbia announced just last week 

that Betaseron will be insured under its drug plan, joining 

Ontario and Quebec. 

 

Can the minister explain today how much longer he is willing to 

make MS sufferers in Saskatchewan wait before they can 

improve their lives through their use of this drug? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the member 

and the House that we have been looking at the issue quite 

seriously. I’ve been talking to some people from the multiple 

sclerosis society in Saskatchewan and talking to some medical 

people as well. I have spoken to several people out of the 

College of Pharmacy, and I can advise the member that it is an 

issue certainly under active consideration, and I expect to make 

an announcement in the relatively near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s nice to 

hear, but the government has been looking at this drug for well 

over a year — close to two years — and there’s people waiting 

anxiously to hear his announcement. 

 

The drug of course will allow many people to resume normal 

lives, which most of us are allowed to lead. It allows them to 

hold jobs where they could not previously hold jobs, and it 

gives them an opportunity to enjoy life to its fullest, the way 

much of us do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my staff spoke today with Michelle Mostowich, a 

Prince Albert resident, whose brother and sister are both 

afflicted with MS. Her sister is able to afford the purchase of 

this drug, her brother cannot — another example of two-tier 

health care system that this government has created. Obviously 

this is a bittersweet situation as her sister can now enjoy such 

activities as horseback riding; her brother is nowhere close to 

meeting the same kind of success because, once again, he 

cannot afford the drug. 

 

Will the minister tell us today in this House why is he delaying 

this decision to put Betaseron under the drug plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question, I 

believe I have largely answered the member’s question. 

 

But I want to say that much of what the member says is 

somewhat overstated in the sense that unfortunately there is no 

cure for multiple sclerosis. The drug Betaseron is not touted as 

a drug that allows people to lead normal lives. It is a drug which 

may allow certain people with multiple sclerosis to have a 

better quality of life for a relatively short period of time. But 

that does not mean it should not be looked at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when the member gets up and suggests that there’s some 

cure for multiple sclerosis, I have to advise the member and the 

House that, quite tragically, that is not the case. We hope 

someday it will be. 

 

But I also want to say to the member, Mr. Speaker, having 

answered the question, that when the member gets up and talks 

about two-tiered medicine — a system we do not have in this 

province — I would remind the member that the member has 

publicly called for a two-tiered health system, as has the leader 

of the member’s party. We reject that. We think we should keep 

the medicare system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dorsey Report 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today my 

question is to the Minister of Labour. And today, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to raise a question that’s been brought to our 

attention. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Dorsey report was originally going to improve 

our province’s bargaining and negotiations for both employers 

and employees. But, Mr. Minister, we’re finding that some 

people are falling between the cracks. 

 

One woman has contacted our office — a long-time employee 

of the Wascana Rehab Centre is on long-term disability because 

of rheumatoid arthritis. She can barely walk, let alone work. 

She has been told, Mr. Minister, by SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union) that her disability benefits will 

be terminated on May 17 because your government adopted the 

Dorsey report. Further, Mr. Minister, the woman says she has 

been informed that others are being cut off as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think you had indicated that anyone on disability 

would not be hurt by the Dorsey report. Clearly this seems to be 

happening. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you allowing the SGEU to cut members 

off benefits when you promised that they wouldn’t? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know of 

course that the plan, the disability plan in question, is not a 

government plan; not a plan to which the government or any 

part of the government is a party. 

 

The disability plan is a plan established by the SGEU for its 

own members, and the premiums are paid by the members to 

the trade union, and they run the plan all by themself. Now if 

they’re cutting off coverage to those people, obviously the 

union and the person concerned has something to talk about. 

 

But I want to add to that answer by saying that I am aware that   



610  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

there are discussions going on involving SGEU and SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and I 

believe other parties, to determine on what basis those benefits 

can continue into the future. 

 

We are aware of those discussions and we will assist them in 

any way we can, but we are not directly a party to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. Mr. Minister, I think as this lady has pointed out — 

and she’s certainly written the SGEU; she’s written, I believe, 

your office; the Health department — the concern she has is, 

despite all the letters she’s written, she really has no assurances. 

 

Mr. Minister, I guess what we are asking of you today, can you 

give this lady or anyone involved with SGEU assurances that 

your government, whether you’re responsible for the plan or not 

— SGEU has supported your government for many years — 

that you will support the workers of this province, and people 

such as this lady, and make sure that indeed proper and 

informed discussion takes place so that people like this one in 

question will not fall between the cracks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The question does not become the 

member, Mr. Speaker. He knows perfectly well that the SGEU 

does not support any political party and hasn’t supported our 

party ever in its history. And that is a fact. And if the member 

doesn’t know it, it shows how deplorable their knowledge is 

about how the trade union system works and how the SGEU 

works. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we feel no sense of obligation 

about picking up the union’s plan and somehow extending that 

plan to people who will no longer be members. It’s a plan set up 

by the union, developed by the union. The terms and conditions 

are laid out by the union and they’re going to have to figure a 

way out of it. And as I said to the member, we’re prepared to 

help facilitate that in any way we can. 

 

This business about the Conservative opposition trying to 

divide and conquer here, drive wedges between people, make 

unions the bad guys, just doesn’t contribute anything at all to 

some of these difficult issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Young Offenders Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this afternoon is for the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, the four students from Miller High School that 

have spent a lot of time and effort researching changes to the 

Young Offenders Act came to the Assembly a few weeks ago 

seeking our support. These young people are going to head to 

Ottawa, I understand, this Saturday to present petitions to the 

Liberal Justice minister, Allan Rock. Unfortunately we’ve been 

informed that Allan Rock will not meet with them while they’re 

in Ottawa. 

Mr. Minister, you met with the students last week. Did you give 

the students the support they were asking for from your 

government on their initiatives? And if so, in what form will 

your support come? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to answer that question. 

 

I have a great deal of respect for these young people. The 

Minister of Social Services and I spent almost two hours with 

them going over all of their proposals in their petition. We had a 

very enjoyable discussion but also what we did do was show 

them the kinds of things that we were doing that related to some 

of the issues that they had. We’ve invited them to participate 

and work with some of the officials in our departments who 

work on these specific issues. We also explained to them the 

process and kind of discussion that they would probably have 

with the federal government officials, and we encouraged them 

to present a Saskatchewan perspective on this so that they can 

have their points as well as our points presented to the federal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the minister in charge of STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company). There is one simple question, Mr. 

Minister, that I would like to ask you today and that is, just 

what is your government’s plan for STC? 

 

The former president and former VP (vice-president) of sales 

and operations claims CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) wants nothing but privatization, that they have 

been doctoring numbers so STC looks worse than it really is. 

Either way, the people of Saskatchewan lose. On the one hand, 

you’re feeding people inaccurate numbers which aren’t true, 

and on the other, your false numbers will mean Saskatchewan 

people will have to absorb smaller offers for the Crown. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you’re bent on privatizing STC at least paint the 

real picture so private companies will give the Saskatchewan 

people a fair deal. If you’re not, then stop playing games with 

the numbers. 

 

Mr. Minister, once and for all, are you or are you not going to 

privatize STC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be 

pleased to answer on behalf of the minister. And let me begin 

my remarks by saying that STC, as other Crown corporations, 

has been under review for very obvious reasons. The 

environment in which these corporations are operating has been 

changing fairly dramatically over the past years. And I would 

want to say specifically, to address his question whether or not 

a decision has been made to privatize the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, the answer is no. 

 

The new president of the corporation has been mandated to look 

and reflect upon options, make a recommendation to the   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

minister and to the board of directors. I want to say to the 

member opposite though, one of the decisions that government 

did make early on in its mandate was to get rid of the Eagle 

buses that his political party was part and parcel of purchasing 

on behalf of the corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Foundation Grants 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

this government delivered its budget back on March 20, school 

divisions were informed that there would be a two-week delay 

until they receive specific details about their foundation grants. 

Nearly three weeks have now passed and school boards have 

nearly spent 40 per cent of their 1997 budgets. 

 

School divisions are unable to set mill rates because of this 

delay. Communities like Englefeld, Annaheim, Weekes, 

Windthorst, just to name a few, are also concerned because the 

school division boards cannot yet tell them about the likelihood 

of program cuts, grade discontinuance, or even possible school 

closures. 

 

Will the Minister of Education explain why her government has 

forced boards to play this waiting game? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as the members will know, we did 

not receive assessment information from the two large cities in 

this province until a day or two before the provincial budget 

was delivered on March 20. At that time we indicated to school 

divisions that we would be able to indicate to them their 

operating grants after the Easter vacation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s our intention that we should have information 

to school divisions in the province by the end of the week. And 

we’re optimistic that if we’re able to do that, school divisions 

will be in a position to indicate to their ratepayers, their mill 

rate. 

 

If we’re not able to get that information to school divisions by 

the end of this week, it’s our intention to extend the deadline for 

the setting of mill rates until the end of May. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The question, 

Madam Minister, though, is that school boards are in a 

predicament. There are many that have passed resolutions to 

terminate classes, to discontinue grades, to close schools. That 

time period, as you know, by law is nearing. Okay. 

 

And the situation that we’re going to have is that reassessment 

has caused a problem. Reassessment has caused a problem in 

that we see a shift from urban school divisions to rural. The 

foundation grant formula addresses that. Boards of education 

have not heard from your department as to whether or not this 

will occur. 

 

My question, Madam Minister, is can you explain how you are 

going to address the fact that rural school boards may face a 

serious financial hit because of the government’s reassessment 

plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to indicate to the member that this government did not 

bring in reassessment. In the fall of 1995, municipalities and 

school divisions across this province voted at an annual meeting 

to go forward with assessment through SAMA (Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency). So I would just say to the 

member, get your facts straight. Reassessment is as a result of 

85 per cent support by municipalities and school divisions 

across Saskatchewan. That’s point number one. 

 

Point number two: as we know, we have all gone through 

reassessment and reassessment is just now starting to settle out 

in terms of the implications. If you look at the provincial 

average, reassessment has gone up some five times in this 

province. There are parts of Saskatchewan, particularly some 

parts of rural Saskatchewan, where reassessment has gone up 

some seven times, and then there are parts of urban 

Saskatchewan where reassessment has not hit the provincial 

average. 

 

All I can say to the member is this government supports rural 

Saskatchewan. We already introduced an agricultural factor of 

.84 per cent, and I can assure the members that when school 

boards get their information, further consideration will be made 

for those rural school divisions that have seen their 

reassessment balloon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 

correct. It is the plan of SAMA in terms of reassessment. The 

question though still is, Madam Minister, is that the urban 

municipalities will have a multiplying factor of three or four. 

Rural school divisions, as you’ve indicated, have a 

multiplication factor of maybe seven. The foundation grant is a 

provincial grant. How will you address those concerns for rural 

school divisions who may face a double impact? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As I indicated to the member, one of 

the difficulties that our department experienced a couple of days 

before the budget, was no numbers from the city of Saskatoon 

and city of Regina. We now have those numbers in hand. 

Obviously their reassessment has come in lower than the 

provincial average. It does have implications for some — and I 

want to stress some — rural school divisions. And I want to 

assure the member that it’s our intention to have this 

information to school divisions by the end of this week or the 

end of the following week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that response, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated that there may be a 

delay. She’s hoping that there will be a response by the end of 

this week, but there may be a delay. My question then to the 

minister is: if indeed there is a delay and we have numerous   



612  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

school divisions that are facing possible school closures and 

that period of time is not May 1 — that decision must be made 

before that, by law — how will you address that potential 

problem that school divisions will face? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, our 

. . . we now have all of the information about reassessment in 

this province at the Department of Education. 

 

As I indicated, we have parts of Saskatchewan that have come 

in below the provincial average and some parts above the 

provincial average. 

 

As you know, reassessment is based on market value. Because 

farm land has increased in value in some parts of Saskatchewan 

much higher than in other parts, what we have done is bring in 

an agricultural factor for school divisions to implement so that, 

on average, farm land will not increase — in terms of school 

taxes — more than 5 per cent across the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are now dealing with the operating 

grant. As I indicated to the member, we are April 7; it’s our 

intention to have this information to school divisions by the end 

of the week or the end of next week. 

 

I can assure the member that we are working diligently on this 

issue and it’s our intention to have this information to school 

divisions as soon as humanly possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would like to introduce a series of motions — seven motions 

which would change the . . . which would substitute names of 

members on standing committees of the legislature. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the name of the Hon. Eldon Lautermilch be 

substituted for that of Mr. Doug Anguish on the list of 

members composing the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the name of Mr. Walter Jess be substituted for that of 

Mr. Dale Flavel on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Special Committee on Nominations 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the name of Ms. Doreen Hamilton be substituted for 

that of the Hon. Glenn Hagel on the list of members 

composing the Special Committee on Nominations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the name of Mr. Mark Koenker be substituted for that 

of Mr. Jack Langford on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on the Environment 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the name of Mr. John Wall be substituted for that of 

Mr. Mark Koenker on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on the Environment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Education 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move, seconded by the member from 

Watrous: 

 

That the name of Mr. Larry Ward by substituted for that of 

Mr. Mark Koenker on the list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Education. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  And last of all, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the name of Mr. Andrew Thomson be substituted for 

that of Mr. Myron Kowalsky on the list of members 

composing the Standing Committee on Constitutional 

Affairs. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling Under Rule 36 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to bring 

to the House a ruling of the Chair. 

 

Rule 36 — order — rule 36 of the of Rules and Procedures of 

the Legislative Assembly Saskatchewan entrust the Speaker with 

the duty to ensure that no Bill that necessitates an appropriation 

of any part of the public revenue is considered by the Assembly 

without having first been recommended by the Lieutenant 

Governor. Numerous rulings of the Chair have underscored the 

constitutional principle that only members of the Executive 

Council may initiate legislation involving the expenditure of 

public funds or for the raising of any tax. 

 

The practice in this Assembly is for Bills to be introduced and 

read the first time with their further progress being contingent 

upon the Speaker affirming that they are in order. 

 

I have now had the opportunity to review a number of Bills that 

have been introduced and wish to draw the attention of the 

Assembly to three in particular. All three Bills are presently 

standing on the order paper for second reading under private 

members’ public Bills and orders. 

 

Bill No. 208, The Employers of Babysitters Restitution Act was 

introduced by the hon. member for Cypress Hills on March 18, 

1997. Clause 2 of Bill No. 208 directs the Minister of Labour to 

make restitution to those individuals who made certain higher 

payments in regard to their child care-givers pursuant to 

recently enacted regulations to The Labour Standards Act. The 

effect of this provision is to require that an amount equivalent to 

taxes already collected is to be paid from the General Revenue 

Fund to employers of babysitters. 

 

Erskine May, 21st edition, chapter 28 at pages 713 and 714 

clearly states that, and I quote: 

 

The authorization of a single payment out of the 

Consolidated Fund (requires a recommendation). 

 

Accordingly, I find that Bill No. 208 contravenes the 

parliamentary principles of Crown initiative in financial matters 

because it requires a recommendation from the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The member from Cypress Hills is not a member of the 

Executive Council and cannot obtain such a recommendation. 

Therefore, I must rule Bill No. 208 out of order and direct that it 

be removed from the order paper. 

 

On March 19, 1997 Bill No. 207, The Saskatchewan 

Government Post-employment Code, was introduced by the 

hon. member for Melville. Bill No. 207 proposes to establish a 

post-employment code which would govern the conduct and 

activities of public office holders during their tenure with the 

government and in the period afterward. 

 

The Bill proposes that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, 

an existing officer of the Assembly, would act as the 

post-employment commissioner and be charged with carrying 

out the provisions of the Bill. 

 

It is a well-established parliamentary principle that, I quote: 

“expenses arising out of the imposition of new duties on an 

existing department or authority” require a recommendation 

from the Crown. 

 

I refer members to Erskine May, 21st edition, chapter 28, pages 

713 and 714, and rulings of the Chair in this House dated March 

24, 1966 regarding the Provincial Secretary’s department; dated 

March 20, 1980 regarding the Provincial Auditor; and dated 

May 1, 1990 regarding the Ombudsman. 

 

When comparing the provisions of Bill No. 207 to existing 

legislation regarding the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, 

namely The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, it is apparent 

that the effect of the Bill is to impose new and significant duties 

on the commissioner over and above existing responsibilities. 

 

I therefore find that Bill No. 207 requires a recommendation 

from the Lieutenant Governor. Because the member for 

Melville is not a member of the Executive Council, I must rule 

Bill No. 207 out of order and direct that it be removed from the 

order paper. 

 

On March 26, 1997, Bill No. 206, The Saskatchewan Health 

Ombudsman Act, was introduced by the hon. member for 

Moosomin. This Bill seeks to create, as an officer of the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, the position of the health 

ombudsman. 

 

As I have just noted, a royal recommendation is required where 

monies are to be provided by parliament when new duties are 

imposed upon an existing department or authority or where an 

entirely new department, agency, or position is established. 

 

Although Bill No. 206 does specifically direct in clause 5 that 

the health ombudsman, and I quote, “. . . shall not be 

remunerated or reimbursed from the General Revenue Fund, but 

may act on a fee for services basis,” it does not address the 

attendant operating costs of this proposed new public agency, 

such as accommodation, equipment, and other administrative 

expenses. It is reasonable to expect that such operating costs 

will be incurred, which consequently will create a charge on 

public monies. 

 

Therefore I find this Bill requires royal recommendation. The 

member for Moosomin, not being a member of the Executive 

Council, is not entitled to obtain a royal recommendation, and 

so I must rule Bill No. 206 out of order and direct its removal 

from the order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I hereby request that question 

no. 2 be converted to a notice of motion for order for return, and 

with leave of the Assembly, that questions 33 to 36 also be   



614  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

converted. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  Items 1 through 5 are converted to motions 

for return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I don’t 

know if we’re ever ready for the question. I’m not sure if . . . 

the Madam Minister probably will be, but I think there’s a few 

questions that need to be asked first. 

 

First of all I just wanted to commend the Premier on his new 

look. I was just looking across the way, and I thought to myself 

that there’s a terminology, and I’m not exactly sure where I’ve 

heard it, but something about the term, baby face. I think the 

Premier put on that new look to go to New York with. And I 

guess as he was indicating, he’s hoping it works. I think he 

mentioned that Wayne Gretzky scored a goal when he was 

down there, so it obviously worked for Mr. Gretzky. And the 

Department of Finance, I think that’s something he’s hoping 

that in the area when it comes to the bond . . . or the creditors, 

that they indeed will take a more favourable look to the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, coming to the point at the hand and the 

expenditure of the 600-plus million dollars or the interim supply 

Bill for two months, of funds for the government and its entities 

to operate. Over the past number of days, Mr. Chairman, we’ve 

been asking . . . opposition members have asked a number of 

questions. We’ve asked for some input and involvement as to 

what plans the government has in place should a disaster take 

place, and we’ve seen it even this past spring already in the area 

of southern Saskatchewan with the number of floods that have 

afflicted many communities. 

 

And up until now the minister basically has said that she really 

doesn’t have those numbers. I guess what I would like to ask of 

the minister, whether the minister has any numbers on hand. I 

would like to know if the minister has and if her department has 

certainly discussed some of the probable . . . or probabilities of 

problems that may arise and how her department is planning to 

meet those problems, whether it takes place over the next two 

months or even ongoing. 

 

(1430) 

 

We’re talking two months right now. And right now the big 

concern is going to be the expenditure, the availability of funds 

in the next two months, this appropriation of two months 

expenditures, to cover some of the losses that may take place as 

a result of flooding that comes from phenomenon of nature that 

we really don’t have any control of. 

 

And I would be very surprised if the minister and her staff have 

not at least had some discussions as to what they may or may 

not do should some requests come in from RMs or communities 

or individuals to offset some of the problems that they are 

facing in the area of compensation for flood damage that may 

not be covered under their current insurance policies. 

 

And I’m wondering if the Madam Minister could give us a bit 

of an idea of what her government and her department plans to 

do in the event this transpires. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I’d like to 

take this opportunity to welcome back Bill Jones, who’s the 

deputy minister of Finance, and he’s sitting with me today. 

 

And again, just to reiterate what we’re doing here. The budget 

has been presented to the legislature. It provides details in terms 

of estimates as to where the money’s going to be spent that the 

government has put in the budget. And interim supply is an 

interim measure which takes us from this point in time until the 

point of time in which the budget is passed. 

 

And what I would say to the member opposite is, that is a long 

and complicated question and I would wait till the appropriate 

departments are here and ask them for some more details. 

We’re quite anxious to provide details about this budget. We’re 

quite pleased and happy about the budget and we welcome the 

opportunity to proceed to estimates and answer those sorts of 

questions. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, a 

quick question and . . . Well I don’t have one. I’m wondering if 

the minister would have a copy of the appropriation expenditure 

that’s being asked of this Assembly and if we could have a copy 

of that expenditure. And while the minister and her staff are 

getting it, the minister made a comment . . . I’ll just go onto 

another question or raise another matter. 

 

The minister made a comment, Mr. Chairman, about the fact of 

whether some of the questions that have been raised get into 

some of the specific detail and maybe getting it from 

departments. And I was . . . I went back, over the weekend, I 

went back over some of the responses made by members, 

current government members, while they were in the opposition 

side. And I note out of Hansard, August 14, 1989, and this is 

Mr. Shillington speaking: 

 

Mr. Chairman, in past times we have enjoyed a fairly . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I would remind the members that 

when referring to members that are in the Assembly, unless it is 

a quotation, that they not use the proper name but use the 

constituencies. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, this comes out of 

Hansard. It’s a quote from Hansard and this is the . . . I’m 

quoting the member’s name from Hansard, August 14, 1989. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, and this is what . . . Mr. Chairman, this is 

what Mr. Shillington did say in Hansard, and I quote: 

 

In past times we have enjoyed a fairly wide-ranging . . . 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order. Order. The member is still 

out of order in referring to the proper name of a constituent . . . 

or of a member of the Legislative Assembly. If it is not in 

quotations or a quote, direct quote, then it has to be referred to 

as his constituency and not the proper name. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, but in Hansard 

unfortunately it doesn’t refer to the member by his seat. But I 

will abide by the chairman’s ruling and we’ll certainly follow 

up on it. But the chairman I think, may have to just take a 

moment just to review some of the rules as well and the fact 

that it’s . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. I must remind the members that the 

ruling of the Chair is not debatable and not to be commented 

on. And the comment is not asked for. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I find it very interesting. I find it 

interesting that all of a sudden . . . and I guess it comes back to 

the point, the point that the Premier’s making from his chair 

right now. And I think the Premier takes an interest in the 

debate that’s going on because the Premier and Minister of 

Labour are quite familiar with some of the comments that were 

made. And I’d just like them to be reminded again of comments 

that were made by members when they were in opposition. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, the unfortunate part I have 

today is the best comment I did find happened to come from the 

member who is currently recovering from an operation in 

Toronto. We’ve acknowledged that and we wish him well. But I 

have to read this into the record because it’s an interesting 

comment. He says this: 

 

It has, I think, always been regarded as unfair to put 

detailed questions to the minister with respect to the 

expenditures of the department, but that is certainly within 

the realm of what’s being discussed. It’s just been thought 

not to be practical to do so. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the questions that have been raised by a number 

of members . . . and I appreciate the Minister of Agriculture all 

of a sudden saying . . . his comment was, that was then, this is 

now. And I can appreciate government members not wanting to 

be reminded of what took place when they were on this side of 

the floor. And I can appreciate, Mr. Chairman, we can go back 

and we can dig up all kinds of comments, even where members 

used other members’ names. We can dig all of that up. I can see 

why government members wouldn’t want that to be raised. 

 

In all due fairness to the Minister of Finance, the Minister of 

Finance wasn’t here, so she’s not aware of what took place 

prior to, and the types of questions that used to be raised. Such 

as a question, Mr. Chairman, a question at the time raised by the 

member from Regina Victoria about are you going to allow 

Saskatchewan transit systems to apply for rebates of the gas tax, 

which is very much a provincial tax and has to do with the 

budget. That was interim supply in August of 1989. 

 

Or again the member from Regina Victoria talking about the 

bond credit rating. And I guess, Mr. Chairman, we could ask 

that today because the Premier is available today to respond to 

his trip down to Toronto and New York to talk to the bond 

credit agencies. And I’m sure the Premier’s just waiting with 

bated breath for the bond agencies to come out with their 

approval or disapproval of the budget. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, there’s so many other things, like the home 

improvement program. And today in question period a question 

was raised about — or not in question period; I think it was a 

ruling by the Speaker — about a question and a motion, a Bill 

before this Assembly where we had asked the government if 

they’ve taken into consideration the problems that may arise 

when they review the babysitters’ legislation that has put a lot 

of parents in a difficult financial position; if they have taken 

into consideration what kind of dollars that they’ll be dealing 

with and whether or not those funds would be available. 

 

And I’d like to ask the Minister of Finance whether the Minister 

of Finance has any idea as to the amount of dollars that the 

government may be looking at in compensation to parents for 

something that they were not aware of as far as paying their 

babysitters under the new Labour Standards Act. I wonder if the 

Minister of Finance could respond to that, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I think what we have to do again is remind ourselves 

what we’re doing here. Those sorts of details we welcome the 

opportunity to supply and we would like to move to that process 

where we can get into a detailed discussion of this budget. 

Because as I said, we quite like this budget and we’d like to 

have lots of opportunities to discuss the details of it. 

 

But I just want to remind the members opposite why there is 

some urgency to passing interim supply. It’s got nothing to do 

with me needing the money. I don’t get any money from this. It 

has to do with small agencies in the province who depend on 

getting their money on a timely basis. Their fiscal year starts 

April l. The budget won’t be passed for some time after April 1, 

and we welcome that opportunity to discuss the budget. 

 

However, what I want to make clear to the member opposite is 

that these agencies need their money. And last week when I 

mentioned the fact that if they didn’t get their money on a 

timely basis they would have to go out and borrow money, I 

want to remind people in the province what the response of the 

members opposite was. And I quote from Hansard: 

 

Running a line of credit is nothing to be afraid of and it’s 

nothing to get alarmed about . . . (And I thought back to 

exactly the Conservatives saying it wasn’t . . . no problem 

running lines of credit) . . . and if a few folks have to go on 

a line of credit for a few days in order to keep things going, 

it’s not going to be the end of your world and it won’t be 

the end of their world. 

 

What I want to ask the members opposite is whether they think 

the Big Sisters of Regina have a line of credit and have a 

capacity to run a line of credit until the members opposite 

decide to pass interim supply. 

 

And I would also remind the members opposite that perhaps 

they might have done something quite remarkable. They may   



616  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

have finally achieved something that is noteworthy. They make 

the Liberals in the legislature look good because the other 

members on the other side of this House, although they want to 

debate the budget in great detail, have understood that there are 

groups out there that require their money as soon as possible 

and they’re supporting interim supply. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, that’s incredible. I guess it’s hug a 

Liberal today. I don’t know whether the polls are changing a 

little bit and now you’ve got to change . . . rock them back the 

other way or what the situation is. But I would just as soon, Mr. 

Chairman, not be totally linked with the Liberal Party as being 

part of the opposition. 

 

I think we have established our own level of . . . amongst the 

people of Saskatchewan as far as our credibility. And I think, 

Mr. Chairman, the questioning we have divulged in and gotten 

involved in over the past two sessions and the questions that we 

will raise in a number of areas are going to speak for 

themselves. 

 

And the ability of our caucus to work and to cooperate and to 

bring issues to the floor of the Assembly, such as the one we 

raised today regarding the Dorsey report and SGEU members, 

the interesting thing is while I appreciate the fact that the 

minister can hide behind the fact that they don’t have control of 

SGEU and the way they handle their finances, the fact is, Mr. 

Chairman, people are going to be left on the hook because 

SGEU didn’t implement the Dorsey report. The province, the 

government, the Minister of Health, and the Minister of Labour 

implemented the Dorsey report to consolidate unions in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it would seem to me, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister of 

Labour and this government should be responsible to make sure 

that SGEU follows up with its responsibilities. 

 

And the interesting thing as well, I find, is that if it was any 

other organization, say a business group, that business group 

would be . . . this government would tackle them right now and 

say you have an obligation to meet the promises and the 

obligations you have to your membership whether there’s a 

change or not. 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, that’s some of the things that I think as 

an opposition we will continue to bring before this Assembly 

and raising these questions that affect individuals. 

 

The minister was just crying the blues a moment ago about the 

fact that there will not be funding available for a number of 

organizations. I would suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, that the 

Department of Finance has the ability, has the wherewithal, 

already has it in motion — they know where they’re going to be 

once this interim supply Bill is in place. 

 

And if you tell me that, that you’re sitting there . . . When you 

go to the bank, Mr. Chairman, you don’t go to the bank to . . . 

and I’m not talking about borrowing money; I think other 

members may have talked about borrowing money — but when 

you’ve got funds coming in or when you’re going to disburse 

funds, you don’t go without having a plan in place. And the 

Department of Finance has operated in this province for a 

number of years and I think they have operated very well. 

 

But I would like to just say, Mr. Chairman, while we haven’t 

been able to get positive responses to a number of the questions, 

the Minister of Finance has indicated that they’re . . . and I’ve 

listened as all . . . many opposition members, members from the 

Liberal Party caucus, and our caucus have raised questions. I’ve 

listened to the Minister of Finance continually telling each 

member individually that well, I don’t really have those 

numbers here but ask those numbers of the department — that 

particular was the Department of Highways; whether it’s the 

Department of Health, whether it’s the Department of 

Agriculture, you can ask those questions individually of those 

departments. And, Mr. Chairman, we will. 

 

(1445) 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, as well I think there’s a number of 

questions have been asked over the last few days that the 

Minister of Finance will have to come prepared to answer in 

this session once we get into specific questions on the budget 

presented by the province of Saskatchewan. And while the 

Minister of Finance is quite pleased about this budget, I would 

like to remind the minister that the auditor has already indicated 

that there are a number of holes. There are a number of 

concerns that our caucus has raised, a number of concerns we 

will continue to raise. 

 

And I would just like to say that while it might, it might please 

a person just to hold up an interim supply Bill for another 

period of time, whether it be till 5 o’clock or till 10 o’clock this 

evening, it’s not, it hasn’t been our intention, Mr. Chairman, to 

just hold up the Bill for the sake of holding it up. 

 

I think we’ve raised some points. We certainly are looking 

forward, Mr. Chairman, to the fact that when we get into 

line-by-line debate in the Committee of Finance we expect the 

ministers, regardless of which department they’re involved — 

and whether it’s the Minister of Education in a response to the 

questions today about how school boards are going to operate 

since they don’t really have an idea of what’s available in 

funding, or whether it’s the minister responsible for Highways 

and the flood conditions down in the south-west or any other 

portions . . . there are a number of questions that we will 

certainly be raising. 

 

And I would like to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that at this time I 

really have no further questions unless the Minister of Finance, 

unless the Minister of Finance wants to respond and give me an 

opportunity, raise another point or question that I can speak to. I 

think we’re at that point that we can allow this interim supply 

bill to go forward. 

 

However, one question. I still haven’t received my copy of the 

amount of supply that’s been asked for, the line-by-line, I 

believe for 19 . . . or this two-month interim supply. And I’m 

wondering if that could be sent over before we’ve completed 

the debate this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the members   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

opposite. Yes, we sent you one over. We’ll send you another 

over so that you can look at it again. Sorry about that. This is 

especially for the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam 

Minister. Madam Minister, I thank you for the copy of . . . 

that’s just been forwarded to me about . . . just showing the total 

for interim supply that we’ve voting on — $675 million. 

Unfortunately I regret the fact that I never thought to ask for 

this on Friday, so I could have had a chance to review it even 

more. I think there’s maybe a number of questions here. 

 

I see there’s . . . in certain areas I notice it says the less . . . 

amounts more or less the twelve . . . the two months . . . or 

two-twelfths. But, Mr. Chairman, I think as I’ve indicated 

earlier we do have . . . we have asked a number of questions. 

We certainly are looking forward to ongoing debate with the 

Department of Finance. 

 

And I trust, Mr. Chairman, that we will have sufficient time; we 

will not be called by the Government House Leader towards 

what the government would presume to be the closure or the 

termination of this current session, and they indicate that the 

Minister of Finance really only has Friday afternoon or Friday 

morning or whatever to debate. We trust that we will have 

ample opportunity to not just debate and sit down with 

ministers for the other departments but certainly sit down with 

the Minister of Finance in good time, well before we may arrive 

at a time when the session will certainly disband for the 

summer. 

 

So at the present time, while it’s difficult to say thank you for 

the responses because I think we’re still looking for a lot of 

responses to the questions we’ve given, I want to indicate that 

at this time now we’re more than prepared to allow the interim 

supply Bill to move forward. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 

hereby move resolution no. 2: 

 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1996 the sum 

of $675,429,000 to be granted out of the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to take a moment to 

thank the minister and her officials, and we certainly look 

forward to having further discussion as we get into line-by-line 

debate on the Department of Finance. Thank you. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That Bill No. 43, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Year ending on March 31, 1998, be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly and under 

Rule 55-2, I move that the Bill now be read a second and third 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9  The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 9, 

The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 replaces The 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act and is intended to improve the 

ability of the park to carry out its business. 

 

These changes will also increase the representation by first 

nations and community members on the board. Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park officially came into existence in September, 

1989. It is a nationally recognized heritage park that contributes 

to increasing public awareness and understanding of the cultural 

legacy of the northern plains Indians. It is one of the top 10 

tourist attractions in Saskatchewan, based on attendance, and 

attracts visitors from all over the globe. 

 

Wanuskewin marks a concentration of pre-contact historic sites 

which date back 6,000 years. Here people gathered to 

reacquaint themselves with their traditions, hunt bison, gather 

food and herbs, and escape the winter winds. 

 

The new legislation will change the name of the Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park Corporation to the Wanuskewin Heritage Park 

Authority. This will achieve consistency with other urban park 

authorities such as Meewasin Valley Authority which is one of 

the park’s partners. 

 

(1500) 

 

The new legislation now lists the board membership of 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park, which includes representation from 

the park’s eight partners. The board membership has also been 

expanded to increase representation from first nations, as well 

as the broader community. 

 

The reference in the original Act to the interpretation and   



618  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

preservation of native culture has also been changed to Indian 

culture to provide the correct legal terminology for referring to 

the first nations peoples, as referenced in this country’s 

constitutional framework. 

 

The legislation also increases the borrowing powers of the park 

to provide it with greater operating flexibility throughout the 

fiscal year. This has been accomplished by removing the limit 

on borrowing that can be done by the park without the approval 

of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. This is also consistent 

with the legislation for other urban park authorities. 

 

I’m confident that the new Act will enable the Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park to continue to operate effectively as a 

not-for-profit enterprise and to provide a unique and memorable 

experience for its visitors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 9, The 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have this opportunity to address the amendments 

proposed within Bill No. 9, The Wanuskewin Heritage Park 

Act. There are many wonderful tourism attractions in 

Saskatchewan and Wanuskewin Park is a fantastic complement 

to Saskatchewan’s tourism industry. 

 

Wanuskewin means “seeking peace of mind” and thousands of 

visitors seek out not only peace of mind but a taste of the 

overpowering spirituality of the park. During my own visit to 

the park, I found a wide range of cultural attractions including 

interactive displays and historical trails and overnight camping. 

It gave me some great, tangible examples of the origins of 

Saskatchewan native culture. 

 

Wanuskewin has now been in operation for five years and will 

celebrate its anniversary this summer on June 27. The park 

designers and the Saskatchewan bands that are all involved in 

this project are doing a remarkable job of passing down the 

traditions and diverse experiences of 6,000 years of history of 

the northern plains Indian people. 

 

I am hopeful that some of the amendments proposed within Bill 

No. 9 will enable Wanuskewin to continue to grow and develop 

into one of the leading tourism attractions in Canada. 

 

Having a year-round historical attraction such as this rounds out 

many other Saskatchewan events that celebrate the rich native 

of history of this province. For example, thousands of people 

were fortunate enough to have taken in the 19th annual 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated Powwow in Regina this past 

weekend. The event featured over 600 dancers from across 

North America and drew visitors from a wide range of 

backgrounds. 

 

One great benefit of this event is that the display of traditional 

costumes, drumming, and dancing reaches people from every 

age and racial background. The pride these people feel about 

sharing their culture with non-aboriginal people is displayed in 

the remarks of one of the dancers, Wavell Starr, in today’s 

Leader-Post. Starr says, and I quote: 

“People don’t understand why the powwow is so important 

to me . . . But this aspect of my life is just as important . . . 

as . . . my education. It’s really satisfying to know (that) 

you’re playing a part in keeping the culture alive.” 

 

And they are keeping their culture alive for future generations 

and Indian people. Many of the participants in this weekend’s 

powwow were children. 

 

Thousands of native youth were also in Prince Albert this past 

weekend for the Prince Albert Indian Winter Games. This event 

is also gaining an international reputation as a venue to promote 

Indian culture. The youth competed in a variety of events 

including hockey, curling, broom ball, boxing, and traditional 

hand games. The Indian Winter Games promotes healthy living 

and leadership skills among our aboriginal youth. 

 

Too many people these days are quick to criticize the 

development of Saskatchewan aboriginal communities. But 

facilities such as Wanuskewin and events like the SIFC 

(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) Powwow and the 

P.A. (Prince Albert) Winter Games are all forums for 

highlighting the rich and colourful history of these people. They 

also emphasize how the spiritual and traditional customs of the 

past can be used by all Saskatchewan communities in order to 

effect positive future development. 

 

Saskatchewan people do a fantastic job in promoting our 

province’s multicultural mosaic by staging hundreds of 

different types of events throughout the year. Celebrating our 

heritage and the traditions of our ancestors gives Saskatchewan 

communities a unique flavour. I am proud to say that I come 

from a province that embraces its expansive history instead of 

one that uses its ethnic differences as the grounds of dissent. 

 

When Wanuskewin was included in provincial legislation 

relating to Saskatchewan’s urban parks in 1989, it was 

introduced as a non-controversial Bill. That is because all 

parties of this legislature recognize the need for a year-round 

facility that would promote and educate people about 

Saskatchewan’s aboriginal cultures. 

 

Saskatchewan’s breathtaking natural landscape and colourful 

history provide a solid foundation for a successful tourism 

industry in this province. But members of Saskatchewan’s 

tourism industry have long debated the issue of government 

involvement in regulating tourism enterprises. The recent 

changes to the structure of Saskatchewan’s Tourism Authority 

reflects some of these opinions. 

 

I recognize that Wanuskewin is rapidly becoming one of 

Saskatchewan’s more popular tourist attractions. And in doing 

so, I also recognize that many of the amendments proposed 

within Bill No. 9 are intended to clarify the duties and 

responsibilities that go along with this growing enterprise. 

 

Because this heritage park is a joint project funded by the 

provincial and federal governments and by Saskatchewan 

Indian bands, the amendments proposed within Bill No. 9 

should clearly define the responsibilities of the Authority’s 

board members. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

While I wholeheartedly support expanding the composition of 

the board to include greater representation from the first nations 

community, I have a few concerns about the other amendments 

pertaining to the fiscal operations of the park. 

 

The Liberal caucus certainly supports open and accountable 

government, so the amendments requiring the Wanuskewin 

Authority to provide an annual report are welcome. But many 

private business people in Saskatchewan do question the 

amount of control the Saskatchewan government exercises over 

the tourism industry. 

 

While Bill No. 9 should create some of the necessary tools the 

Wanuskewin Heritage Authority will most certainly need in 

order to facilitate growth and the future development of the 

park, I do have some reservations about Saskatchewan 

taxpayers being ultimately responsible for guaranteeing future 

loans taken out by this Authority. 

 

I also have some concerns about the powers of this Bill that are 

left to be prescribed in the regulations. Once again, this 

legislation leaves too many of the details to regulations and 

subject to the power of the minister. This technique does not 

surprise me because this government continually takes the 

power of decision making out of this House to behind closed 

doors, where it can rule by regulation. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I question why this government 

would not prefer to include major legislative changes within the 

structure of the Act itself so that proper public scrutiny of these 

changes could be made before they become law. 

 

This government shows us time and time again how its lack of 

foresight and planning can adversely affect Saskatchewan 

people. I hold the babysitting wage fiasco and the chaos 

surrounding reassessment as two solid examples of this 

government’s abuse of power and mismanagement. Who pays 

for this government’s mistakes? The Saskatchewan people. If 

the minister and her colleagues would make the legislative 

process truly open, some of these problems could be avoided. 

 

I am still gathering input on the amendments relating to the 

fiscal operations of Wanuskewin Heritage Park and how they 

could impact Saskatchewan taxpayers. Therefore at this time I 

move that this motion be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 

Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to speak to the proposed amendments to The 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act. 

 

Members will be aware that this government has engaged the 

public, employers, workers, and our training institutions in 

designing a new provincial training strategy. One year ago in 

this Assembly I released a discussion paper outlining the 

reasons why we need a new training strategy and the principles 

on which that strategy was to be based. 

Training is a shared responsibility among learners, industry, 

education institutions, communities, and governments. 

Apprenticeship is a crucial part of any effective training policy. 

One of the areas where we received good feedback was on 

improving the existing apprenticeship legislation. 

 

The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act is an essential 

component of the training system in this province. The 

amendments I’m introducing in this Bill will address 

shortcomings that industry, employers, and workers have 

identified as restrictive. The proposed changes are directed at 

developing a more cost-effective apprenticeship and trade 

certification system. 

 

The proposed amendments address seven areas of concern: 

eliminating gender-biased language throughout the Act; 

increasing the fines for failing to comply with the 

apprenticeship and trade certification regulations; allowing the 

director to approve joint training administrative committees; 

reducing the length of training time required to designate a 

trade from two years to one year; allowing for endorsements to 

reflect technological change or specialization; allowing for the 

designation of a sector; and providing for a representative of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology to 

be appointed to the provincial apprenticeship board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, employers and employees have asked for these 

changes in training and certification. The changes proposed in 

this Bill will allow for the development of better regulations to 

address the specific needs of trades. They will help provide for 

a more effective training system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, presently job trades require a minimum of two 

years of work experience for designation. A number of trades 

have said that an apprenticeship period of less than two years is 

appropriate, particularly in the case of sub-trades. The 

amendment to a one year minimum allows regulations to be 

developed that match the training with the needs of the trade 

and not artificially restrict and delay training and certification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of trades identified a need to provide 

some type of certification that would indicate the holder is 

current with changing technology and work practices or has met 

the requirements of a specialty area. For example, plumbers 

could have their gas fitting qualification reflected on their 

journeyperson certificate as an endorsement. This amendment 

will allow this and provide for a more efficient certification 

process. 

 

Many existing and emerging sectors are interested in the 

apprenticeship and trade certification model to address their 

training needs. Tourism is an example of a sector which has 

recently received approval for two apprenticeable trades and 

which will likely request designation as a sector. This 

amendment to the Act will allow for the designation of sectors 

in the regulations, thereby facilitating sector approaches to 

apprenticeship and trade certification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize again that the amendments 

proposed in this Bill were drafted at the request of industry, 

employers, and workers as represented by the trade advisory   



620  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

boards and the Provincial Apprenticeship Board. They will 

allow the apprenticeship and trade certification system to better 

respond to the industry’s needs in Saskatchewan. 

 

These proposed amendments will contribute to the 

strengthening of the relevant, flexible, high quality training 

system that helps Saskatchewan people get jobs. These 

proposed amendments have been endorsed by the Provincial 

Apprenticeship Board. 

 

I’m pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 10, amendments to 

The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 

opportunity to speak on behalf of the Liberal opposition and 

raise our concerns and questions regarding Bill 10, The 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act. 

 

The Liberal opposition welcomes some of the proposed 

amendments to the current law. No doubt some of the people 

affected by the changes will welcome them as well. But we 

would not be doing our job as opposition if we did not carefully 

scrutinize this Bill and raise the concerns brought to us today by 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the main purposes of the Bill is to make training in 

Saskatchewan more responsive to the new economy. And the 

government does say, existing and emerging sectors want to use 

the apprenticeship and trade certification model to address their 

training needs. 

 

The government says the proposed changes to the current 

legislation will allow for more flexibility in matching training 

needs to work needs. New industries like multi-media and 

communications will be able to set up apprenticeship programs 

like plumbers and mechanics have had for years. Instead of two 

years, students will only have to apprentice for the one year. 

 

Apprentice education will move more and more out of the 

classroom and into the workplace. The Liberal opposition has 

long encouraged the government to development partnerships 

between education and industry. And this Bill does appear to be 

a move in that direction. 

 

Getting our youth ready to work in fast-growing sectors of the 

economy is vital to our economic health as a province, but we 

have to ask the question, is the government going about this in 

the best possible way? 

 

I’m concerned that the Bill will not address the problem of 

full-time employment. Currently about 21 per cent of 

Saskatchewan workers are employed part time. This is the 

highest rate of part-time employment in this country. Many of 

those people wanted to work full time but couldn’t find work. 

 

As we all know, part-time work often means financial 

insecurity — 4,600 people in this province who receive social 

assistance work part time. They can’t find enough work to 

support themselves and their families. 

 

The high rate of part-time employment in this province also 

affects our youth. Youth have the highest unemployment rate in 

this country. The prospect of part-time, insecure employment 

no doubt has contributed to the numbers of young people who 

leave this province every year. 

 

This Bill proposes to make the apprenticeship system more 

responsive to industry’s needs, but some suggest that perhaps 

this isn’t the best balance. In the long term we are in danger of 

ending up with a workforce that is too narrowly trained, some 

would suggest. 

 

A one-year apprenticeship may not be enough time to become 

well rounded in a particular field. Workers with little theory and 

narrow practical experience will have a tough — a very tough 

— time making a transition to another sector or skill area. What 

we would see then is a demand for additional training, or people 

standing in the unemployment line because they could not make 

the cut. 

 

Surely industry needs a flexible workforce. A broadly trained 

workforce will be able to move quickly with minimal additional 

training to other sectors of an industry. We need to always seek 

the best balance between a broadly trained, technical workforce 

and quick, responsive training to meet immediate job growth. 

 

I’m glad to see the legislation open up to include new and 

emerging sectors. Hopefully this will serve to alleviate some of 

the burden on post-secondary education. I’m encouraged that 

the government is proposing to include educators such as 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) on the Provincial Apprenticeship Board. Times 

change so rapidly and there needs to be an all-inclusive process 

to meet the challenges of the new workplace. 

 

But one thing the government is overlooking is that SIAST has 

training programs for these new and emerging sectors. Some of 

them, like the new multi-media program, are already up and 

running; others are on the way. More would be possible if they 

were not faced with serious government cut-backs. 

 

We’ve all heard the NDP (New Democratic Party) whine about 

federal cut-backs — from the state of our highways, our health 

care system, to our education system. They blame it, in a 

self-interested and disunifying way, on the federal government. 

But nine other provinces have faced the same cut-backs, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan is not unique in this and we have to find 

progressive ways of dealing with difficult times; ways that 

embody the Canadian values of patience, compromise, and 

understanding. 

 

Let’s hope the government does not forget that SIAST is fully 

capable of responding and adapting to changes in the 

workplace. They provide excellent training to Saskatchewan 

people but right now they are under increased financial strain. 

The NDP would like to take full credit for the quality of 

education in Saskatchewan, but they are all too quick to blame 

the federal government for any problems. The province has held 

the line for this year on education cut-backs but this does   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

not mean education isn’t suffering. 

 

I’ve one more concern, area of concern, regarding the proposed 

amendments we are discussing today, Mr. Speaker. The Bill 

proposes to make the language of the Act gender neutral, and 

that’s great. But gender-neutral language is just one small step 

in eradicating inequality. 

 

On average, women earn 70 cents for every dollar a man earns. 

This is because women can be found working in part-time, in 

poorly paid jobs, with little chance for advancement. 

Traditionally male-dominated sectors like mechanics and 

welding and new sectors such as high-tech communication offer 

well-paid job opportunities. 

 

Apprenticeship opportunities in the new job areas may offer 

women the opportunity to access these jobs. This would be a 

great opportunity for women, but evidence suggests it’ll take 

more than gender-neutral language to accomplish this. 

 

Women have been entering non-traditional occupations in 

increasing numbers. SIAST has an education equity program in 

place since 1990, but women are not staying in these jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, and somewhere along the line we have to ask why. 

 

So gender-neutral language is a welcome step, but it is a small 

step. 

 

This NDP government claims it has made significant advances 

for women. When you consider the facts, the picture isn’t as 

rosy as the government makes it out to be — 82 per cent of the 

government’s clerical positions are filled by women; 60 per 

cent of the temporary and part-time government employees are 

women; 50 per cent of women hired in management and 

non-traditional jobs are not permanent employees. The 

government’s record on equity leaves a lot to be desired. 

 

It appears that this Bill will help link students and employers in 

emerging economic sectors and reduce the training time, but 

there are other sections of Bill 10 on which we’re still gathering 

some input and will require some more time to study the full 

implications of the Bill. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

at this time move adjournment of this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 3:24 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 43 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1998 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:26 p.m. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20  The Small Claims Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Small Claims Act, 1997. 

 

Small Claims Court is sometimes described as a citizen’s court. 

This court provides easier access to justice for people with 

claims of a small monetary amount. The procedures in Small 

Claims Court are simplified and informal. They are 

understandable and easy to use. This enables people to 

represent themselves in court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments being introduced today have 

resulted from the efforts of the Advisory Committee on Dispute 

Resolution. This committee was appointed by the previous 

minister of Justice in 1994. Its members represent a broad range 

of groups and individuals, including the Canadian Bar 

Association, The Law Society of Saskatchewan, the consumers’ 

association, Mediation Saskatchewan, the Arbitration and 

Mediation Institute, Saskatoon community mediation, the John 

Howard Society, the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and 

the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan — certainly an impressive 

array of groups and individuals, Mr. Speaker. The committee 

also includes persons representing labour interests, the 

academic perspective, government, and the judiciary. 

 

This advisory committee made it a priority to conduct an 

extensive review of appropriate measures for the resolution of 

smaller disputes. They have recently forwarded their 

recommendations for improvements to the Minister of Justice. 

Most of their recommendations deal with non-legislative 

matters. However the committee did provide a number of 

comments as to how The Small Claims Act could be improved. 

Their recommendations form the basis for the Bill before us 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Small Claims Act are put 

forward as an entirely new Bill for two reasons. First, this 

approach allows us to review the language of the Act in detail 

to ensure that it is clear and can be understood by people who 

are not legally trained, which of course is of great importance in 

Small Claims Court where we want citizens to have the right to 

represent themselves. Second, this is one of the Bills which is 

being put forward for re-enactment in French and English this 

session. This is another step in fulfilling our commitment to 

Saskatchewan’s francophone community. 

 

Specific amendments are proposed in a number of areas. One 

amendment replaces the current monetary limit of $5,000 for 

Small Claims Court with an ability to set the monetary limit by 

regulation. This change will allow us to pursue a 

recommendation of the advisory committee which suggested 

adopting different monetary limits in different parts of the 

province. This would enhance access to court-based dispute 

resolution in areas of the province not fully served by the Court 

of Queen’s Bench. And I think members will understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are more Provincial Court centres around the 

province than Court of Queen’s Bench centres. 

  



622  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

Another amendment reduces the number of exemptions from 

the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court, leaving only those 

that are constitutionally required — in other words, people will 

be able to take a wider variety of cases to Small Claims Court 

and represent themselves. 

 

A third amendment gives the Small Claims Court the ability to 

transfer a case to a different geographic court location or to the 

Court of Queen’s Bench if that would be a more appropriate 

place for the matter to be heard. 

 

A fourth amendment authorizes the Court of Queen’s Bench to 

transfer matters to the Small Claims Court with the consent of 

the parties. This will eliminate the need for parties to 

recommence an action if they decide they want the matter to be 

heard in Small Claims Court. 

 

A fifth amendment expands the kinds of orders the court can 

make. Currently Small Claims Court is limited to ordering the 

payment of money or the return of property. This change will 

ensure the court has the ability to respond with an order that 

makes the most sense in the specific circumstances of the case 

before it. 

 

A sixth amendment eliminates the requirement for a party to 

prove their claim if the other party does not appear at the trial. 

A seventh provision of the Bill allows for judges to make orders 

detailing how judgements are to be complied with, such as a 

schedule for payment by instalments. This will assist parties in 

assuring the judgements are complied with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the Dispute Resolution 

Committee also recommended a number of additional, 

non-legislative improvements to the way in which smaller 

claims can be resolved. Officials in Justice are working with the 

groups represented on the committee to address many of those 

items. For example, the information provided to claimants and 

defendants who approach the court will be revised to ensure 

that information about both court and non-court options for 

resolving disputes is complete and easy to understand. 

 

As members of the House may know, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

initiatives taken by the Department of Justice over the last 

several years has been to encourage people to go to mediation 

and alternate dispute resolution as opposed to going to court. 

And that will continue under this legislation. 

 

Under the leadership of the Small Claims Court in Regina, a 

voluntary mediation program has been developed. And I think 

that’s good news. I think we welcome it, and the opposition 

welcomes it as well, I think, Mr. Speaker. This program 

provides another option for parties to resolve their disputes. The 

potential use of mediation in small claims matters is also 

recognized in the Bill before us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should acknowledge the contributions of 

another group to the development of the Bill before us today. In 

1994 the law society, the Canadian Bar Association, and the 

provincial court judges’ association cooperated to submit a 

report on improvements to the Small Claims Court process. 

They provided the former Minister of Justice with 

recommendations on ways to alleviate problems they observed 

the public encountered in the Small Claims Court process. 

 

In some instances, this Bill adopts alternative solutions to the 

problems they identified, but there is a consensus that the 

improvements made by this Bill are consistent with the 

principles that these people identified. These principles are: 

improved access to justice; keeping the cost of litigation for 

small claims within reach of all citizens; and ensuring that the 

process is effective, efficient, simplified, and speedy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting Small 

Claims. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

begin debate for our caucus, the official opposition, on Bill 20, 

The Small Claims Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the entire issue of access to the courts is of 

extreme interest to me, given what has happened in my 

constituency over the last year, and what is continuing to 

happen in the current year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our system of government, and our system of 

justice, it’s of extreme importance that everyone in our province 

has an equal opportunity to access our courtrooms and our 

justice system. And that in itself makes the small claims process 

so vital to our entire system of justice. 

 

The Small Claims Court allows people a fairly quick and easy 

access to a court and a judge to settle disputes involving 

relatively small monetary values. And, as important, it allows 

people this access without needing to hire legal counsel, which 

not only speeds up the process considerably but also offers 

more affordable justice to those who need or desire a quick 

solution in disputes. It’s sometimes a sad truth in the legal 

system that you get as much justice as you can afford. 

 

Without the small claims mechanism, our courtrooms would be 

even more clogged than they already are, and the judicial 

process would grind to a virtual halt. So obviously any 

amendments to the small claims courts Act that may make the 

process even more accessible for people is indeed of great 

interest to us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also recognize the work and the input 

that has gone into the process of updating our small claims 

system. We recognize and sincerely thank the members of the 

law society, the consumers’ association, the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, and 

all the other organizations that have been involved in the 

process of reviewing the small claims system since 1994. 

 

Obviously all of these groups do have a stake in this system and 

this Act, as do all Saskatchewan residents who may potentially 

need the use of small claims courts. And our hope is that the 

government has taken their recommendation seriously, though   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

we obviously have some doubts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes that are being put forth in this Act are 

extensive and comprehensive, and we want to make sure we 

have the opportunity to study all of these changes in their 

entirety. On the surface, some of the changes in the Act do 

seem warranted, though like I say, we’ll be doing extensive 

consultations of our own before voting on this Bill. 

 

In particular, expanding the jurisdiction of Small Claims Court 

seems to be a way to free up more of our courtrooms for matters 

that may be of a more serious nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a few of our preliminary discussions we have 

heard that there is justification for possibly raising the current 

limit for small claims action from $5,000. Some have suggested 

$10,000; others have said $15,000 would be a reasonable limit, 

given the expensive nature of employing the legal counsel that 

is necessary for taking action in Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

And we could have potentially supported such a change. 

Obviously in this day and age $5,000 certainly doesn’t go as far 

as it used to. And currently if a person’s complaint is over that 

magic figure, they’re headed to Court of Queen’s Bench, which 

means hiring lawyers and incurring what could potentially be 

great costs. In fact if this is the route forced on people whose 

claim exceeds that $5,000 figure by only a small amount, legal 

fees could potentially eat up most, if not all, of any award that 

may be coming to the complainant. Given these facts, many 

individuals or small businesses who would otherwise seek 

redress through the courts don’t, because it’s simply not 

economically feasible. 

 

So possibly a higher small claims ceiling would have been 

something worth considering, but this legislation does not do 

that, Mr. Speaker. Instead of taking the sensible approach to this 

question and looking at a higher limit, the government is 

seeking to introduce an imbalance into our judicial system. 

 

The way the Bill is being proposed in fact, Mr. Speaker, causes 

us considerable concern. I’ve always thought that one of the 

basic tenets of our judicial system is a fair and equal system that 

applies to all no matter where you live in this great province — 

that the law that stands in Melville is the same law that stands in 

Yorkton or Moose Jaw or Regina or anywhere else in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However it now appears, through this Bill, the government is 

beginning to move away from this very concept. It appears that 

the government is now willing to implement a system where the 

action you are allowed to take depends not only on what your 

case or complaint is but also where you happen to be in the 

province. 

 

The Bill proposes to give the Minister of Justice an 

extraordinary amount of discretion when it comes to the small 

claims system. 

 

No longer will one law apply equally across Saskatchewan. 

With this Bill the minister will now have the power, through 

regulation, to set varying limits across the province. This is of 

great concern to us, Mr. Speaker, and it should be of great 

concern to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I raise this issue only briefly today and will be 

raising it again along with other issues as we continue to debate 

Bill 20. But this particular section caught my attention in 

particular. Because most likely this new ministerial power will 

be used in the cases of those areas of the province that do not 

have easy access to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Obviously this is of great interest to me since the city of 

Melville will likely be one of those locations that will be 

affected by this new power. That’s because this same Minister 

of Justice last year moved to shut down Melville’s Court of 

Queen’s Bench, leaving it the only city in Saskatchewan 

without such a facility. 

 

Furthermore, the government passed legislation making it very 

easy for the province to shut down any Court of Queen’s Bench 

facility in Saskatchewan without so much as a word of debate. 

And the people were among the first to feel the pinch of this 

legislation. 

 

The decision to close Melville’s Court of Queen’s Bench was 

another in a long line of slaps in the face to the people of that 

community, Mr. Speaker. And like I said last year when we 

were debating that Bill, it was very likely that more 

communities in Saskatchewan would be facing the loss of their 

Queen’s Bench seats. Now it appears the government also 

indicates that very likely this will happen, given the nature of 

this provision. 

 

And no, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t appear to me that this 

government is interested in raising the ceiling in small claims 

action in order to give people more reasonable access to that 

system. Instead, what they’re proposing is keeping that limit in 

place in many areas of the province, including the larger urban 

centres which will continue to have Court of Queen’s Bench 

service. So this will not be any help to them. 

 

What it will do however, Mr. Speaker, is to get another 

roadblock out of the way to take away Queen’s Bench service 

from other smaller centres — centres such as Melville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this was not the case, wouldn’t the government 

have simply raised the limit on small claims actions? Why this 

move to set different limits for different areas unless they knew 

that there were about to be several more communities which 

currently have Queen’s Bench that will no longer have it in the 

near future? 

 

Like I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, when Melville lost its Court of 

Queen’s Bench it was yet another slap in the face, just as it is 

for any community that has lost this service or is about to. 

 

Through last year’s Bill, and now this one, Mr. Speaker, the 

government is quickly moving us away from the tenet of equal 

system for all Saskatchewan residents. And it is doing so by 

giving the minister an extraordinary amount of discretion. It 

centralizes more power in the minister’s office by making many 

of the future changes not subject to legislation that will be   



624  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

debated in this House. 

 

Rather, the minister will be able to close court-houses or set 

small claims limits through a simple stroke of the pen. He won’t 

have to consult anyone to make these changes. He especially 

won’t have to consult with the people in those communities that 

are facing change. Ask the people about this, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Melville, and I suspect many other places, can attest 

to this government’s lack of consultation. 

 

This is not a government that listens easily. We’ve seen this 

government do that in other areas as well, Mr. Speaker. 

Virtually every piece of legislation that comes our way dealing 

with health care has as its underlying goal, a movement to 

centralize more and more power in the government’s hands. 

 

(1545) 

 

This is a government hungry for power. It doesn’t want the 

bother of actual consultation. It wants nothing but to centralize 

decision making and do so outside of this legislature. No 

discussion. The people of Melville only found out about the 

move to close their Court of Queen’s Bench because the mayor 

of that community happens also to be a lawyer. Little thought 

was actually given to going to talk with city council prior to that 

decision being made and thought through. 

 

And even after such a discussion was undertaken, it came only 

after the Minister of Justice had already signed off the closure 

of Melville’s court. It was a cynical action that showed the 

people of Melville and the people of Saskatchewan what a sham 

it is when we hear about this government’s consultative 

process. If that wasn’t driven home to the people of Melville 

last year, it certainly was this year, when we learned that now 

the city’s Provincial Court is sent packing. 

 

The Provincial Court now has to pull up stakes and find a new 

home because it’s being kicked out of its present location. This 

too was done with no discussion with the people of Melville. 

The court-house has to find a new home, probably in a 

community hall somewhere, to make room for the city’s newly 

gutted SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management) office. 

 

Most of the jobs have been moved out of Melville to Saskatoon. 

But the government thinks it’s wise to spend thousands of 

dollars to renovate what was once a courtroom, into office 

space for what’s left of SERM in Melville. Of course the 

decision to take SERM out of Melville was also made with 

limited discussion with Melville city council. It was another 

stroke-of-the-pen decision made by another of the ministers in 

this government. 

 

How much the government is spending on renovating the 

court-house for SERM is a mystery. However as the minister 

declined to answer the written question I put to him a few 

weeks ago, I think we know why he declined to answer his 

question — because the government is embarrassed by the 

answer. But I think the people of Melville deserve an answer. 

They also deserve an answer as to how the government expects 

security to be enforced at Provincial Court from now on, if it is 

to be held in an ill-equipped community hall. 

 

What about all the money that was spent only a few years ago 

on increased security at the current court-house in Melville? 

Again the government has no answers for this, because frankly 

it was probably something they hadn’t thought of before those 

decisions were made. 

 

Had they bothered to talk to anyone prior to deciding, these 

problems may have been brought to their attention. But once 

again consultation went by the wayside, as this government 

moved to impose its will on the community regardless of what 

the people there might have to say. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The question before the 

Assembly is second reading debate on Bill No. 20, The Small 

Claims Act, and I’ve been listening carefully to the debate of 

the hon. member for some minutes. Recognizing that second 

reading debate is debate in principle and by its nature does tend 

to be somewhat more wide-reaching than individual clauses of 

the debate, it is becoming less clear to the Chair what the direct 

relationship is between the remarks made by the hon. member 

for Melville and the second reading debate of the Bill before us. 

And I’m sure that the hon. member from Melville will want to 

tie the point that he’s making, to the item of The Small Claims 

Act . . . Bill that is before the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate your wise 

decision and I will come back to the gist of my comments with 

respect to this particular Bill. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we certainly do recognize the 

contribution of the organization who put in their 2 cents on this 

particular Bill. However, getting back to the Bill, in looking at 

the result, the government appears to have used the process to 

further some other goals, namely reducing the level of court 

service in more areas, which goes back to the accessibility for 

court dealing with small claims, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I’ve stated, its solution to the problem of closing 

Queen’s Bench service in other areas is to introduce an 

inequitable small claims system to our province. And such an 

action is of grave concern to me, Mr. Speaker. To give the 

minister such extraordinary discretionary power puts us, I’m 

afraid, on another very slippery slope. Once again let me say 

that I do agree with trying to give people easier access to the 

courts, but this government has not shown any interest in doing 

that. 

 

Yes, raising the limit of Small Claims Court may be a 

worthwhile discussion, but setting different limits in different 

parts of the province simply because of the lack of Court of 

Queen’s Bench service in more and more settings is something 

that we must thoroughly discuss before allowing this Bill to go 

through this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other sections of this Bill that we 

are also studying very closely, and others of my hon. colleagues 

will have something to say with respect to the Bill in 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

However at this time, I move to adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Health Districts Amendment Act, 

1997. The Health Districts Act introduced in 1993 has been 

fundamental in our renewal of the health system. The creation 

of health districts has opened the way to many major 

improvements in our health system, including allowing local 

control over health services to ensure they meet the needs of 

district residents. 

 

As well we’re reducing administration of our health system 

from over 400 governing boards, all appointed, to 30 elected 

and accountable district health boards. And we’re securing our 

high quality health system for future generations. 

 

Today, thanks to the diligent efforts of these diligent district 

health boards, our health renewal is the most successful in 

Canada. And with the introduction of this year’s provincial 

budget, the restructuring process is nearly complete. We have 

increased funding to ensure needed health services are available 

now and in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Health Districts Act and the changes that it 

ushered in have been truly ground breaking. But as is the case 

with anything that is leading the way, we have come across 

some areas where improvements are required. 

 

The amendments before the House, Mr. Speaker, are intended 

to improve the legislation and provide clarification. The first 

amendment will ensure the district health boards have the 

flexibility to set appropriate rates for board members, either at 

or below the maximum level. 

 

District health board members have a challenging job. They 

deserve fair compensation for the tremendous amount of time 

and energy they put into managing health services. That district 

health boards should have the flexibility to set compensation for 

board members at a level below the maximum set by the 

government, if they so choose. That was the original intention 

of The Health Districts Act. This amendment will clarify that 

intention. 

 

These amendments before you also address the matter of 

property taxes as they relate to district health boards and their 

affiliated organizations. There are a number of statutes on the 

books that exempt hospitals and nursing homes from paying 

property taxes, but those statutes do not recognize the health 

districts that today own many of these facilities, nor do they 

specifically recognize health centres. 

 

By and large, municipalities have not chosen to levy any 

property taxes on these facilities and organizations. The purpose 

of this amendment is simply to clarify in legislation the tax 

exempt status of district health boards and their non-profit 

affiliates. For-profit affiliates will continue to pay local property 

taxes. 

 

There have been consultations on this matter with the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. All have 

indicated their support for this clarification. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendments before you 

will clarify these two important issues for district health boards, 

their affiliates, the municipalities, and school boards. In doing 

so, they will support and improve upon the operation of our 

health system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure to stand in the House today and express some of the 

many concerns I have with The Health Districts Amendment 

Act and this government’s performance with respect to health 

care reform in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very important that as official opposition we 

carefully scrutinize any health care legislation put forward by 

this government. And it is important because the people of this 

province, especially those who have been touched by the 

painful consequences of health care reform and those who work 

within the system and know all too well the pain that this 

government has caused, no longer trust the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have lost faith in the 

minister and in his government. They simply do not believe that 

government promises that no more beds will be cut and no more 

jobs will be lost. The people simply do not believe that the pain 

is over. 

 

Allow me to step back for a minute and reflect on the faith 

Saskatchewan people once had in their health care system. 

 

We are constantly reminded, Mr. Speaker, by the members 

opposite of the key role their predecessors played in the 

implementation of medicare. For the record, I’d like the 

Assembly to note that it was a Liberal government in 

Saskatchewan which first proposed publicly funded hospital 

insurance, and a Liberal government which legislated medicare 

at the national level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continually tell the people 

of Saskatchewan that they should trust their government to 

preserve medicare. Mr. Speaker, today I’m going to say to the 

Assembly yet another time, and I can only hope that this time 

the members opposite will listen, it is no longer enough for this 

government to ride the coat-tails of its predecessors and claim 

that they are the solitary protector of medicare in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the people of this province no 

longer trust this government and their health care system. They 

no longer trust the government, because they promised to save 

medicare, and what they have done is throw our health care   



626  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

system into turmoil. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

did this without any clear indication what the end result would 

be. When the health care reforms began, Mr. Speaker, the 

government could not quantify what was wrong with the health 

care system. Moreover, the government jumped head first into 

the district formation and cost-containment process without 

putting any evaluative tools in place. 

 

What does this mean in 1997 now that the members opposite 

tell us the cuts are over? I will tell you what it means, Mr. 

Speaker. It means that we have no idea if we’re better off in 

terms of quality of care or even efficiency of service than we 

were in 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to quote from Roberta McKay when she 

said, quote: 

 

I have been involved in the health care field for 35 years. 

Never in all that time have I experienced the level of 

frustration that I now feel. I also have never seen morale so 

low and animosity so apparent amongst the various groups 

of care providers and support staff. The environment is 

unhealthy and, in spite of the rhetoric, communication and 

coordination is at an all time low. There are caring and 

talented people in Regina Health District and it’s sad to see 

them struggle in a demoralizing atmosphere. 

 

Mr. Minister, allow me to repeat that in case the minister 

neglected to listen to the words: “The environment is unhealthy 

. . .” It is sadly ironic that every day our health care providers 

must work in an extremely unhealthy environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister and the members opposite often talk 

of wellness and the expanded detriments of health. They say 

that factors such as the individual’s work environment and 

stress level can have a greater impact on individual and 

population health in the health care system itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what does a minister say to an individual 

whose place of employment is the health care system? Let me 

remind the minister what he told health care workers only a few 

short weeks ago. Mr. Speaker, after the budget was presented 

on March 20, the Minister of Health stated that nurses and 

health care employees should no longer worry about losing 

jobs, and communities should no longer worry about losing 

hospital beds and nursing home beds. 

 

(1600) 

 

According to Roberta McKay’s description which incidentally 

is reinforced by many individuals and health care worker 

providers who share their grave concern, what this 

government’s health care reforms with us, and again according 

to Ms. McKay’s description, the minister’s promises is too little 

too late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is essential that this government begin to listen 

to the serious concerns of the health care providers and home 

care workers. Since the government has not been listening to 

these people, Mr. Speaker, let me share with the minister some 

of the concerns their representatives have put forward. 

 

The unions which represent health care workers in this province 

are concerned about the continual layoffs; the shift away from 

full-time jobs towards more casual, part-time positions; the 

increase in the number of workers on lay-off recall; the 

replacement of health care workers with volunteers; the 

deterioration in housekeeping, lab, and dietary services; and 

yes, Mr. Speaker, the more stressful work environment which is 

resulting in more sick-leave. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I do not believe the 

government when they say that the pain is over, nor do the 

people of this province. That is why before we will support any 

health care legislation this government proposes, we intend to 

further scrutinize the legislation, and consult with individuals 

and groups which this legislation will affect. 

 

However little further consultation or analysis is necessary to 

determine that this legislation will do very little to alleviate the 

crisis which our health care system is currently experiencing. 

 

The Health Districts Act is a flawed piece of legislation. As a 

matter of fact The Health Districts Act was flawed from its very 

inception in 1993. When the district formation process first got 

under way, the members in this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan were told that enabling legislation was absolutely 

necessary for authority to be transferred to the health districts in 

the province. 

 

This may have been acceptable in 1993, but is not acceptable 

that since 1993 the government has done nothing to address the 

serious problem in this legislation. For example, Mr. Speaker, 

when the government embarked on the health care reform 

initiative, it applied only to the southern portion of the province. 

Although we now recently see the formation of two northern 

districts, very little else has been done by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very little else has been done to address the 

serious condition of health care in northern Saskatchewan. We 

can only imagine that now that districts have been formed, this 

government will adopt the same policy as it adopted in the 

South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key reason this government set up health 

districts in this province was to provide a political buffer to 

protect themselves from the consequences of politically 

sensitive decisions. Under the new health care system, all of 

these decisions are now made by the health district boards. 

These are decisions, might I add, that are still effectively made 

by government. Not only does the government control the level 

of funding for the health districts, but they insist on appointing 

one-third of the board members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because this government controls the 

purse-strings and because it continues to underfund health care, 

especially in the North. People in La Loche continue to receive 

medical attention from a series of ATCO trailers. 

 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

Mr. Speaker, there are serious problems with the health care 

system and the legislation which established it. This 

government must open its eyes to the mess which has been 

created and begin to do something to rectify the crisis our health 

care system is in. 

 

We see nothing in this legislation which proposes to alleviate 

the obvious problems in the health care system. We plan to 

further consult those individuals and groups which will be 

directly affected by this health care legislation. We would like 

to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the government begin to do the 

same. 

 

Therefore at this time I move adjournment of this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 7 — The Cancer 

Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that the debate on The Cancer Foundation 

Act is something that we’ve been trying to get some more 

information on and taking some time to consult with a number 

of concerned parties. And it would certainly be inappropriate to 

allow the motion to go through second reading on such short 

notice, and therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated beside me 

is Sandra Morgan, who is the deputy minister of the 

department. Behind Ms. Morgan is Cheryl Hanson, assistant 

deputy minister. Behind me is John Boyd, the director of 

planning, policy and communications. Also present in the 

Assembly, Mr. Chair, sitting in the back row are Doug Forseth, 

senior labour relations policy analyst; Eric Greene, the assistant 

director of labour standards; and Sharon Little, manager of 

administration. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And also I would like 

to take the opportunity to welcome the minister and his officials 

here this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if we could start out this afternoon’s 

session by providing a list of all of the out-of-scope personnel 

in your department who are appointed by order in council and 

are subject to the Crown contracts Act. And would you be able 

to also provide us with a list of their salaries as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I can send across the list to 

the member if he likes. He’ll just have the list then. I won’t take 

the time of the committee to talk about it. You can just have the 

list. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, thank you. Mr. Minister, I’ll have 

a look at this here a little bit later. But also with respect to that 

legislation that governs Crown employment contracts, it’s my 

understanding that employees appointed by order in council 

have to file their contracts according to provisions of that 

legislation, and any subsequent amendments to the contract due 

to a raise or a promotion also have to be filed and made 

available for the public to view. 

 

And on that topic I’d like to ask the minister if he could tell us 

how many individuals from his department have failed to file 

since the legislation was introduced. And in addition, I’d like to 

know what controls, if any, are in place within the department 

to ensure that these employees file their contracts and 

amendments thereto with the proper authority. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I am 

instructed that the only person in the Department of Labour, on 

the employment list of the Department of Labour, that has a 

contract of the nature that the member refers to is Ms. Bilson, 

the Chair of the Labour Relations Board, and that her contract is 

on file as required by the Act. And as far as I know, it is . . . the 

Act has been fully complied with, with respect to her 

appointment. The other appointments were made pursuant to 

The Public Service Act. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Could I, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, could I 

just ask for one further clarification? When you say within 

compliance of the legislation, do you mean now or do you mean 

that it had occurred within the appropriate amount of time as 

governed by the Crown contracts legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Ms. Bilson has been in that position for 

more than four years — I think nearly five years — and as far 

as I’m aware, her contract has been filed as required. And if not, 

it’d come as a surprise to me. And she is the only one now 

employed by the department who’d fall into that category. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, in viewing the 

Estimates provided with the budget, I read with some interest 

some of the information regarding accommodation and central 

services, and I see that less is budgeted for this purpose this 

year —about 21,000 less than last year. My interest with this 

item is not so much with the cost but with the method by which 

it’s handled. 

 

  



628  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

It says here in the book that this particular item, item 2, 

provides for the payments to the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, and I guess I find the wording a little 

bit confusing. Does it mean that the department actually 

receives the money, or is the money simply allotted to you by 

the Department of Finance and held by the Department of 

Finance to pay for office space and minor renovations and other 

services on your behalf? 

 

(1615) 

 

I guess in other words, is it really the cost of accommodation 

and central services or is this just the Department of Finance 

holding the money for that purpose, but knowing that it might 

actually be lower or possibly higher? And I ask how it’s 

handled because I’m concerned that those preparing those sorts 

of estimates can use accommodations and central services items 

as a means of inflating departmental spending for political 

purposes, and particularly in fields like post-secondary 

education where buildings would play a significant role. And I 

just ask the minister if he might respond to this concern at this 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we actually pay the amounts 

referred to in the Estimates. The leases are of course negotiated 

by SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 

and the cost, the rental costs involved are made known to the 

department so that we can include an appropriate amount in our 

estimates that we bring to this House. 

 

The payments are made biennially — is that the term? — 

semi-annually. Yes, every six months; not every two years, 

every six months. And they are in the actual amount of the 

amount in the Estimates. 

 

The member noted that there was a decrease in the payments to 

be made this year. And that is because of the renegotiation of a 

lease and the fact that the department occupies slightly less 

space in this coming year than was the case last year. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, with respect to 

staffing of the department I see there will be a net increase of 

about six staff this year over last. And I would like the minister 

to explain what additional person-hours will be used, what 

they’ll be used to accomplish, and for what particular subvotes 

would the additional labour be required. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the members, the 

member is quite correct. There are six new employees coming 

into the department this year. Three of them will be 

occupational health and safety officers; one labour standards 

intake officer; one person to be employed in the Labour 

Relations Board, and I believe that the plan is to make that 

person the registrar of the board; and a conciliation and 

mediation officer in the labour relations section of the 

department. There’ll be a total then of six. I’ll just repeat that 

for the member — three occupational health and safety officers, 

a labour standards officer, a Labour Relations Board person, 

and a conciliation and mediation officer. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I 

note with some interest one additional in the labour standards 

area. I guess it sort of gets into a topic that I know that you’ve 

heard the tremendous outcry about in the province, and that’s 

about bringing the babysitters under the jurisdiction of The 

Labour Standards Act. Now we see that your government has 

responded to some degree by changing the regulations and the 

policy in including only live-in domestics under the provisions 

of The Labour Standards Act. 

 

One of the complaints that I’ve heard from many of the parents 

is that the documents provided by your department were 

conflicting and unclear. And there’s some indication even that 

the definitions in the regulations themselves conflict with each 

other. And this also has made those who look to them for advice 

very uncertain as to whether they or their employee fell under 

the Act. 

 

Now I know it’s quite common for governments to publish 

pamphlets that provide information on programs so that the 

public can have a better understanding of the programs. 

Regardless of what the pamphlet does say, it is the statutes or 

the regulations that are the final authority. But many people do 

rely on these publications for making their decisions. 

 

Granted that many of the people are concerned that your 

department provided them with written information which was 

inaccurate, I wonder what steps you have taken to ensure that 

the pamphlets and publications that your department might put 

out in the future are a bit more accurate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It is my impression, Mr. Chair, that the 

documents the member is talking about, the brochures and the 

information, was not so much inaccurate as it was incomplete 

and that this may have caused some of the problems that the 

member referred to. 

 

And as to the steps that we’ve taken, an incident like this 

certainly does point out the need for complete information. And 

the structure of the department, from the deputy minister on 

down, is there to ensure that these sorts of things don’t happen 

and won’t happen in the future. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, with 

respect to the lack of information perhaps in these pamphlets 

and also just the lack of information or advisement and 

consultation that occurred in this issue, I know I have a number 

of people concerned, and I’m sure you’ve heard from every one 

of these as well. 

 

But for example, here’s one who is saying in closing: 

 

I just want to state that I do not understand how the 

government can take an unregulated industry, regulate it 

overnight, and not inform the people that it directly affects. 

The government should be held accountable. 

 

Here’s another example from another parent stating, and I 

quote: 

 

The bottom line is that we were not properly informed 

about the new law and how it would affect us so that we   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

could decide if we could afford to pay this amount of 

money based on our wages. 

 

Another concerned parent here, again I quote: 

 

The lack of publicity on this law has had a devastating 

impact on families and for those people who provide the 

child care. The child care providers have been laid off and 

therefore are out of a job and possibly on or back on social 

assistance. Where is the justification in these actions? I 

thought we as a country were trying to solve problems, not 

create them. 

 

Just a few examples, Mr. Minister, of some of the people who 

have wrote me and undoubtedly have also wrote you with their 

same concerns. 

 

Now I know you mention here that we’re talking in many 

instances about the information or lack of information in the 

pamphlets that have been distributed. But getting back though 

to an issue, I think, that does pertain to the regulations 

themselves: some of the people that are concerned on the issue 

have pointed out that there seems to be some discrepancy 

concerning the definition of what constitutes a domestic. I guess 

it might conflict with one another within the regulations. 

 

And I’d like to hear from the minister what he might intend to 

do to rectify that particular situation for the future. And what do 

you intend to do to make certain that these sorts of similar 

mistakes don’t happen again on these sorts of policies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Chair, and to the member, we 

are of course at some pains to ensure that mistakes don’t occur, 

and I think that overall our record is pretty good. All 

governments make a concerted effort to ensure that there are no 

loopholes in their laws or any inconsistencies such as the 

member has referred to. And I freely and openly acknowledge 

the fact there had been a mistake made. There is no secret about 

that. 

 

I want to just share with the member, as he may well know, that 

there was a very high level of consultation with respect to the 

changes in The Labour Standards Act. There were countless 

meetings held all around the province and a lot of information 

sent out to people. But the problem is to whom is it sent out? 

 

It is relatively easy for us to identify the persons who you 

would normally consider to be employers — the restaurant 

owners, the hotel owners, the clothing store owners, the garage 

owners, and so on. We can access those people because, for one 

thing, we have access to the Workers’ Compensation Board list 

of employers, and so we can reach those people. And of course 

they cover the majority of employers in the province. 

 

But when you come to the question of who is an employer of a 

domestic worker, who are those people? And unfortunately 

they’re not readily accessible. They’re not registered in one 

place as they are with Workers’ Compensation. Workers’ 

Compensation for domestic workers is a voluntary matter and 

so that we are in a position of not knowing who to send them to. 

And that’s one of the problems that has confronted many 

jurisdictions with respect to getting out the information as to 

changes in the law. 

 

So you do your best, you know. You notify all of the people 

that you traditionally notify and have public meetings and give 

notice of those meetings and send out your material, but 

knowing, while you’re doing that, that there is no doubt a slice 

of employers who just won’t learn about it. And there isn’t a 

very effective way of giving the public notice of the details of 

that kind of a law. 

 

And so it is with a lot of the things that we do in this Assembly 

no matter who the government is. We pass a law, and then the 

question is how to communicate the contents of that law. And 

over the years we’ve developed various and different ways of 

doing it. 

 

We have press releases, we have press coverage, we have 

newspaper advertisements, we have consultation meetings, and 

a whole variety of different things depending upon what law 

you’re talking about. But in the end you and I . . . we all know 

that there will be a slice of the public who just won’t know that 

this law has been passed and that it applies to them. 

 

And it is too bad. I mean it really is a difficult situation for 

them, and we know that. But it is very difficult for us to 

conceive of a way of ensuring that every person like the 

employers of domestic workers, or babysitters as we’ve been 

using the term, are aware that this law has in fact been passed. 

 

In retrospect, you know, we can look at what we did and say, 

well that wasn’t enough, we should have done more. And we 

learned from these incidents. We learned from our 

shortcomings and hope to get it right next time by trying to be 

perhaps more creative in the way in which the news gets out. 

 

I have received the same letters as the member has though, and 

I know it has caused hardship and a good deal of irritation 

among some of the citizens of our province. And I feel badly 

for that. But it is, to repeat myself, a very difficult proposition 

for any government to get out the contents of a new law to all 

the people who may be affected by it. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I know every 

time affected parties hear from yourself that you admit to 

mistakes being made and they hear that you are doing your best 

to try and come to some resolution, I see that it doesn’t really 

do anything for those who you speak of that have been so 

dramatically affected. 

 

And I guess I would be lax at this time if I didn’t mention just a 

couple of them, Mr. Minister, that have wrote to us just to 

highlight how dramatically affected they have been by this 

particular regulation and the bungling related to it. 

 

But I see here one individual where they say they . . . we 

expect, and of course they’re wording this towards demanding 

compensation from you: 

 

  



630  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

So we expect you to compensate us in full for the back pay 

of $4,246.71 plus expenses that we’ve incurred regarding 

the issue (Mr. Minister). 

 

And I see these expenses that they relate to here amount to 

some substantial amounts of expenses as well, where in fact 

they have a $241.98 bill with an accountant in regards to the 

matter, an additional $433.88 in legal expenses related to the 

matter. And I believe this is one that has been put in front of 

you before, so I won’t go through the process of passing this 

over to you. 

 

But I see another affected party here writing that . . . at the time 

of writing they were saying: 

 

We currently have an unsettled claim against us at the 

labour standards branch in Saskatoon. If we are forced to 

pay out any amount for this claim, it will be very 

detrimental to our family. We certainly do not have the 

funds to pay this claim. Our family life has been in turmoil 

since we found out about the legislative changes through 

an article in the Star-Phoenix on October 22, 1996. We 

want our family life back to normal. Our children have 

suffered enough. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I believe that the current status of these 

individuals is that they still haven’t paid this particular claim 

however; it is still hanging over their heads. 

 

Now given that this is causing these tremendous hardships and 

emotional stresses, I find it interesting to take a look at some of 

the paradoxes within government. I looked recently at the most 

recent set of Public Accounts for the province. And in them I 

notice that there was a considerable increase in the monies that 

were paid out by the Department of Energy and Mines in 

’95-96. The total increase, Mr. Chair, was over $7 million. And 

that was all paid out in trust to a Calgary law firm called 

McCarthy Tétrault. 

 

The minister might be, I guess, wondering what my point is in 

all of this, so I’d just satisfy your curiosity in that I was 

wondering about the payment. So I’d asked the Department of 

Energy and Mines and I learned that it was for the purpose of 

settling a court case out of court, and it was in fact with a 

number of large oil companies. 

 

So I do find this ironic that here we have a minister who’s 

unable to compensate maybe, perhaps — and I might get into 

this a little later — but perhaps a few dozen families perhaps, at 

most, for a mistake made by his department. But when it comes 

to big oil companies the story is different with this government. 

The government’s willing to fork out $7 million to settle claims 

before they go to courts. 

 

I’d like the minister to comment on what is an obvious double 

standard in this regard and explain, if he would, what’s more 

important to this government. Do you believe that families are 

just as important as oil companies? And if you do, what do you 

intend to do to compensate the families for these liabilities that 

they’ve incurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I suspected that the member would 

raise that matter because we’ve discussed it before on the floor 

of this House. And I have met with some of the people who 

have been affected by the situation and discussed their plight 

with them. I have consistently taken the same position, 

consistently said that we will monitor this situation and any 

decisions that are . . . that may be appropriate will be decided 

after we are in possession of more facts than we now have. 

 

Let me share with the member some of the complexities. And if 

this were simply a matter of looking at the claims that had been 

filed with the labour standards branch and the settlements of 

those claims and then deciding what to do, if it were that 

simple, it would be simple. Because your facts would be 

relatively clear, simple, and the government could make a 

decision about whether or not to have a compensation program. 

 

The problem is complicated by such factors as the following. 

We are aware in a general way that there are a number of 

people out there who have been paying the minimum wage for 

child care in their home for some time. This may result because 

that’s just how much they pay, or it may be that they became 

aware that the law applied to them in one way or another. Who 

knows? 

 

But we know that there are a number of people who have been 

complying with the law. One of the babysitters, for example, 

who receives a minimum wage, received quite a bit of 

television coverage. A young woman by the name of Rothery, 

Ms. Rothery. She’s been receiving the minimum wage. 

 

Now what to do about those situations and how to get that 

information, because it makes no sense to compensate only the 

people who have not been complying with the law and not 

compensating people who have been complying with the law. 

Now that’s a real complication. And how do you get at that 

information? This is one of the complexities that we’re trying to 

make sense of and to understand. 

 

I have great sympathy for some of the people who I met with 

who you refer to in your question, but we don’t leap into these 

things and don’t make these decisions on the basis of what’s 

obvious. You have to be much more thorough about it and try 

and get complete information before you make such an 

important decision. 

 

I might say to the member that we regard these situations with a 

great deal of seriousness. It’s always tough to balance 

competing claims; that made by a lawsuit from an oil company 

and that made by a family affected by this law. Personally I like 

the family better; I would be more responsive to them. 

 

There were probably compelling reasons for the settlement of 

the lawsuit that the member refers to, but I have no knowledge 

of that at all. But I have no hesitation about where my 

sympathies lie. 

 

Unfortunately it’s not a simple decision, and I’ve been trying to 

convey that to the people affected. But it’s one that we will 

monitor very carefully, and try to dig out the information that 

we need in order to make a decision about whether or not   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

compensation should be paid. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I know I had sent 

your department, through the freedom of information, a request 

just asking you how many claims regarding this issue had been 

filed with the labour standards branch, and at the time the 

response had been 14, and only one had been paid out, I think, 

at that point. And I was just wondering if you could provide us 

with an update on this situation right now, and also with respect 

to the period of time in which those affected are going to be 

allowed to file claims. 

 

I know in the corridor, but weeks ago, I heard a hint from 

yourself that perhaps the period of time in which claims would 

be received might be something that could be up for a certain 

amount of discussion. Would you be able to just make some 

comments on that at this point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, that was an exchange with a 

reporter in which he asked why we did not set some deadline or 

time limit. And I said in response, we’d consider that. And 

that’s part of the mix; we’re considering that too. It’s an 

attractive idea for a number of reasons but we haven’t yet . . . 

we’re not yet in a position to make a decision about whether or 

not compensation should be paid. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister . . . 

and I was listening with great interest to some of the dialogue 

that was taking place between the member from Thunder Creek 

and the minister in regards to this babysitting fiasco that’s 

happened in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess what I would have to just mention, Mr. Minister, it 

would seem to me that some thought should have been given 

before the regulations were changed to make sure . . . so that 

people were really informed. You made a comment about 

individuals paying the minimum wage, and I’m quite well 

aware of that . . . even in small businesses, small businesses, not 

everyone pays minimum wage. Some employers pay more than 

minimum wage. They pay based on how they value their 

employees in their workplace and how the workplace is doing. 

 

And so I think what we have had, and I’m sure what the 

members had in their caucus, claims that have come in, we’re 

dealing with individuals with quite a difference in income 

levels. And in many cases, individuals who . . . where the 

spouse was out working for barely minimum wage or little 

better and then all of a sudden it just wasn’t something that was 

really . . . would be a positive for them to turn around and have 

to hire somebody. 

 

So I think, Mr. Chairman, I guess what I would address to the 

minister in this case is that I think your department has to be a 

little more . . . I guess think ahead a little more when changes 

are made in The Labour Standards Act so that people aren’t put 

in a situation such as we find with the individuals and this 

babysitting question. 

 

But I’m going to go from this to one other topic, a topic that we 

were discussing in question period this afternoon. There’s, I 

think, a couple points, I think, need to be brought forward in 

regard to this situation. And I think what we have here, Mr. 

Minister, in question period this afternoon you basically were 

saying to the questions I had placed, Mr. Minister, that you 

were washing your hands, that it really wasn’t your 

responsibility. 

 

I think it comes from the fact that, and I’ll look at a letter that 

was sent . . . I’m sure SGEU sent this to all of their . . . all of 

their claimants. And one of the lines that I want to read into the 

record says: 

 

Under the SGEU Long Term Disability Plan Text 

membership in SGEU is a condition to continue to receive 

disability benefits. 

 

And then the letter goes on and says to the claimant, well we’re 

doing whatever we can. We’re negotiating with the government 

and we’re encouraging all affected claimants to contact 

government members to have this problem dealt with. 

 

Now from our debate earlier on this afternoon, Mr. Minister, 

you’d indicated it really isn’t your problem. I guess, Mr. 

Minister, the problem arose as a result of the Dorsey report. 

Who implemented the Dorsey report and why was the Dorsey 

report implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the Dorsey report didn’t just 

appear out of nowhere as some idea of a cabinet minister or a 

government department. The idea of having this kind of a 

commission arose from the trade unions involved in the health 

industry, who had been grappling themselves with the question 

of jurisdiction — that is to say, which unions would represent 

which employees — for some two years, I think. 

 

And they came to the minister at the time, the minister of 

Labour at the time, and the Minister of Health and said in 

effect, we’re not able to resolve this problem; we need some 

kind of mechanism in order to help us deal with these questions. 

So that led to the government being persuaded by the unions, 

with the full concurrence of SAHO, that a commission should 

be set up. 

 

And the member will recall that we brought legislation to this 

House in order to establish the commission and the mandate of 

the commission. It was part of that legislation that the 

government could either accept or not accept the regulations 

that were presented by the person who would be appointed as 

the commissioner. 

 

(1645) 

 

In due course Dorsey, who was an outstanding Canadian expert 

on questions like this, presented the government with his 

regulations, with his report. And we could either accept it or 

reject it. We could not amend it. It was an either you take it or 

leave it proposition. 

 

And we took it because we saw no basis on which we could do 

otherwise. Here is a situation where a person who had been 

agreed upon by all of the organizations involved, who was one 

of Canada’s outstanding experts in the field, who’s had specific   



632  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

experience in the health care industry in his home province of 

British Columbia, who presented us with these 

recommendations. And we felt obliged to accept them and we 

did. 

 

Now that was controversial certainly, a very public issue. The 

SGEU were extremely unhappy with the result. And you can 

appreciate the fact that they would be upset because they were 

no longer representing anybody, subject to the results of the two 

votes that are yet to be taken. So I can understand the level of 

upset. 

 

It wasn’t until that debate had gone on for some time and after 

the regulations had been passed that the status of people who 

were on the SGEU disability plan became public. And that was 

presented to us as though it ought to be a reason for rejecting or 

reversing the decision with respect to the Dorsey report. We 

didn’t see it that way. We sympathize with these people and we 

would like to see some resolution of the matter. But it certainly 

was no ground for rejecting the approach taken by Dorsey. 

 

I don’t know whether Dorsey knew about the disability plan or 

not at the time he was writing his report. And as I stand here I 

don’t recall whether there was any reference to it in his report. 

But certainly it would be no ground for a government to reject 

the whole parcel. 

 

I said to the member earlier today, Mr. Chair, that this was a 

plan that had been established by the trade union for trade union 

members. The government had nothing to do with it, nor did the 

employer of any of the people involved in the health industry. 

And when the problem of their continuing coverage came up, 

the first thought that occurred to me, and to others, was that 

that’s a problem for the plan, and that perhaps the plan covers 

it, or should cover it. It is a union plan and they might be able to 

find within themselves some way to deal with this problem. 

 

Then we learned that there were discussions going on between 

SGEU and SAHO, and I believe involving other unions, as to 

how this thing could be handled within the continuing 

bargaining relationships in the health industry. Now I don’t 

know what is the state of those discussions, but I said earlier 

that if there is some way in which we can facilitate that process, 

we’re quite prepared to do it. 

 

I can’t foresee that the government . . . that anyone could 

seriously argue that the government should somehow step in 

here and establish a disability plan to pick up those people who 

were covered by the SGEU plan. The logic of that just hasn’t 

been made clear to me. If the member has an argument for it, 

I’d like to hear it. But I haven’t heard one to this point, so . . . 

 

At the same time, however, these people were injured in the 

health industry, and if there’s an answer to be found to the 

problem it must lie within the relationship between SAHO and 

the various organizations representing workers in the health 

industry. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I think if 

you reflect back, when the legislation was brought forward to 

implement the Dorsey Commission, as members, as opposition 

members, we had certainly indicated that we could see where 

there was a plan that was needed to address the fact that so 

many health districts were dealing with such an incredible 

number of independent unions. 

 

And the problem that that can create as you deal with different 

unions, and the fact that each union has their own bargaining 

unit, and you just nicely settle with one and then you have to 

deal with the next one and so on. And I think, Mr. Minister, 

you’d be aware of the fact that we raised that fact. We certainly 

have agreed with the government that something had to be 

done. And I guess we’re all working on the premiss that when 

everything was said and done we wouldn’t run into a 

circumstance such as we have today. 

 

I’m not particularly standing here, Mr. Minister, and suggesting 

that the government needs to pick up the tab, nor am I standing 

here defending SGEU and their policies. I think as we look at 

the Dorsey Commission and as we look at the report as it was 

recommended, and based on the number of calls I’ve had to my 

office, certainly SGEU members were the more forthright in 

their letter-writing campaign and calling the office. The two 

health districts that happen to comprise my constituency, 

unfortunately for SGEU members, they were very minor 

players in the health districts. 

 

And there was another concern was raised in the fact that some 

. . . The different unions, and I just forget offhand the two 

unions that were directly involved that are becoming the major 

stakeholders in the province, one of them was represented by 

. . . Most of the member . . . or most of the health professionals 

in my area were represented by the one union. And for awhile 

they were afraid they were going to be put into CUPE 

(Canadian Union of Public Employees), I believe, is where they 

thought they might be put into. 

 

And I had written your office. I had written the Minister of 

Health, talked to the ministers. And I guess I can say, Mr. 

Minister, I appreciate the fact that when the final report came 

down it left the two health districts with the union that most of 

the members were involved with rather than changing them and 

putting them in the CUPE union, which that was one concern 

that was raised, and people certainly didn’t want to be 

transferred out of a union that they had voted to be a part of. 

And in that regard, I think a lot of people appreciate what was 

done. 

 

But when it comes to the question that we have before us today, 

Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that SGEU, as a union, was 

more than happy to accept this individual, or these individuals 

into their union. These individuals worked as members, worked 

as employees in the public health field, and were employees of 

different sectors of the health field, and became members of a 

union that they put their trust in, they put their confidence in, 

they paid their membership dues to. They paid into an insurance 

plan that gave them, or insured them, in case of a disability as a 

result of a job-related matter. 

 

And whether or not SGEU has any more employees in the 

health field, I don’t think — my personal view anyway — it   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

doesn’t take them, or it doesn’t eliminate the responsibility that 

they have to members, or who were members prior to any 

changes that came about. 

 

Whether it’s in the health field or whether it’s someone has 

been a member of SGEU for a number of years receives an 

injury on the workplace, whether it’s in a labour-related area or 

whether it’s in the government service, doesn’t take away the 

obligation of the union to look after its members if members 

have paid into that disability plan that they carry. 

 

And in this case, this individual is not severing her membership 

with the union. While the union may lose a position in the 

health field, this member . . . or this individual and a number of 

other individuals still are, and as far as I know, will retain 

membership in the SGEU union. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, I guess what we’re coming 

to you with is the fact that when the report was released and 

when this came to light, you had indicated that there certainly 

you didn’t see where anyone would lose any benefits; that the 

benefits would continue. I believe that’s how you related that 

matter. 

 

And I guess, as the Minister of Labour, the minister responsible 

to the labour force in the province of Saskatchewan, I think 

what people are looking to you today at for, Mr. Minister, is 

some guidance, if you will, as to how some of these disputes 

can be settled. And well I would suggest we just don’t totally 

wash our hands of it. 

 

I think if someone came to your office, you would certainly 

want to take a look at the circumstances that surround it. And I 

think the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union would 

certainly be coming to you if they felt they were going to be left 

carrying the load for somebody else. And they’d say, well we 

have our own plan in place that looks after our members; we 

look after our members. 

 

So I guess what we have here is we need an assurance that the 

Minister of Labour is certainly going to stand up for working 

people in this province and indicate that we will give you all the 

support we can to make sure that you are looked after, whether 

it’s by your union or, as you’ve indicated, the discussion that is 

taking place now; whether health districts or other unions that 

are now left with the membership pick up the disability 

program that these members are being faced with. And so that’s 

the thing, Mr. Minister, I think that people are looking for. 

 

They’re . . . I don’t know . . . I don’t believe they’re coming and 

asking us to come to you and demand of you, or demand of the 

Minister of Finance, that now you pick up this disability. I 

guess I would suggest that the membership was paid, the 

insurance was paid, the disability fund was carried. 

 

This fund is going to be ongoing and this individual or these 

individuals are actually members of this union will continue to 

be so. They’re disability members but they’re still members 

who are drawing and there is no reason for me to believe that 

the SGEU could not honour its commitment to the membership 

for that membership that was taken out when that individual 

began working and paid into that membership. 

 

And I’m wondering if you could respond or what your views 

may be on this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, it certainly is a very complex 

matter. And the member’s question indicates that it is, and 

indicates some of the complexities that are involved. 

 

I think that probably our best approach here is to take it on a 

step-by-step basis, not try and solve the problem with one swift 

decision or one swift action. The present course, as I’ve 

indicated today, involves SAHO discussing with SGEU how 

this matter might be handled, and I have considerable faith in 

that process. I think that the solution to this problem lies there. 

And if that doesn’t work, then I think options have to be 

considered, and I have not considered them. I have never, for 

example, read the terms of the SGEU plan or purported to 

suggest to anybody what their rights might be under that plan. 

 

That’s for another day, and only in the event that other solutions 

don’t arise in the meantime. So I think that we just approach 

this matter on that basis, step by step, and only if one step fails 

do we have to consider what the next step might be or should 

be. 

 

I share with the member his concern about the plight of the 

people who are on that disability plan for the very reasons that 

he mentioned. He mentioned the fact that they had become 

members of the union and had signed into the plan and paid 

premiums with respect to the plan and become injured and 

entitled pursuant to the plan. And I have a great deal of 

sympathy for them, so we’ll be following this matter very, very 

closely. For now though we’re still on the step involving SAHO 

and we’re prepared to do our part to try and make that process 

work. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Progress from the Department of Labour, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chair:  The Government Whip has moved that the 

committee report progress from the Department of Labour. Is it 

the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? It now being 

close to 5 o’clock this committee will report progress and stand 

recessed until 7 p.m. later this same day. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 605 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 605 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Sunrise Community Futures Development Corporation 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 

 Flood Disaster Assistance 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 

 Thorablott 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 

 Daylight Savings Time 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 606 

 Documentary Film, Percy, Me and Bobby McGee 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 

 Tribute to Barb Gibb 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 607 

 Gloria Lennox Honoured as Best Principal in Saskatchewan 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 607 

 Battlefords Community Players Win Saskatchewan Drama Festival Awards 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 607 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Public Prosecutions Report 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 607 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 

 Prairie Hog-Processing Plant 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 608 

 Multiple Sclerosis Treatment 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 

 Dorsey Report 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 609 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 

 Young Offenders Act 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 610 

 Education Foundation Grants 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 

MOTIONS 

 Standing Committee on Communication 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Special Committee on Nominations 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Standing Committee on the Environment 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Standing Committee on Education 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

 Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 612 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling Under Rule 36 



 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Interim Supply 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 614 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 614 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 617 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 617 

ROYAL ASSENT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 621 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 9  The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 617 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 618 

 Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 619 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 620 

 Bill No. 20  The Small Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 621 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 622 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 625 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 625 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 7 — The Cancer Foundation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 627 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Labour  Vote 20 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 627 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 631 

 

 


