




















































Hansard: March 18, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 253 

 March 18, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

the Hon. Assembly of Saskatchewan in the legislature 

assembled, the petition of the undersigned concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that: 

 

Whereas the provincial government has stated its 

commitment to address issues of poverty and 

unemployment in Saskatchewan; and 

 

Whereas the provincial government is responsible for the 

administration of funds for employment assistance services 

under the Employment Insurance Act, and through their 

narrow interpretations of the Act are affecting 80 per cent 

of the women presently receiving services from Working 

for Women in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, by denying them 

access to the counselling skills and resources needed by 

women in poverty to gain employment and education; and 

 

Whereas the same free services are being continued in 

other provinces; 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services of 

Working for Women in Saskatoon for the 16-year history 

of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible services 

to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to training 

and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to table on behalf of people in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Lumsden, Vanscoy, Prince Albert, and so 

forth on their behalf today. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

join with the member from Greystone in adding petitions for 

women concerned with the elimination of Working for Women 

in Saskatoon: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services for 

Working for Women, Saskatoon, who have a 16-year 

history of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible 

services to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to 

training and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are from 

Watrous, Simpson, and Young. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens with respect to the youth offenders Act, and  

I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a task force to aid the government in its fight 

against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

I present this on behalf of people of the city of Regina. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of conscientious and concerned 

citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the victimization of our 

children through the child prostitution trade. The prayer reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places, and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners are from throughout the city of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, and also from Pilot Butte, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I also present petitions from 

concerned citizens on the issue of youth crime. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

create a special task force to aid the government in its fight 

against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of Regina, 

Southey, White City, McLean, and Pense. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to 

present on behalf of hundreds of people from the province of 

Saskatchewan the following petition which I will read the  



254  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

prayer of: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to recognize the hardships 

imposed on people of Saskatchewan and immediately take 

responsibility already demonstrated by the admission of its 

mistake; and further, make amendments and exemptions to 

The Labour Standards Act of Saskatchewan’s parents and 

seniors, families, disabled people, and care-givers or 

domestic help so that families can decide together what is 

acceptable in their private residences and not have any 

additional costs imposed on them on that agreement by 

government. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the volumes of numbers that we have in this 

petition speak to the issue and its importance. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too wish 

to present petitions to this Assembly, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we get ongoing petitions every day, and 

today I have petitions signed by people from Midale and 

Saskatoon, Birch Hills, Big River, Hudson Bay, a number of 

other communities in the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker, 

from Eastend, from Webb, from Gull Lake, from Regina, more 

from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased as well to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people with regard to the PST (provincial sales tax) and the 

reduction of the PST. And these petitioners come from all over 

Saskatchewan. These particular ones are from the Swift 

Current, Wilkie, Saskatoon, Regina areas of the province. I’m 

pleased to present on their behalf today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and  

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to immediately 

amend The Non-profit Corporations Act to protect 

volunteers; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by two points. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the direct 

debt reduction Act. 

 

And if I may, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, 

the balanced budget amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next move the first reading of a Bill, the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement revocation Act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: how much money was returned 

to the provincial government by collection agency or 

agencies hired by the province for the purpose of collection 

of delinquent Saskatchewan student loans in 1994; (2) how 

much was outstanding to the province in delinquent student 

loans in ’94; (3) what collection agency or agencies were 

hired in 1994 for the purpose of collection of delinquent 

student loans; and (5) what percentage is paid to these 

collection agencies for the collection of delinquent 

Saskatchewan student loans? 

 

I have similar questions for 1995 and 1996. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 

14 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Hon. Minster of Justice: how much was collected in 

land titles fees in 1996; what were the operating 

expenditures of the land titles system in 1996; how much 

was collected in personal property registry fees in 1996; 

and what were the operating expenses for the personal 

property registry in 1996? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of adult 

students visiting today from the Saskatoon Open Door Society. 

 



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

Immigrants to Canada come to find new opportunities and a 

new life for themselves and their families. When they arrive in 

our country however, they may also find a culture and a society 

much different from that of their native homes. As such, the 

Saskatoon Open Door Society exists to welcome and assist 

these new immigrants to become informed and effective 

participants in our Canadian society. 

 

As part of their study of government, this group is visiting our 

province’s legislature to see and experience the daily working 

of the Legislative Assembly. Following the visit to our gallery 

today, they will be given a tour of the Legislative Building. I 

look forward to meeting with them later to share their 

impressions. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to warmly 

welcome our special guests from the Saskatoon Open Door 

Society. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have in 

our gallery today three very active members of Regina’s North 

Central Community Society who are extremely busy preparing 

their North Central Community Walk For Freedom. The walk 

takes place this Sunday, March 23, at 1 p.m. starting in Victoria 

Park. 

 

These people are working very hard to raise awareness of the 

child prostitution problems in their area, and I commend them 

for their work. 

 

I ask the members of this Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming Nancy Harvey, Peter Lewis, and Carrie 

Quangtakoune. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You will notice a 

very fine group of young people sitting in the west gallery, and 

it’s my pleasure to introduce them to you and through you to 

my colleagues in the legislature today. These are a group of 58 

grade 8 students from MacNeill School in Regina. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Jim Harrop and Ron Schindel 

 

I know they will be here for question period and then they will 

have a tour of the building. And I really look forward to 

meeting with them later on this afternoon to get their 

impressions of what happens here today. So please join me in 

welcoming them here. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature a 

guest sitting in your gallery — Morris Werziak, who is the 

president of the United Food and Commercial Workers, the 

largest UFCW local in Saskatoon. Morris is the president of the 

Intercon unit, and I would like to welcome him on behalf of all 

of us to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Babysitting Back Pay Compensation for Parents 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 

parents in our province continue to play a frustrating waiting 

game, and I commend them on their patience and their 

perseverance. Many of them that are here with us today are 

waiting for the NDP (New Democratic Party) government to 

compensate them for the thousands of dollars that they face 

because of claims for back pay from babysitters. 

 

The government has taken the first step by admitting it was 

their error, and now it’s time for the government to take another 

honourable step forward and pay for its mistake. But so far, Mr. 

Speaker, all the government is willing to do is monitor the 

situation and then decide how many claims there are and what 

the settlements will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parents should not have to wait for compensation. 

They can’t put their lives on hold. They still have to pay their 

bills and feed their families. And so, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 

opposition has come up with the plan to address the issue. The 

government members opposite could forgo the $4,200 in 

additional salary that they will receive this year and use that 

money to compensate parents. 

 

I look forward to getting input from the government, Mr. 

Speaker, on this simple, effective solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Nipawin Seed Firm Expansion 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to tell you about a new and rapidly growing 

business in my constituency in the community of Nipawin. 

 

Newfield Seeds recently announced a $750,000 expansion of its 

existing seed plant in the sales operation section. This 

expansion means a new retail store and sales offices will be 

added to Nipawin as well as warehouses in Nipawin and 

Porcupine Plain. 

 

Further to the . . . Nipawin seeds plans to upgrade existing 

warehouses and build a bulk seed plant very shortly. These 

additions will allow Newfield Seeds to concentrate its sales 

focus on forage production and become more established in the 

ag chemical retail market. 

 

If you drive into the Nipawin area, Mr. Speaker, you will notice 

the fields there are full of little, colourful houses. Many people 

ask me what they are — and that’s the home of leafcutter bees, 

Mr. Speaker, and they’re used in the production of alfalfa seed. 

 

This is another example of Newfield Seeds’ commitments to the 

producers of the north-east, Mr. Speaker. As part of the 

agri-food week in Saskatchewan, this new expansion will mean 

easier and better access to producers, the expansion of a 

business, and more jobs for more people. 

 



256  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

Construction will begin immediately and should be completed 

this fall. Mr. Speaker, this is good economic news for the 

Nipawin area. It will create nearly 39 new jobs and boost the 

confidence into the existing economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tisdale Farm Equipment Business Expansion 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

acknowledge a very successful business in my constituency. 

John Bob Farm Equipment of Tisdale recently celebrated their 

grand reopening in recognition of a 13,000 square foot 

expansion to their shop area. The expansion was started in 

September, 1996 and just completed. 

 

Bob Penner and John McShannock are the original owners, 

establishing John Bob Farm Equipment in 1980. On Thursday, 

March 13, John Bob held their official ribbon cutting 

ceremonies. Approximately 700 people attended the open 

house, showing us the tremendous impact that our small 

businesses have in rural communities. 

 

Please join me in congratulating John McShannock and Bob 

Penner on their commitment to Saskatchewan business and on 

their recent expansion to John Bob Farm Equipment in Tisdale. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Careers for Youth Program 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

with the Liberal member opposite in talking about some of the 

good things that are happening in our Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Yesterday there was an announcement of the results to date of 

the tourism careers for youth program. This is a very important 

program and so far the results are very impressive. More than 

90 Saskatchewan youth have already completed this program 

and more than 60 of them have found jobs. 

 

This is a tribute not only to the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Education Council but also to the young people of this province 

who have worked hard to prepare themselves for the future. 

 

Tourism in Saskatchewan has experienced impressive growth 

over the past few years, Mr. Speaker. In fact Saskatchewan’s 

tourism industry generates approximately a billion dollars a 

year in tourism expenditures and provides more than 40,000 

full-time and part-time jobs for Saskatchewan people. This 

represents — and I know the members opposite will be 

interested in this — this represents approximately 1 in every 12 

employees in the province. 

 

The tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, is also becoming a popular 

career choice for young men and women as more and more 

tourism operators are investing in hospitality training and the 

industry has developed professional standards and certification 

for tourism occupations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating these young people and the Saskatchewan 

Tourism Education Council. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kid’s Poster Contest 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Winter activities and 

hot chocolate are synonymous with Saskatchewan winters. 

Recently Kelsey Statchuk, a grade 5 student at Wadena 

Elementary, was selected as the Saskatchewan winner of Every 

Kid’s Capital Winter Poster contest. 

 

Kelsey’s picture is about her family coming home from an 

evening walk. They were cold and her dad made a fire, and they 

made hot chocolate and sang songs as they warmed up. The 

scene in Kelsey’s picture shows the family in the middle of a 

song, drinking hot chocolate. 

 

Kelsey’s picture, along with the other winning entries from 

Canada, were displayed in the Children’s Museum of the 

Canadian Museum of Civilization through the month of 

February. Another exhibit, which includes pictures of the 

winning students and their classes, were displayed along the 

Rideau Canal in Ottawa for the duration of Winterlude skating 

period. Kelsey’s description of her picture and her favourite 

winter activities will also be displayed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this Assembly to join with me and 

congratulate Kelsey on her depiction of a scene of 

Saskatchewan that everyone can relate to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debden Credit Union 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Credit unions have 

served Saskatchewan people well over the years. I’m proud to 

have served on the board of the Spiritwood Credit Union for 

over 20 years. But technological change and globalization are 

changing the credit unions and credit unions are adapting to the 

changing times. 

 

I’m proud to report that one credit union is doing just that. The 

Debden Credit Union in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood 

constituency opened a new branch in Big River on December 

18, 1996. This is a particularly noteworthy development 

because Big River is a larger community than Debden — a sign 

of the Debden Credit Union’s aggressive move into the larger 

world. 

 

As a second, much bigger step, the Debden Credit Union has 

entered into a linkage partnership with ORO, an integrated 

cooperative in the Philippines. These two financial cooperatives 

are learning how their counterpart operates in a very different 

part of the world. Last winter, Jim Zimmerman and Neil Jean 

represented the Debden Credit Union on a trip to the 

Philippines. Last summer, representatives of ORO visited 

Debden and even went on a northern fishing trip. 

 



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

Mr. Speaker, the Debden Credit Union is a local, democratic 

financial service with a global vision — a true Saskatchewan 

success story which we should all be proud of. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New SaskTel Facility Opens in North Battleford 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to 

congratulate SaskTel on the opening of a new $1.4 million 

facility in downtown North Battleford. And we were pleased to 

welcome, we were pleased to welcome the minister on the 

occasion of the official opening. 

 

We were also pleased, about the same time, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member for North 

Battleford is having difficulty presenting his member’s 

statement because of the comments of other members in the 

House. And I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the hon. member 

for North Battleford to speak uninterrupted. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — We were very pleased in North Battleford not 

only for the new facility, but also to be told about the same time 

that plans to consolidate customer call centres in Saskatoon 

have been cancelled and that service will remain with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment SaskTel has shown to 

communities such as my own has convinced me to stay with 

SaskTel, and I’m pleased to give that commitment today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Transition-to-Work Programs 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to speak 

about Saskatchewan’s world-class education system. In honour 

of Education Week, I would like to comment on the 

implementation of the transition-to-work program and their 

success in the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency. 

 

The transition-to-work programs are designed and implemented 

to provide hands-on training, develop a healthy work ethic, and 

often combine high school and post-secondary credits that can 

count toward journey-person status. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these programs help keep students in school and 

expand their educational and employment opportunities. They 

benefit both the individuals and the communities. 

 

An example of the success of the program is evident at the 

McLurg High School in Wilkie. Students studying television 

communication technology provided coverage of the Minister 

of Education’s visit to the community. The coverage, Mr. 

Speaker, was part of their studies and involvement with the 

cable television station. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students involved in transition-to-work programs 

are gaining practical and relevant skills in their area of interest  

as part of Saskatchewan’s core curriculum. We must continue 

to work together with community members and our partners in 

education, business, and labour to provide students with 

practical training and specialized learning resources. Successful 

programs like those in Unity and Wilkie meet the needs of the 

local community and make the best use of existing resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to quality and 

excellence in education. By investing in our young people, we 

are investing in our future . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, the hon. member’s time has expired. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Saskatchewan are becoming increasingly reminded about the 

growing problem of child prostitution and the pedophiles who 

pray on these children. 

 

On an almost daily basis, we are hearing heart-wrenching 

stories about our young people who have fallen victim to this 

ever-growing epidemic. People in north-central Regina are 

witnessing children, some as young as 9 and 10 years old, being 

prayed upon for sex. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on four separate occasions during the last session I 

questioned this government about the issue, and I was told that 

they were looking very carefully at the problem. Well after 

looking very carefully for one year, will the Minister of Social 

Services indicate what concrete measures his government has 

taken to combat this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the member 

for raising this issue in the legislature. I congratulate her for her 

commitment to bringing this issue to public attention. As well, I 

want to commend those within this community and other 

communities in our province who are struggling and working 

hard to find solutions to this very tragic circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. We’re not essentially here 

dealing with child prostitution, we’re dealing with child 

victims, with child victims of adult perpetrators. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re here talking about child abuse. 

 

As we struggle to assist the children who find themselves on 

our streets, and struggle to assist their families, I think equally 

this legislature and every citizen in the province must stand and 

say we have zero tolerance for adult perpetrators of child abuse 

on our streets. And we need to find every legal remedy we can 

to deal with these individuals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As politicians we must 

take action to protect our youth. The people of Saskatchewan 

are questioning where the action is for these children in this  



258  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

government’s child action plan. We cannot continue to talk the 

talk and do little else. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would like to serve notice of my intention to introduce the 

measures to combat child prostitution Act in this House today. 

 

This Bill would, among other things, seek to identify prostitutes 

under the age of 18 as victims of child abuse and the men who 

prey on them as sexual abusers. Mr. Speaker, people who prey 

on our children should be forced to face tougher laws, and for 

those who ignore the warnings harsh penalties must be the 

result. 

 

Will the minister indicate whether he is prepared to take a step 

forward and support this private members’ Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as the member is aware, 

we’ve been reviewing very carefully some of the suggestions 

that have come from the province of Alberta very recently. And 

I will want to have a look at the Bill that the member is going to 

put before the House. We haven’t seen it, but we’ll want to 

certainly be looking at that. 

 

I think her comments and mine, and I’m sure the comments that 

would reflect the feeling of every member in this House today, 

that there is a unanimity around these issues and we need to 

find solutions, both for the children whose lives are on the street 

and who are being sexually abused by adult perpetrators, and 

those legal remedies that can get the johns off the streets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

some very grave concerns about our province’s finances and 

our education system since they appear to be in the hands of a 

government that can’t do the math. 

 

Last week the Finance minister said in this House, and I quote, 

“In fact K to 12 is getting more funding, not less . . .” Mr. 

Speaker, that simply is not true. In 1991 the grant for the 

kindergarten to grade 12 system was $381 million. The 

operating grant for 1996-97 was $355 million. You do the math, 

Madam Minister, because I have, and any way you crunch the 

numbers the end result is still the same. Funding has dropped 

$26 million, Mr. Speaker; 26 million. Figures don’t lie, because 

boards of education are coping with less. 

 

How has the Finance minister figured that funding has 

increased for the K to 12 system when the figures don’t support 

her claims? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for that question. My comments are comparing this year to what 

was received by school boards last year. As I recall the numbers 

in 1996-97, they will be getting $2 million more than the 

previous year. And in 1997-98 they will be getting, I think it’s  

$900,000 on top of the 2 million. 

 

And I think the important point is to put this into perspective. 

This is at a time when we are losing millions and millions and 

hundreds of millions of dollars in transfer payments from the 

federal government. So our capacity to continue funding 

agencies is restricted by the amount of dollars that we’re losing 

to their cousins in Ottawa. 

 

So I stand by the statement that although last year, Mr. Speaker, 

we cut ourselves — this government cut itself by $50 million, 

lost 600 positions — we were able to provide more money to 

the K to 12 system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, in fact in 1995-96 the numbers 

that were given to school boards in this province, the grant 

totalled $355.354 million. This last year the grant is $355.154 

million. 

 

Underfunding is a serious problem in the education system. For 

example, the Regina Public School Board is closing six schools 

and now it doesn’t know if it will receive any more money for 

its transportation budget, a budget that is sure to feel the strain 

because more kids will be bussed in this city. 

 

Boards right across the province are coping with $8 million in 

wage hikes to teachers’ salaries, and the government has made 

it clear it will only be picking up $900,000 of that cost. All 

stakeholders in the province — the teachers, the trustees, the 

parents, and the students — are looking to this government for a 

comprehensive plan. When will this government make 

education a priority, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just for the purposes of clarification, 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to assure the members that the Regina 

school division will be eligible for the urban transportation 

policy, as all other urban boards are in the province. So I just 

wanted to clarify that for the Regina school board’s edification, 

as well as the Liberal leader’s edification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of educational funding, we have made it 

very clear in the last two months that there are five areas, 

strategic areas, that it’s our intention to invest in. We’ve said 

that the priorities of this government are jobs, education, health 

care, social programs, and highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March 20, 1997, at approximately this time, the 

Minister of Finance will stand in her place and deliver the 

province’s budget. I would advise the members that they should 

stay tuned, be here, and it will become transparent — the 

intentions of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Nations Taxation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, while the Minister of Finance  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

claims that collecting taxes for on-reserve businesses is no 

different than collecting taxes from any corner store, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations claims that first 

nations lands and persons are tax exempt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue is poisoning community relations in 

Saskatchewan and must be resolved quickly and harmoniously. 

It cannot be resolved by threats and raves. Nor can it be 

resolved by negotiation as long as the parties have such a vastly 

different understanding of their respective rights and 

obligations. The only thing that will resolve it is a constitutional 

reference to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in order to 

determine the tax obligations of first nations people. Only then 

will negotiations be able to go forward. 

 

My question of the Hon. Minister of Justice: will he recommend 

to cabinet that a constitutional reference be made to our Court 

of Appeal to determine this difficult issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I can answer on behalf 

of the government with respect to this question and tell the hon. 

member that our preferred route in matters of this nature and in 

most matters of public policy is that they be decided through the 

give and take, the compromise, the discussion of a political 

process done in good spirit by all the parties affected. 

 

As well-intentioned and as capable as the judiciary may be, 

very often in issues which comprise more than legal 

considerations, this being one of them, the judiciary may not be 

very well the most favoured or best suited a place in which to 

make this decision final. 

 

It’s really democracy and it’s really a question of compromise 

and discussion, and that’s our approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Hon. Premier. 

However, I think we all recognize that negotiations only move 

forward in any context when the respective parties have a 

similar understanding of their rights and obligations. Here, that 

understanding is simply not present. 

 

The government has tried threats; they have tried negotiations, 

which have gone nowhere. The third party is prepared to try and 

throw gasoline on this difficult issue. I am saying that until we 

have a constitutional reference as a framework for negotiations, 

negotiations are unlikely to go anywhere. 

 

Will the Premier commit to have that constitutional reference as 

a prelude to negotiations, which will then accomplish 

something? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I would not say, 

although I must confess that it’s run across my mind, that the 

nature of the questions that the hon. member has advanced here, 

I would not say that they constitute throwing gasoline on the  

situation. But the thought certainly does run across my mind 

and I’m sure a lot of people. 

 

Listen to the logic of the Liberal Party: go to court, frame a 

constitutional reference, and negotiate. He knows full well what 

the situation is if you go to court and have a constitutional 

reference. All the parties say, let’s just wait until the court 

decides on this issue; what’s the sense of talking and what’s the 

sense of compromising, or what’s the sense of negotiating? You 

cannot say, logically, go to court and then carry out the 

discussions at the same time. That will freeze-frame the 

discussions. That will freeze-frame the topic that needs to be 

resolved and determined by give and take. 

 

Now I say to the hon. member opposite here that if he wants to 

be helpful and constructive in this very important social, 

economic, legal, political, constitutional discussion, what he 

ought to be doing is not asking these kinds of questions but 

advocating and helping us in the resolution through a fair, 

compromised approach — not through some form of legal 

alternatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Parents 

Affected by Labour Standards 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, many 

families in Saskatchewan, like Leisa and Kevin Fedak, and 

David and Donna Blackhurst, who I think are in the Speaker’s 

gallery today, were left with big, retroactive babysitting bills as 

a result of your government’s ill-conceived amendments to The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, in January you admitted that your government 

made a mistake by classifying parents who bring care-givers 

into their home as employers. You also admitted that your 

government made a big mistake by not informing parents of 

these changes in 1995 — a small step in the right direction. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you left Saskatchewan families to pay for 

your mistake. You met with some of these parents and gave 

them . . . and they gave you, rather, two weeks to answer 

several questions that they posed to you. Your two weeks ran 

out yesterday, Mr. Minister. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, why haven’t you answered their questions? 

Why do you believe that these people do not deserve an 

answer? And is it fair that families are on the hook for the 

government’s mistakes? Do you believe that this is right, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well essentially the member’s question 

was answered in this House by me about 10 days ago, when I 

told the minister, as I have said publicly, as the Premier has said 

publicly, we’re going to monitor this situation. We’re going to 

keep track of how many claims there are and what the 

settlements are. 

 

Those settlements are being facilitated by the Department of  



260  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

Labour, and when we have the information available to us as to 

just what’s involved here — what are the factors involved, how 

much money is involved — then we’ll make a decision as to 

whether or not anything further will be done. 

 

Now that was made clear some time ago. Now if I’m not right 

up to date with my correspondence, I apologize for that. But I’ll 

look into that and ensure that the people you refer to have an 

answer to their inquiry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank you, 

Minister. Thank you also for the promotion; I hope the pay 

cheque reflects that. 

 

Mr. Minister, Alison Watson, one of the parents who received a 

big bill because of your mistake, recently wrote to the Premier 

about this issue. And she of course, about 10 minutes before 

this House sat today, was contacted and had received no 

information from you at all on the answers to these questions. 

 

Her letter states: 

 

The money that these parents have paid or will have to pay, 

is money that will be taken away from the children . . . 

Most parents spend extra money in the household on their 

children. You are therefore taking money away from 

children. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this the reputation that you want? A heartless 

government that is hurting families, that is taking money away 

from children? 

 

Mr. Minister, I am introducing a Bill which will give you the 

opportunity to do the right thing. Mr. Minister, will you support 

our Bill? Will you compensate the families your government 

has taken money away from? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same 

question and I don’t know how many times I have to give the 

answer, but let me give it again. 

 

We’re going to monitor this situation to see what kind of 

dimensions it has: how much money is involved; what the 

settlements are; how many of them there are; what kind of a 

claim would . . . what kind of a program would be required in 

order to meet this situation that the member describes. 

 

Now we’re going to do that, and we’re going to make a decision 

in due course. That’s the nature of government. We can’t make 

decisions until we get information. That’s fundamental, and the 

member will know that. 

 

Now when the information is at hand, when we’ve got the 

information we need, then the decisions will be made, and then 

an announcement will be made. That’s the way things work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Gaming Addictions 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Minister, the number of people being treated for gambling 

addiction has nearly doubled in the past two years, from 221 in 

‘94-95, to 426 in the following year, and now 456 in the first 10 

months of this particular year. Much of the cost of this 

treatment is being provided by district health boards, and we’d 

like to know how much this is costing health boards and the 

province. Unfortunately your government doesn’t keep those 

figures. That’s an astounding admission for a government that 

says it’s concerned about the social costs of the problem of 

gambling. 

 

Mr. Minister, why aren’t you keeping these figures, and will 

you commit to finding out how much gambling addiction is 

costing the district health boards? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member should be aware 

that in our province we’ve moved from a system of per diem or 

per-patient day funding for services to a global system of 

population health funding to health districts. What we do by and 

large, with some adjustments, is divide the health budget that 

goes to health districts between them on the basis of their 

populations. We then ask that they provide certain services to 

the people of the province including drug and alcohol 

counselling, gambling counselling, and so on. 

 

And I’m pleased to tell the member and the House that we do 

more than other provinces in the area of gambling addiction, 

and we’re providing more services in that regard than have ever 

been available before, Mr. Speaker. And the same is true for 

drug and alcohol addiction counselling. It’s unfortunate that we 

have these problems in our society but we do, and we’re dealing 

with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Closure of Working for Women 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatoon’s Working for Women is an organization that has 

successfully worked with women in poverty. For over 16 years, 

it has helped them to gain the skills necessary for employment 

and training. Without the provincial government’s immediate 

intervention, the doors of Working for Women will close this 

Thursday. 

 

My question is for the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training. Mr. Minister, why is your government so 

narrowly interpreting its role in the Employment Insurance Act 

when other provincial governments faced with exactly the same 

decision at the federal level have chosen to keep similar 

organizations fully functioning, and in some cases, has actually 

increased funding to these organizations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman — or Mr. Speaker, this 

question of formerly federally funded organizations who are 

now in a crisis situation is all too familiar and is a source of 

great frustration to us. This is not the only organization that is in 

a crisis because of the withdrawal of the federal funding for 

organizations that they have funded, in this case up to 16 years. 

 

Now I’m not sure what other provinces the member is referring 

to, but this is a problem for all of us right across Canada and 

we’re at a loss to know what to do with it. There is no way that 

we’re in a financial position to back-fill behind all of these 

federal cuts. These are organizations that they have encouraged, 

have established, and nourished over the years and now they 

simply just walk away from them. And it’s hard for us to be 

able to back-fill behind that because the amounts involved are 

considerable. 

 

Now we have been meeting with the federal government and I 

have written to the minister and we’re trying to get them to 

hang on and continue the funding until we can work something 

out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

repeatedly states its commitment to not only combating poverty 

but its commitment to increasing employment. And the women 

in this organization, the women in poverty served by this 

organization, do not feel that the government’s actions supports 

its words. 

 

These are amongst the most vulnerable people in our province, 

Mr. Minister, and you know that. The installation of human 

resource development computers in malls does absolutely 

nothing for women such as these who have no computer skills. 

And we may have 10 different counsellors in Saskatoon who 

are at the employment assistance office, but they’re booked for 

months and months in advance to deal with just simply 

Employment Insurance clients alone. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this is now your responsibility. It has been 

given your government — the responsibility to be in charge of 

the administration of the distribution of these funds, so its your 

choice, sir. What about the 60 per cent of people not on 

Employment Insurance, not on SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan) — what about those people who are not employed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure I don’t know 

what funds the member is talking about. The federal 

government hasn’t given us any funds with which to continue to 

sponsor or to support the organizations that they established and 

they nourished over all these years. 

 

And this is an especially frustrating problem for us, Mr. 

Speaker, because these cut-backs, these withdrawals by the 

federal government, happened at a time when the employment 

insurance fund is in a surplus which is almost obscene. It 

exceeds $5 billion. 

 

So the money is there. It’s in accounts in Ottawa. And I would 

urge the member, as well as the members of the other Liberal 

Party, to write to the Prime Minister and write to Mr. Pettigrew 

and tell them to continue funding these organizations, at least 

until there can be a decent level of federal-provincial 

negotiation to talk about how these programs can be continued 

in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I would never 

question your understanding of the important issues facing 

women. I do not question that at all. I do question, however, 

your commitment and your government’s understanding, 

whether or not you have any clue at all about what this is going 

to mean on Thursday when the doors of Working for Women 

closes. 

 

Mr. Minister, this question is for your government, not someone 

anywhere else but for your government. How are you going to 

provide services to the 80 per cent of women, the 80 per cent of 

women who currently live in poverty and currently are 

receiving help from this organization when not one of them 

qualifies for employment assistance services or reach-back 

services, given that they will be excluded because of your 

narrow interpretation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I quarrel with the 

member’s characterization of our position on this thing. We are 

not taking a narrow interpretation or anything like that. We’re 

faced with a situation where we’ve had massive withdrawal of 

federal funds from the training system at every level. And one 

of the levels at which there has been massive withdrawals are 

support for organizations like Working for Women. 

 

We’ve never made any financial contribution to that 

organization at all. We’ve co-operated with it; we have worked 

with it; we’ve met with it, but we’ve taken no part in the 

funding. And it doesn’t automatically follow that all of that 

becomes a provincial responsibility just because the federal 

government is so irresponsible as to withdraw, precipitously, 

from the support of that kind of a program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, there are 

indeed organizations like this throughout the nation. They have 

been faced with identical kinds of challenges that you state that 

your government is facing because of federal cut-backs. Why is 

it, sir, that groups like Working for Women, who work across 

this country with their sister organizations, have been able to 

state unequivocally that it is this government in the province of 

Saskatchewan that has chosen not to see this as a priority; that 

in Winnipeg they in fact have received increases — increases 

— to the funding of their organization. 

 

In Toronto they are receiving increases to the funding of their 

organization. Somehow this doesn’t mesh, Mr. Minister. 

Somehow in the province of Saskatchewan your government  



262  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

has not seen fit to see that Working for Women is a viable 

organization providing a service that other organizations do not. 

 

Will you or will you not please take a stand on this and not 

simply pass the buck by blaming someone else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I am not passing the buck, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think the member will know that. It’s not a question of 

passing the buck; it’s a question here of who created the 

problem. 

 

Now I’m going to take the member at her word and on the basis 

of that make inquiries of other provinces as to just what has 

happened there. I’m not aware that what she has said is a fact, 

but I’m going to make inquiries into that. 

 

But let me just remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that the extent 

of the federal withdrawal from the training system in this 

province may be as much as $48 million. Now my friends 

opposite in the official opposition don’t like to do it because 

they don’t like to have to sit in this House and answer for the 

federal actions. Our experience though is that a Liberal is a 

Liberal is a Liberal. And that is the reality and these people 

have to account for the actions of their federal cousins in this 

situation and in many others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. All hon. members 

will come to order. Order. Question period has ended and so has 

answer period. Order, order. Answers will cease from both 

sides of the House. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 209  The Measures to Combat 

Child Prostitution Act 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 209, The 

Measures to Combat Child Prostitution Act, be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 208 — The Employers of Babysitters 

Restitution Act 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that The 

Employers of Babysitters Restitution Act be now read and 

introduced for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Small Claims Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 20, The  

Small Claims Act, 1997 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 21, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 22, The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Act 

Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 23, The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act 

Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux 

et le renvoi des instances 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 24, The 

Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings Transfer Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully ask that 

questions 11 through to 15 be converted to notices of motion for 

return. 

 

The Speaker:  Leave will be required. Is the whip requesting  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

leave to do those simultaneously? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I so request, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The whip has requested leave to deal with 

items 1 through 5 simultaneously. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave is granted. Items 1 through 5 are converted to motions 

for return (debatable). 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I hereby table the response to 

question no. 16 in the spirit of open and honest government. 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. 6 is tabled. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of open and honest 

government, I hereby table the response to question no . . . item 

no. 17. 

 

The Speaker:  The question is tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I perhaps should begin, Mr. Speaker, 

by assuring members opposite that the length of the comments 

will not match the size of this podium. I had in mind something 

a trace more modest when I asked for a podium. 

 

Last night I congratulated the mover and the seconder on the 

honour of being chosen to move and second the reply to the 

throne speech and on what were two very fine speeches. The 

mover was someone who someone said was . . . just seemed 

like yesterday was a neophyte; now is quite an accomplished 

speaker. The seconder who is . . . as is always the case, was 

thoughtful and reflective in her comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, before getting into the main text of my 

comments, deal with a subject that has concerned me for some 

time actually. I raised it privately with one or two of the 

opposition members. I recognize, Mr. Speaker, your ruling on 

the subject. I accept your ruling on the subject of the use of the 

opposition research funds. I want to comment on this, Mr. 

Speaker. You’ve ruled on it. I accept that. It is a proper 

interpretation of the rules. 

 

I do want to say, however, that merely because something is not 

prohibited by law does not mean it is appropriate. I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that under our system of law, which applies in the 

legislature as well as out, if something is not prohibited and it’s 

allowed, that doesn’t mean it’s appropriate and it doesn’t mean 

it should be done. 

 

Let me pick a very simple example for members opposite. If 

you were to ask any policeman whether or not it’s illegal to talk  

in a boisterous way in church, he’d say, of course not. It would 

seem equally obvious it’s something that shouldn’t be done. 

 

I recognize that the leader did consult with respect to the rules. 

It strikes me, however, this is an inappropriate use of research 

funds. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Are you talking about the Liberal 

leader? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I am talking about the use of the 

opposition research funds. 

 

Everyone — everyone — Mr. Speaker, is I think reasonably 

familiar with this person’s . . . his capabilities. Whatever they 

are, he doesn’t have a background as a research officer. 

Moreover, if he were trained as a research person, it would be a 

bizarre use of a party leader’s time, to have them doing 

research. And no one believes, I think, Mr. Speaker, no one 

believes that’s what’s being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these funds were voted by this legislature to hire 

staff who would assist them in the work in the House. I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, from what I’ve seen so far, they could use a 

little of that help. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, things like the 

$4-a-day living allowance on which they agreed to live only to 

find out that, on average, Saskatchewan people spend less than 

that is an example of what research people might do for you. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not a violation of the 

letter of the law, but is certainly a violation of the spirit of what 

these funds were voted for. It’s a violation of the ordinary 

precepts of common morality. 

 

I think the same can be said, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

Liberal seat sale in the gallery. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not illegal to promise the seats to contributors, but I ask 

members opposite to ask themselves whether or not that’s an 

appropriate use of this privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since time immemorial, opposition parties have 

been given some tickets because there are groups which relate 

to opposition parties which might not make their way onto the 

government invitation list. That’s been done since time 

immemorial. I know of no instance in the past where these have 

been proffered up as an inducement to people to make 

contributions to the party. 

 

Well I have a couple of questions, Mr. Speaker, for members 

opposite. One of the questions I have for members opposite is, 

does anyone over there know the difference between right and 

wrong? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had occasion to ask that . . . Well before the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative) respond to that, let me just say that I 

had occasion during the years in opposition to ask that of the 

Devine government. I had many occasions to wonder, does 

anyone in that government know the difference between right 

and wrong. 

 

I want to say with respect to the third party, to be fair, I think  



264  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

they have tried, made some effort, to put that period behind 

them, to separate themselves from that period. They have tried 

to operate by a different morality. But, Mr. Speaker, it appears 

the Liberals pick up where the Tories left off. It appears the 

Liberals pick up where the Tories left off. 

 

I have another question, Mr. Speaker, for the Liberals, and a 

question which the Saskatchewan public are going to be asking 

themselves: do you really think you’re ready to assume office 

when you make this quality of decision? You folks have a 

relatively small budget and it is highly scrutinized. I think, and I 

will say this to you in public, I think that you’ve misused that 

money. 

 

What’s going to happen if you should ever get to this side of the 

House, have the enormous resources that are available to a 

government, which are much larger and which are not anywhere 

near as closely scrutinized? 

 

If this is how you handle one talent, are you really ready to 

handle 5 talents? I ask the members opposite, do you know the 

difference between right and wrong? And if there’s any serious 

doubt on that issue, do you really think you’re ready to assume 

the reins of office? The answer to both questions, Mr. Speaker, 

must be no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a couple of comments in addition 

to that, and I’ve been asked by the whip to keep my comments 

short. As I’m fond of reminding other people, the Gettysburg 

Address took less than five minutes and I don’t . . . So those 

sort of thoughts can be expressed in five minutes — perhaps I 

could do mine in 10 to 15 or so. 

 

I want to make a comment, Mr. Speaker, first of all about 

competition and the NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement) agreement. We are in the midst, Mr. Speaker, of 

pursuing an Agreement on Internal Trade; to some extent, 

reflects of some the benefits and also some of the problems that 

we find in the Free Trade Agreement and the North American 

Free Trade Agreement. 

 

There is, Mr. Speaker, both good and ill in the North American 

Free Trade Agreement. First of all, I want to deal with those 

things which are negative. I and my colleagues have stated that 

with respect to the NAFTA Free Trade Agreement, the 

overwhelming problem is it is solely an economic agreement. 

There is nothing about this agreement which recognizes the 

social policies which form a part of this country. 

 

One might contrast this with the principles upon which the 

European Economic Community was founded. They began with 

a statement of the social principles to which European . . . the 

western European nations could agree. Around that, they built 

an economic agreement, but the economic agreement is subject 

to the social principles. 

 

None of that was done here. What we have is an economic 

agreement, and what we tend to see, Mr. Speaker, is what has 

been described by many of . . . some of my colleagues as a race 

to the bottom. Cheaper labour, less . . . fewer rights for labour, 

anything that’s cheaper; it’s part of your production —  

dismantlement of social programs — it’s part of your 

production, and it’s a race to the bottom. 

 

What this agreement really needed — it may be late for the Free 

Trade Agreement — but what this really needed was a 

statement of social principles upon . . . which defines this 

country. We Canadians define ourselves as different than 

Americans. When you ask a Canadian what’s different, the 

conversation gets pretty quickly to the social programs which 

are so important to Canadians. 

 

What was lacking in the Free Trade Agreement was a statement 

of those social principles incorporated into the agreement, about 

which then the economic agreement might have been framed. 

None of that was done. 

 

It is not too late, Mr. Speaker, to incorporate us . . . to 

incorporate — perhaps it’s not too late — to incorporate some 

of those principles into the Agreement on Internal Trade. And I 

and my colleagues are pursuing that. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the . . . I don’t want to be 

misinterpreted. There are some things about the Free Trade 

Agreement which are not all bad. There is no question that the 

volume of trade has increased very, very substantially. The 

figures simply cannot be denied. 

 

Since the Free Trade Agreement was implemented in 1988, our 

trade with the U.S. (United States) has increased by 97 per cent. 

When you consider that our trade with the U.S. totals $3.8 

billion, that is an enormous increase — all out of proportion to 

anything which we have historically seen, and certainly all out 

of proportion to any inflationary figures. 

 

And by way of comparison, our trade with our next four largest 

partners is less than half of what our trade with the U.S. now is. 

There’s no question it has been successful economically. But 

we Canadians have never defined ourselves solely in economic 

terms, as some peoples around the globe have. We have always 

defined ourselves as well in social terms, and it’s lacking in this 

agreement. 

 

Again I do not want to be misunderstood. To comment on the 

Free Trade Agreement is not to accuse free trade. There’s no 

question, in Saskatchewan free trade is essential to the standard 

of living we enjoy. No question at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have the highest percentage 

of our gross domestic product comes from external trade than 

any jurisdiction in Canada. And Canada is one of the great 

trading nations on earth. 

 

It’s true in Saskatchewan, if you think about it. Where are the 

good jobs, the jobs that pay — let’s pick a figure out of the air 

— more than 12, $13 an hour? There’s two sources, two large 

sources. One is the public service in its broadest sense — 

provincial, federal, municipal, school, hospital. Beyond that, 

almost all the other good jobs that pay well, almost all of them, 

depend upon export trade. Almost all of them. There are very 

few in Saskatchewan that don’t. 

 



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Our standard of living depends upon trade, it depends upon us 

being successful in trading. And we are. All of that is not to 

give a blanket approval to any trade agreements. 

 

I want to also make a comment, Mr. Speaker, about the issue of 

national unity. It’s an area which we tend to . . . it’s an area 

where fools rush in and angels fear to tread, I guess. I do want 

to make a comment or two about it. 

 

The events of last October proved that Canadians — or rather, 

October ’95, — proved that Canadians do care about this 

country. Old and young, rich and poor, urban and rural — vast 

numbers went to Montreal in the dying days of the referendum. 

It may well have made the difference, as slim as it was. 

 

Last year, during the spectacular and devastating floods in the 

Saguenay Valley, Canadians once again contributed very 

generously to a region, without asking whether that region was 

federalist or sovereigntist. In fact I gather it has a history of 

voting for sovereigntist candidates. 

 

Canadians across this country do care, and care a great deal. 

And it is in part that devotion to this country which makes 

Canadians want to pitch in and be a part of it and be a part of a 

solution. 

 

(1445) 

 

We see the challenges in two respects. Firstly, on the legal and 

constitutional front. We must begin, I suppose, by asking 

ourselves what Quebec people really want. What they really 

want is not so outrageous when you analyse it. What they want 

is to be assured that within Confederation, their language and 

culture will be secure. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s not always been the case. When 

Quebec people claim to be an oppressed people, there’s some 

historical foundation upon which that can be based. There was a 

period in Quebec in which you couldn’t use French if you 

wanted a good job. You couldn’t even use French in a good 

restaurant. 

 

I remember being in a restaurant in Montreal in 1963 with a 

lady from the Caribbean whose first language was French. We 

went into a restaurant. She tried to order in French. I remember 

the waitress snapping at her, speak English. I remember her 

saying to me, you Canadians, is it any wonder the Quiet 

Revolution’s beginning. I can remember her saying to me, you 

Canadians, is it any wonder that you have a problem when you 

can’t order a meal in a good restaurant in the heart of Quebec. 

There’s no question, at a point of time, there’s some foundation 

for that claim. 

 

It’s equally apparent that we have made enormous strides in 

eliminating that. But the claim of Quebec people to have their 

language and their culture guaranteed within the legal 

framework of Canada is not an unreasonable one. 

 

The difficulty of course, is finding an agreement which 

everyone agrees upon. We in this province and in other 

provinces have sought to find that middle ground; to find, as 

the Premier of this province has so eloquently put it, to find a 

package which we can set in the window which will be 

available to them the next time they should go to the polls or the 

next time they should have a referendum. And we’ll continue to 

work for that. 

 

At the same time, we’re attempting to do something else. We 

are attempting to revamp Canada’s social safety network. We’re 

attempting to make it more effective and more efficient and less 

costly. We have had . . . largely through the work of this 

government, we have had established, at the level of the 

premiers, a council on social policy reform. Out of that council 

and out of the work of the ministers, came the national child 

benefit plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that without the energetic and very able 

promotion by the Premier of this province, all of that would not 

have happened. It is equally fair —and I’m sorry that he’s not 

going to hear these comments personally — it’s equally true 

that the member from Regina Dewdney and his very 

considerable diplomatic skills played a major role in steering 

through into the initial stages, the whole policy on social policy 

reform. He played a major role in it and I wanted to pay tribute 

to him. 

 

We have today, we have today, Mr. Speaker, the national child 

benefit program. We have a series of principles upon which the 

social policy on a federal level can be based, and there are 

officials and ministers meeting to further define this. We have 

gone a long way, Mr. Speaker, towards redefining a social 

policy which as Canadians defines us. 

 

Throughout the history of this country, Mr. Speaker, this 

province has played a role in this country all out of proportion 

to its size and all out of proportion to its economic importance. 

 

It’s true in the days of Tommy Douglas, it’s true in the days of 

Allan Blakeney, and it is true today, this Premier we have in 

office now. We have played a role all out of proportion to our 

size. We were the instigators and the major definers of the 

social policy. 

 

Someone has brought to my attention a column which appeared 

last Saturday in the Regina Free Press written by a well-known 

Saskatchewan journalist, Paul Martin, who is certainly not a 

New Democrat or a Liberal or anything else, he’s simply a 

professional journalist. But the title of the article — I won’t 

read it all — the title of the article is “Saskatchewan is soul of 

Canada.” 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

That bold statement fell from the lips of one of the 

country’s most well-known business figures and writers 

Dian Cohen in an address to the inaugural membership 

meeting of STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership. 

 

The comment reflected her view that Saskatchewan, 

particularly in political terms, has often been a national 

leader whether it was, in her words, in once-innovative  



266  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

thinking on the development of a welfare state or on fiscal 

prudence. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve made generous use of 

the 10 minutes which was made available to me — I want to 

say, Mr. Speaker, that I am proud to be part of a government 

which has been as effective as it has been in the role of 

intergovernmental affairs. This has been a very interesting time 

and a place to be of government, and this is a very good 

government to be a part of and I’m proud to do that. 

 

It goes without saying that I will, with considerable pride, 

support the motion in reply to the throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

rise in response to the government’s throne speech. It’s only the 

second time that I’ve had such an honour as an MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) to speak for my constituents in 

Melville. 

 

Before I get into the main portion of my speech today, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to echo the appreciation that’s gone before with 

respect to everyone who so tirelessly work behind the scenes 

here at the legislature and the constituency offices, who help us 

do our jobs as MLAs — from everyone in the Clerk’s office to 

the capable library staff to our hard-working pages, and 

everyone else who makes it possible for us to come here each 

year to do our jobs on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

And it’s already been said before that families are a great 

mainstay and supporters for each and every one of us. And to 

Barb and Kim, my wife and my daughter, they have been 

exactly that over my first tenure in office. 

 

I also want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, once again, for presiding 

over us in such an able and fair manner. As well I want to thank 

you, sir, for your hard work outside of session this past year. 

Your effort to take the time to visit students in many, many 

schools around Saskatchewan is to be commended. I know for a 

fact how much the students at White Calf Collegiate in Lebret 

enjoyed your visit, hearing about how government works, or is 

supposed to work. And of course, they’ll cherish the 

opportunity of trying on the Speaker’s pirate hat. Sir, if you’ll 

allow me, you truly emulate the respect and dignity of this 

venerable institution that all members of the House should 

aspire to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my response today will be directed at a great 

many issues that face this great province of ours. And because I 

have the honour of closing off this debate for my caucus, I’ll 

not speak at length since my colleagues have already stated our 

view of the speech. Unlike the members opposite, I don’t feel 

it’s necessary to talk just for the sake of talking. It’s really more 

important to say something meaningful while you’re talking — 

something some of the members opposite clearly do not 

believe. 

 

And unlike many of the members opposite, I shall not lower 

myself to call into question the integrity of anyone in this 

House. I was taken aback the other day in particular when I  

heard one of the members opposite alluding to questionable 

motives of other hon. members relative to political beliefs. 

 

It’s my feeling, Mr. Speaker, that no matter how much we 

disagree with one another on either side of the House, we 

should not be calling into question the integrity of any member 

simply because we may disagree from time to time. Everyone 

was sent here by the people of their constituencies, and that 

should be respected always, Mr. Speaker. And I truly respect 

the honour that the constituents of Melville have bestowed upon 

me to represent them, and I would never want to let them down. 

 

I would hope none of us are here for self-serving purposes. 

Perhaps some of the members opposite are, and that’s why they 

lash out with meaningless attacks on other members for the 

simple fact that they dare disagree with them. That’s becoming 

an all too common theme with many of the members on the 

government benches, Mr. Speaker, and not just in this House. 

 

It seems that anyone who has the audacity to stand up to this 

government and say hey, we don’t like what you’re doing, 

please listen to us and maybe we can help you improve it, are 

treated with unabashed disdain by the members of that party. 

They talk about frogs and chickens and all those funny little 

stories from Dr. Seuss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe one of the major reasons governments 

are defeated is an over-abundance of arrogance and a dearth of 

humility. That was true in 1982 when the current Premier and 

most of the members of that NDP government were fired by the 

voters. And it was most certainly true during most of the ‘80s 

when the Tory government of Grant Devine stopped listening to 

the people and were punished mightily for it. I see the same 

signs today, Mr. Speaker. This is a government that has stopped 

listening. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me I spoke many of these 

same words in the lead-up to the last session of this House. And 

I spoke many of these same words during the last session and 

afterwards. And what did we see during the last year? We saw 

that government try to ram through municipal amalgamation 

without first asking the municipalities what they thought about 

it. And the government was forced to back down. Although, 

listening to His Honour’s prorogation speech, it seemed the 

members opposite had blocked this little fact out of their 

memories. 

 

We saw this government continuing to deny reality and the fact 

that its policies have left huge holes in our health care system. 

This party which so vigorously holds medicare to its breast as 

its own child has in fact now denied responsibility for the child. 

And because of this abandonment, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

places in our province where people are worried and they are 

scared. They are scared that they no longer have access to 

adequate levels of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Time and time again during the last session, we 

stood in this House and brought to the attention of the members  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

opposite, the severe shortages that have been appearing in our 

health care system. There are people waiting weeks and weeks 

for very critical results for tests of serious illnesses, but there’s 

a wait and wait, because we do not have adequate funding for 

those technicians and the people to carry out those tests. 

 

Time and time again we heard this government deny 

responsibility for the system it tells us it was put here on earth 

to protect. Time and time again we heard the Minister of Health 

stand in this House and shrug his shoulders, downplaying the ill 

effects his government’s policies are having on the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s much easier for the minister to play 

politics and play the blame game when it comes to medical care 

in this province. That’s been his strategy since becoming 

minister. He refused to listen last year, and it was not until the 

people of this province literally took to the streets, that he 

acknowledged there was even a problem. I remember last 

summer in Melville when literally hundreds of people were 

marching in protest of this government’s policies, and the same 

marches occurred throughout the province. 

 

Suddenly the same minister who was telling us for the better 

part of a year there wasn’t a health care funding crisis, found 

$40 million to quell the protests. That was money we were 

constantly told was not there. We were told the government 

simply couldn’t afford to inject money in a much needed 

system. 

 

But then what happened? Well let’s see now. Mr. Anguish, as 

we know, ended his distinguished political career and resigned 

his seat in the legislature. With a by-election coming and people 

marching against this government, suddenly the money was 

there. Never in my life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have I seen such 

cynical action. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve seen many such 

actions since returning to this province in 1981. 

 

The Devine Tories ran their whole government using such 

strategies. Politics, not good governance, ruled the days in the 

1980s. So what’s changed? As far as I can tell, absolutely 

nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Absolutely nothing. 

 

If it hadn’t been for the North Battleford by-election, do you 

believe for a minute there would have been extra money for 

health care last year? Of course there wouldn’t have been. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, listening to the throne speech, I was 

saddened. Oh yes, there was much talk of renewed hope in 

Saskatchewan. The government has taken to patting itself on 

the back non-stop for anything good that happens here. 

 

(1500) 

 

But in my constituency of Melville, and in many of the other 

constituencies I had the honour to visit in the last year as 

interim leader of my party, I saw little evidence of hope the 

government speaks of. Almost every week now in my own 

constituency there seems to be another slap in the face by the 

government who has seemingly abandoned not only Melville, 

but any other areas outside of the province, outside of the major  

cities. Communities outside of our large centres have been 

treated with nothing short of disrespect and disdain by this 

government and this Premier. And it hurts me to see this 

happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If it were not for the hard work 

and the initiative of the people who live in our smaller villages, 

towns, and cities, the devastation would be unstoppable. 

 

But these people work very hard and try to succeed despite this 

government’s seeming hatred for rural Saskatchewan. I 

commend the small-business people that open up their shops 

and sell their wares to people in those small communities where 

the government has taken away employment and services for 

the people that need it, for the people that are the heart of this 

great province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear the government opposite take 

credit for the province’s balanced budget. But have they ever 

once stopped to see how they got there? One hundred per cent 

totally, completely on the backs of the citizens. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is better off than it 

was five years ago. But the people? That’s another story 

entirely. But the members opposite sit there in their 

self-satisfied arrogance and ignore the facts. They ignore the 

damage that has been inflicted in many parts of our province. 

Even the members who represent many of those areas ignore 

this. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can ignore reality if they want. 

But there are certain things they can’t ignore. They can’t ignore 

the fact that in the latest poll only 26 per cent of Saskatchewan 

residents supported what they’re doing to our health care 

system. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they most certainly can’t 

ignore the fact that the member from North Battleford now sits 

on our side of the House. 

 

Yes, even North Battleford, my home town, is telling this 

government it is on the wrong track; even North Battleford, 

which has consistently voted CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) or NDP for the last 50 years has 

turned its back on this government. 

 

The good people of North Battleford told the government, they 

told the NDP they weren’t credible and they defeated the NDP 

candidate. They sent a wake-up call to the Premier and to the 

members opposite that they wanted honest government, 

trustworthy government, and a caring government. Will the 

members opposite listen to that message, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

I doubt it. 

 

And before I continue, I want to again welcome the new 

member from North Battleford to the House. It’s about time that 

that part of the province had a member who is willing to speak 

up for the people who live there. It’s a shame that other 

members, members from that side of the House, aren’t allowed 

to do the same. 

 

However, I’m sure by the time the next election rolls around, 

the people will have their say. And they’ll say goodbye to those 

members who aren’t willing to speak out on their behalf. 



268  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the past year we’ve talked a lot about 

troubles facing health care in Saskatchewan, and these problems 

remain despite any number of bandages this government has 

used to try to stop the hemorrhaging. But now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the NDP is casting its wide net of destruction ever 

farther. 

 

Now our schools are the targets. And it looks so similar to the 

health care crisis, only in this case the government didn’t have 

to create sham boards to take the blame for this government’s 

actions. This time they were already in place. Now it’s the 

school boards and the school trustees that they blame. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it used to be in this province that schools 

closed only when there weren’t enough students to warrant 

them. Closures were population driven, and if there were 

enough children in need of an education in any one area, they 

had a school. That’s no longer the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Many of the schools we see closing today are not lacking 

students. They don’t have just 20 or 30 students. In some cases 

they have 2 or 300 students. Ten, twenty, or thirty years ago 

there would have been no question whether these schools were 

viable. If they had students, they stayed open and teachers were 

employed and children were educated near their homes. Now in 

many cases these closures are completely funding driven. The 

boards don’t have the money, so schools are closed regardless 

of the number of students. 

 

So it’s not good enough for the Minister of Education or the 

Premier or the Deputy Premier to stand in this House and say 

that nothing’s changed. Schools have always closed so how is 

this any different, they say. 

 

Well it is different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are not 

one-room school houses we’re talking about; these are not 

schools in small towns that have disappeared with time. These 

are schools in viable centres. These are even schools in Regina, 

which does not have a shrinking population. These are schools 

that would remain if only this government had a commitment to 

keeping them open. 

 

But instead we have a Minister of Finance and a Minister of 

Education who saw a way to hack a few more dollars out of the 

system while hoisting responsibility for such closures onto the 

shoulders of the school boards. Another abdication of 

responsibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just as we’ve seen over and 

over again with hospitals and health care. 

 

Only this time it’s not the sick and the elderly who are being 

hurt, it’s our children, it’s the future of our province, who now 

have to climb on buses every morning to be taken to another 

town away from their communities in order to receive an 

education, not unlike our young people who are then finally 

educated and have to leave to go to other provinces to find 

employment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the members opposite don’t see that 

something has gone wrong here, I ask them — I beg them — to 

please open their eyes and to see what’s happening in our 

province. 

There’s more to governing than a balance sheet. Ralph Klein 

has balanced his budget too, you know. So if you want to be 

held in the same class as him, they must keep it up — keep 

forgetting the people who are affected by government policies. 

Keep it up and you’ll go down as the finest right-wing 

government our province never had. I just wonder what Tommy 

would say about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what it really boils down to, what it really 

boils down to is leadership. I’ve been on the receiving end of 

many barbs from the other side when it came to leadership. 

That’s all right. They can take all the shots they want, because 

that’s pure politics. That really doesn’t harm anyone. 

 

But what they’ve done in abdicating their leadership 

responsibilities is truly sad. It appears to me the members 

opposite have absolutely no interest in the problems facing 

Saskatchewan. They appear only interested in who they can 

blame for those problems. 

 

Well guess what? It doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter who ran 

up the debt. It doesn’t matter which politicians are getting how 

much money from other politicians. It doesn’t matter to the 

people who are hurting out there. What a responsible 

government would do would be to confront the fundamental 

problems facing Saskatchewan head-on with determination to 

truly build a better province. 

 

Yes, no question, debt is one of the problems facing us. But 

surely the members opposite can see it’s not the only one. Yes, 

Saskatchewan receives less in federal transfers than it once did. 

But so do nine other provinces and two territories, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Maybe the members opposite should be paying a little 

bit of attention to this because we are not the only ones who are 

receiving a reduction in federal transfer money. 

 

You can’t stand up in this House day after day and say 

somehow that the federal government is picking on 

Saskatchewan especially hard, because that’s not true. And it’s 

not credible. When we see the Premier laughing and smiling 

with the Prime Minister at every opportunity, suddenly on these 

occasions all seems very cosy indeed between the two levels of 

government. So what’s the problem? 

 

Other provinces have had to come to terms with these 

cut-backs, and so must we. Other provinces have had to 

overcome debt problems, and so must we. 

 

But we have options to help us get past these challenges. It’s 

not good enough simply to close hospitals and schools and raise 

taxes because you can blame others; that’s not what the people 

elected this government to do. They elected this government to 

find real solutions, not more excuses to justify lack of action 

and lack of leadership. I think this government can take a lesson 

from local leaders of municipal governments. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, local governments have borne the brunt of 

five years of cut-backs from this government — cut-backs that 

had far more devastating effects than anything the province has 

received from the federal government. Yet, instead of whining 

and moaning and throwing up their hands in despair, these local  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

leaders have used initiative. They’ve used initiative to see their 

way through their problems. They have shown real leadership, 

Mr. Speaker, not that this government would ever acknowledge 

that. 

 

No, instead we hear the members opposite speak of local 

governments as huge wastes of money. We hear the Premier 

telling them they have to be creative to get out of their financial 

troubles. We even heard government members say it’s unfair 

for these local leaders to blame the province. Hypocrisy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, sheer hypocrisy. I don’t know what’s worse: 

what this government says or the fact that many members over 

there actually believe what they’re saying. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this throne speech is filled with very nice 

words. We hear about hope for the future. We hear about this 

government’s commitment to the people. We hear of this 

government’s drive to create wealth in our province. We hear of 

their commitment to help our poor children. We hear of their 

commitment to maintain the health care system. We hear of the 

importance of education. 

 

Yet all these words sound very nice, but we’ve heard it all 

before and we still haven’t seen any results. So are we to 

believe they are any more committed to these areas than they 

have been in the past five years? Are we supposed to believe 

them now when these same words have rang so hollow since 

1991? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have problems with health care. Our 

education system is targeted. Our justice system in this province 

is a mess. It has been. We’ve seen the problems that have been 

created because a lack of leadership in the Justice department, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It’s like a problem we have with the Health minister. He gets up 

in this House and says to the people of Saskatchewan, we’ve 

got no problem with health; the health care is just great. 

Everything’s fine. Don’t worry about it. We hear the same thing 

from the Justice minister — crime is not a problem in this 

province. 

 

Well let me just perhaps enlighten members of this House 

exactly what is going on in this province. We’ve heard it all; 

we’ve raised the issues. We’re begging the government to take 

note of the fact that there is a problem with crime in this 

province. And it may interest this House to know that the 

number of car thefts here in this city alone, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, jumped from a 1995 figure of 2,200 to 3,300. In 

Saskatoon an increase over the same one-year period, not quite 

so dramatic. So how can we say everything’s under control? 

 

National statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, confirm that 

Saskatchewan — nothing to be proud of — has the highest and 

fastest-growing crime rate in Canada. Youth crime is 

acknowledged as one of the greatest contributors to this fact. 

 

Between 1992 and 1995 the number of youths charged with 

robbery jumped 77 per cent; vehicle thefts 32 per cent; 

possession of stolen goods up 25 per cent. And it goes on and 

on. Possession of offensive weapons, 25. 

What are we doing? We have a Justice minister that stands in 

this House and says, we don’t have a problem with crime; 

there’s no need to do anything about it. That’s what I spoke 

about when I said there’s no leadership in that government. 

 

In Saskatoon there were more than 2,300 youths charged under 

the Young Offenders Act in the last two years, including — this 

is the sad part — 314 under the age of 14 years of age. That’s 

child prostitution. We have a concern. Our side of the House, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, wants to see this government do 

something. We’re offering some suggestions and some ideas. 

What we need is some leadership, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Are the people of Saskatchewan truly to take 

this government at its word when its words have been so 

meaningless for so long? I really don’t think so. While the 

members opposite may feel they are smarter than the people of 

this province, that they can sell them anything, it’s simply not 

true. 

 

You couldn’t fool the people of North Battleford and you won’t 

fool the people of Melville or anywhere else for that matter. 

Until you are willing to show some real action, the people will 

not believe you have any real solutions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the words in the throne speech sounded 

very, very nice. And yes, I wish I could believe them. But I 

don’t believe them and neither do the people I represent. And in 

doing so, I regretfully cannot support this throne speech. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again a 

pleasure to participate in debate in this great institution. Always 

at this point of the legislative proceedings there is some hope 

and optimism. I think there’s a sense of anticipation about 

debates to come. It’s a turning of the season as we turn from 

winter into spring. By the time we finish the session, the mood 

is always something a little bit different. We have to recognize 

that the legislative session can be intense, stressful, demanding. 

But in any event, Mr. Speaker, we’re always glad to be back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first I want to say that your role and that of all the 

others who keep the legislative proceedings on track are vital to 

a successful session. I think we can be optimistic, based on the 

experience that the Speaker has and that you have as Deputy 

Speaker, that you will have a steady hand to guide us through 

some very difficult times. 

 

As we enter into a legislative session, Mr. Speaker, we also 

spend far less time in our constituencies and in our constituency 

offices. Now more so than any other time of the year, we 

depend on our constituency assistants. These are the 

hard-working, I wouldn’t say particularly well-paid, support 

staff who are vital to the functioning of the offices in our  



270  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

constituencies. 

 

How vital, Mr. Speaker? Perhaps I can explain this by way of 

example. A few months ago I was in my office and my assistant 

was engaged on another matter when the phone rang — I think 

she was tied up on the other line — and I answered and I said, 

this is Harry Van Mulligen, you know, answering your call 

here. And the person said, well I want to speak to your assistant 

because she’s the one that really knows what’s going on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend a special word of 

appreciation, as other members have done, to all of the 

constituency assistants who work for all of us, no matter what 

side of the House we’re on, for the hand work they do for us, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, these are also stressful and 

demanding times for our families, who must endure too much 

time without our presence and the support that we are obliged to 

provide for our families. And I think we need to recognize that 

too. 

 

In the past, Mr. Speaker, I’ve described the constituency of 

Regina Victoria and it hasn’t changed any great deal since last 

year. But I do want to say simply that I want to thank all of 

those constituents who wrote or called my office to express 

their concerns, or to express their ideas, and to express their 

questions about government direction and to give me their 

advice. I very much appreciated those calls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to just briefly acknowledge the role of 

the mover of the address in reply to the Speech from the 

Throne, the member for Swift Current, and also the seconder, 

the member for Saskatoon Southeast. I think these two 

members have done a very commendable job. I very much 

appreciated, not only hearing the speech by the member for 

Swift Current, but also reading it again, because there is a great 

deal of wisdom in that speech and there is much to commend it, 

Mr. Speaker. And we congratulate him for his excellent 

performance in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time that many people in 

Saskatchewan will have had an opportunity to see the 

legislative proceedings live on their television. Hitherto, cable 

television has brought the legislature or the legislative 

proceedings to selected centres in Saskatchewan. Because of a 

change from, I believe, cable technology to satellite technology, 

the legislative proceedings are now available to many more 

people in Saskatchewan. I’ve heard — especially in rural 

Saskatchewan — I’ve heard members . . . I remember the 

member for Cypress Hills, Birch Hills, making express mention 

of the fact that this is the first time that many of their 

constituents would be able to see the legislative proceedings 

live, at first hand, Mr. Speaker. And I want to welcome them. 

 

Now having said that, I want to explain something that just 

might confuse them a little bit. Now they know who’s speaking. 

They know, for example, that I’m the member for Regina 

Victoria. I think they might even know which party I’m with  

because there will be a crawler that will go across the screen 

periodically to identify who it is that is speaking. So they know 

who’s speaking. 

 

Now they may not know that the successive speakers, Mr. 

Speaker, are speaking about the same province of 

Saskatchewan. You’d be hard pressed to know that we’re 

speaking about the same place. One speaker will get up and 

sound very optimistic and be optimistic about Saskatchewan 

and where we are and where we’ve come from and where we’re 

going into the future, Mr. Speaker. And the next speaker will be 

very pessimistic, the exact opposite, a case of black and a case 

of white, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now for example, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll indulge me just for a 

moment. If you’ll indulge me just for a moment, I want to 

illustrate what it is that I have to say by looking at the words of 

two members, okay? One is the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley, who spoke about health care, and the other are the 

words of the member for Kelvington-Wadena, who also had 

something to say about health care. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Would that be a Liberal? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Yes, a Liberal member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

And I want to contrast, I want to contrast what it is that they had 

to say to this House and why it might be confusing for those at 

home to know, are they talking about the same thing? Are they 

talking about the same problems? Okay. 

 

Now first the words for the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley, and I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I got these words off 

the Internet. I needed a copy. I was working at home. I didn’t 

have access to Hansard, but I did have access to Hansard 

on-line on the Internet, and I was able to take her words off the 

Internet at home and to be able to refer to them. This is a 

tremendous innovation, and I might say is another way that 

Saskatchewan people can hold the government and hold also 

those members accountable for what it is they say in this 

institution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I digress here. I want to go back to the 

words of the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley who spoke 

about health care, okay. Now this is a lengthy quote and I hope 

you’ll indulge me. I hope you’ll indulge me. The member for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in speaking about health care said 

this: 

 

And while we recognize we must continue to work on 

renewing our health care system, I think it’s also important 

to recognize how far we have come. More health services 

are available in Saskatchewan communities than ever 

before: prenatal nutrition, diabetes education, blood 

pressure clinics, province-wide breast cancer screening, 

and palliative care programs, to name a few. 

 

Saskatchewan is well served by hospitals and nursing 

homes. We still have twice as many hospitals per capita as 

the national average, and the number of nursing home beds  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

per person over 75 years of age is higher than many other 

provinces. We are meeting the needs of our growing 

seniors’ population with expanded home care and other 

programs. Community- and home-based services help 

people stay independent longer. 

 

All districts now have mental health, public health and 

addiction workers. We have increased minority and 

women’s representation on district health boards. And did 

you know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan life expectancy 

is higher than the Canadian average and that for women it 

is the highest in Canada? We must be doing something 

right in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  So that’s what she concluded, that we 

must be doing something right in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s contrast this with the words of the next speaker. The 

very next speaker in the legislature that very same day was the 

Liberal opposition member for Kelvington-Wadena. How did 

she describe the health care system? She uses words like 

“dysfunctional.” She talks in terms like, the government 

administering beatings to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Later, later she says the government is, and I quote her, “the 

killer of our health care system.” Quote: “the killer of our health 

care system.” All I can say is for those people at home, don’t be 

alarmed, don’t call the police. This kind of thing goes on all the 

time and we expect no less from the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  In any event, that is the nature of the 

throne speech debate. It’s the nature of the government to be 

optimistic and to look forward and to be realistic about where 

the province is going. And it’s the nature, it’s the nature of the 

opposition to be pessimistic, to make it sound that 

Saskatchewan is in some kind of Stygian-type darkness, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Whenever the Liberals get up, there 

should be a language warning. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Now the member says that there should 

be a language warning on the screen, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

he’s correct — that every time that a Liberal member does get 

up, that we should have an advisory alert for those less than 18 

years of age or some such age, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the real question, the real question that faces Saskatchewan 

people and that faces us here, are we right to be optimistic or 

are we right, as you say, to be pessimistic? That is the question 

that faces Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we are right to be optimistic. I think the 

speech delivered by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was 

right on the mark when it said at the outset, it said at the outset, 

the speech said right at the outset, that today is, quote, “one of 

the most hopeful times in our province in many years.” 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  The very first words of the throne 

speech: “one of the most hopeful times in our province in many 

years.” 

 

Now many speakers in this debate have fleshed out why it is 

that Saskatchewan people just might allow themselves a 

modicum of optimism at this point in our history, Mr. Speaker. 

Why it is they might allow themselves that, as opposed to 

taking some gloomy, pessimistic view of the years ahead, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would refer the members again to the 

contribution by the member for Swift Current, and also to the 

member for Regina Sherwood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is really interesting to note, as did my colleague, the 

member for Regina Dewdney, in his remarks, he said not one, 

not one opposition speaker has seriously questioned that 

statement that today is “one of the most hopeful times in our 

province in many years.” 

 

They might have attacked us on health care, they might attack 

us on education, they might attack us on jobs and the economy, 

they might attack us on this and they might attack us on that, 

but not one took exception with that statement — that this is 

one of the most hopeful times in the province in many years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those comments, those comments are optimism 

based on the realistic appraisal of where we have come from, 

what shape our finances are in, and the current and projected 

state of the economy. That’s what causes us to believe that we 

are at one of the more hopeful times in our province’s history. 

 

Unlike the Grant Devine-style visions being espoused by the 

Liberal member for Kelvington-Wadena, our visions are firmly 

based on reality, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m somewhat surprised, 

and I guess I ought not to be, that a Devine-like vision is 

coming from the Liberals. 

 

(1530) 

 

But yes, because like Devine, Grant Devine, well what she’s 

saying is that yes, we should have a vision and we should look 

to the future, but we should kind of ignore finances. We should 

kind of ignore the balance sheet. We ought not to worry about 

those things. We should just look forward and look into the 

future; and that’s where we want to go and that’s where we 

want to be. But we shouldn’t worry, we shouldn’t worry about 

sort of niggling items like deficit and debt, or fiscal policy. 

None of that stuff. We shouldn’t worry about that. 

 

And in that respect, and in that respect, the Liberal member for 

Kelvington-Wadena reminds me, reminds me firmly, of Grant 

Devine. I can recall Grant Devine clearly in this House when he 

was an opposition member, when he was an opposition member 

in estimates, grilling the member for North Battleford at that 

time — who was then the Minister of Energy — and going on 

at some length to try to get the Minister of Energy, the member 

for North Battleford, to agree with some project or some 

initiative that the member for Estevan then, Grant Devine, the  



272  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

former PC premier, favoured. Right. 

 

He was going on at great length, and the minister would answer, 

and Grant Devine would get up again and quiz him again: well 

isn’t this the right way to go? And he’d say, well you know, like 

we’ve got to look at the details and kind of sort these things out. 

There’s a number of factors here that should be considered, etc., 

etc. But he’d get up again. But isn’t this the right way to go? 

Well there are a number of factors. We should consider this. We 

should also consider the financial implications. And the 

member for Estevan, the then member for Estevan, Grant 

Devine, stood up and said something to the effect that, well we 

shouldn’t worry about the money; the money will take care of 

itself. 

 

Now that’s the same approach that’s being espoused by the 

Liberal member for Kelvington-Wadena. And that is a very 

stark contrast — that is a very stark contrast about the members 

on this side and the members on that side. We say we need to 

concern ourselves with the finances of this province, that the 

finances of the province have to be a base from which we can 

spring forward, have to be a base from which we can plan for 

the future; that we cannot ignore these things. We can’t ignore 

the finances of the province as you people did in the last 

provincial election, with this wild-eyed scheme of, well we’ll 

cut the provincial sales tax by such a huge amount. 

 

Well how will this be paid for? There’ll be such, there’ll be 

such . . . all your propeller heads who advised you said there 

will be such an increase, there will be such an increase in 

economic activity, there’ll be an 8 per cent economic growth, 

but more and more revenues will come in. Well, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Don’t forget Texas-style audits. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And of course, Texas-style audits. But 

that vision, that vision, that vision as to how the province . . . or 

how we ought to respect, how we ought to respect the people’s 

finances, turned into your nightmare. And rightfully so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  But I don’t think they’ve learned a thing 

— they haven’t learned a thing. I was just aghast, Mr. Speaker 

— I was aghast to hear the Liberal leader, I think it was the day 

or two, or maybe the day after his election as the leader . . . Let 

me just explain this. 

 

Let me just explain what I mean by the Liberal leader, Mr. 

Speaker, because we have one Liberal leader who’s not in the 

legislature, who’s Dr. Melenchuk, and he’s the Liberal leader 

who’s also a research assistant for the Liberal caucus. That’s 

one leader. 

 

Now in addition to Dr. Melenchuk we have a Liberal leader in 

the House, which is the member for Canora. So we have two 

Liberal leaders. 

 

Now in addition to that leader we have the former leader of the  

Liberals in the House. Or maybe he was the leader of all the 

Liberals at that point, I’m not really clear — the member for 

Melville — now we have three leaders — who’s now the 

deputy leader. 

 

And then of course we have the Liberal House Leader, the 

member for Melfort. As opposed to the Liberal leader in the 

House, we have the Liberal House Leader — just to make that 

distinction. 

 

And then of course we have the former deputy leader of the 

Liberals and we have the former House leader of the Liberals. 

And then finally of course we have the member for Saskatoon 

Greystone, who is also a former leader of the Liberals. 

 

I’ve lost track. What is it — 7 or 8 leaders in a group of 11 or 

12 people? Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I digress. Mr. Speaker, I digress. I was going 

to say that I am simply aghast that the current Liberal leader — 

as distinct from all the other Liberal leaders — shortly after 

being elected, that leader, Dr. Melenchuk, said on, I think it was 

November 25 last year, shortly after being elected, that he plans 

on relieving taxation for business because in his words: “it 

would generate more retail outlet sales and provide more tax 

base for all of us and that would solve all the problems.” 

 

Well that’s the same thing that they said in 1995, and it’s 

obvious that they haven’t learned a thing, Mr. Speaker, okay. 

That’s their vision. That’s their vision — cut taxes, close your 

eyes, cross your fingers, pray your prayers, consult Milton 

Friedman, and hope you don’t bankrupt the province. That’s the 

way to proceed. That’s the way to proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, that’s not our approach. 

That’s not our approach. Our vision includes concrete plans for 

the future. Our visions are firmly based on reality, Mr. Speaker. 

Our visions are realized by people working purposefully, with 

determination to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people 

brick by brick, stone by stone. However you want to describe it, 

Mr. Speaker, we do it step by step. No more risking the 

taxpayers’ monies in wild-eyed, irrational schemes, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think the member for Saskatoon Southeast said 

it the best when she said, slow and sure wins the race; gaudy 

and greedy sinks the ship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And whatever thoughts Saskatchewan 

people might have about mixed metaphors, Mr. Speaker, I think 

Saskatchewan people support this approach that we take. 

 

They support the leadership of the Premier, Mr. Speaker. They 

like the fact that his hand is on the tiller and guides the ship of 

state, and that there can be real confidence, real hope, real 

optimism, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the Liberals can pretend, Mr. Speaker, that they had their 

finger on the pulse of Saskatchewan. They can pretend that, but  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

sometimes I wonder if someone should be checking their 

temperature, Mr. Speaker, or has someone got the fingers 

around their throats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is their unprecedented gloom and doom and pessimism 

reflective of their internal mood as a caucus, Mr. Speaker? That 

is a question we ask ourselves. Are we seeing stress symptoms 

of internal struggles? Is their legislative caucus still trying to 

cope with their many leaders within and without, Mr. Speaker? 

Is there dissension resulting from the last shuffle of 

responsibilities, Mr. Speaker? I suppose people with their frame 

of mind would have a gloomy, pessimistic outlook on things, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I find that they’re not even positive about 

themselves, about who they are and what they stand for or what 

it is that they believe in. They don’t say those kinds of things. 

 

Now there was one exception to that, and that was the member 

for North Battleford. I heard him that night, Mr. Speaker, and I 

might say, I want to congratulate the member from North Battle 

ford for his contribution to the House so far. 

 

Now having said that, I knew the former member for North 

Battleford, Doug Anguish. I worked with him prior to us both 

being elected in 1986. I served with Doug Anguish on the 

Public Accounts Committee and of course here in the 

legislature for many years, Mr. Speaker, so I think I knew Doug 

Anguish. And the member for North Battleford now is no Doug 

Anguish. But he’s doing a good job nevertheless. 

 

He did try to define Liberalism. And he did it narrowly in the 

context of youth crime. Now he, talking about youth crime, 

concluded that — and this is a quote from the member for 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal member for North 

Battleford — he said, “Only the Liberals provide that middle, 

reasonable, positive voice of sanity between the two wild 

extremes.” 

 

And that’s a Liberal, Mr. Speaker. He uses words such as 

reasonable, positive, sanity. And I would ask the member for 

North Battleford at an early opportunity if he could explain — 

because he’s explaining this in the context of crime, Mr. 

Speaker — how it is that his brothers and sisters in Ottawa, his 

Liberal colleagues there, could give faint hope to Clifford 

Olson, Mr. Speaker. Because there’s nothing very reasonable, 

nothing very sane, nothing very positive about the actions of the 

federal government or the actions of Liberal in that regard, Mr. 

Speaker. None whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely nothing to say about the PC 

caucus or the Tories and the Justice system. Whatever I had to 

say about them, I said in March 1989 and I need not repeat my 

remarks that I made then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the six points that highlight the 

Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. The throne speech 

outlined the government’s general intentions to invest in 

Saskatchewan people in six ways, in six areas. First, investing 

in jobs and the economy; secondly, investing in the quality of 

education and training; thirdly, investing in our children,  

reducing child poverty — part of a far-reaching and progressive 

welfare reform; fourthly, ensuring a secure, stable health 

system; fifth, renewing our highways and transportation system; 

and sixth, preserving a key accomplishment, a return to fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, I’d like to briefly touch on 

each of these areas. First with respect to jobs and the economy 

— jobs and the economy. The members of the Liberal caucus, 

the members of the Liberal caucus can say whatever they like. 

They can say whatever they like about the Saskatchewan 

economy. They can say whatever they want because I tell you, 

actions speak a lot stronger than words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And I don’t want to repeat all the 

statistics that suggest that the Saskatchewan economy is doing 

well, but I want to deal, I want to deal with one action in 

particular which speaks very strongly, very strongly about the 

Saskatchewan economy. And these are the actions of the federal 

government, your Liberal brothers and sisters in Ottawa — their 

actions vis-a-vis our economy, okay. 

 

Now in Canada we have a concept known as equalization. 

Equalization is a way for the federal government to divert 

federal funds to those provincial economies in provinces that 

are deemed not to be doing as well as some average threshold, 

and therefore need the funds to be able to provide relatively the 

same services and programs for Canadians in those provinces as 

distinct for Canadians in other provinces. So someone in 

Newfoundland, someone in Newfoundland can have access, 

relatively speaking, to the same level of services that someone 

in Kelowna, British Columbia, might have, or in Calgary, 

Alberta. 

 

That is the concept of equalization, and equalization works in 

this way. If your economy improves, if your economy improves 

relative to other provincial economies in the country, then the 

amount of your equalization is reduced because the federal 

government takes the point of view — and that’s the nature of 

equalization — if you’re able to generate your own revenues, 

then you don’t need the revenues from Ottawa. 

 

If your economy is not doing as well compared to other 

economies, then your equalization payments are increased. 

Because then if they deem that, well your economy is not doing 

as well; you can’t generate your own revenues so therefore you 

need the transfers from Ottawa to be able to provide the same 

level of services and programs relatively speaking, in your 

province, the same as any other province in this country, Mr. 

Speaker . . . It’s called sharing. It’s called sharing the national 

wealth. That’s what it is. 

 

But now, what has happened in Saskatchewan with respect to 

equalization? If the Liberal members are correct, and that our 

economy is so bad and terrible and it’s not doing well and it’s 

. . . oh it’s such a terrible thing, then you would think that 

equalization payments would be going up. Is this not true? Is 

this not true? If the economy is doing so badly, as you say it is, 

then our equalization payments should be going up. That’s  



274  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

logical. That’s how the federal government, your Liberal 

brothers and sisters, your Liberal cousins in Ottawa — that’s 

how they act. 

 

On the other hand, what is really happening in Saskatchewan, 

vis-a-vis equalization, is that since 1991-92 we have seen a 

massive decrease in equalization payments from Ottawa 

because it reflects the strength of the Saskatchewan economy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  In 1991 . . . and these figures you can 

get from your cousins in Ottawa. Don’t believe my figures. Go 

phone up Mr. Paul Martin and get the figures from him. But in 

1991 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if he’ll take your call. In 

1991-92 Saskatchewan received about $479 million in 

equalization payments. 

 

In 1996-97, the current fiscal year, we now receive $258 

million in equalization payments — a reduction of $220 million 

in the five years, a reduction of 46 per cent. In contrast I might 

say, to Manitoba, which in ‘91-92 received $853 million in 

equalization payments as opposed to the current year when they 

received $1.039 billion dollars — an increase of 22 per cent. 

 

So Ottawa is saying, you in Saskatchewan, your economy is 

doing reasonably well; we’re going to cut back on your 

equalization payments, as opposed to Manitoba where we’re 

going to increase the equalization payments because their 

economy relative to Saskatchewan’s economy and other 

economies is not doing as well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member says, what about Alberta? Alberta 

is a “have” province. B.C. (British Columbia) is a “have” 

province. Ontario is a “have” province. And I hope soon that we 

too will be a “have” province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just might also say that it’s an interesting contrast to what’s 

happening here in Saskatchewan, good old NDP Saskatchewan 

with this bad economy that you talk about and contrast it with 

the Liberal economies in Atlantic Canada — Newfoundland, 

where equalization payments have gone up by 9 per cent; or 

Nova Scotia, where they’ve gone up by 33 per cent to $1.129 

billion . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the members can say what they like, they can say what they 

like. I frankly don’t care what they say about the provincial 

economy. The proof is in the pudding — or more accurately, 

the proof is in the equalization payments. This economy is 

doing quite well, thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, this is not the only 

inconsistency that we can see in their speeches when describing 

Saskatchewan economy. I was particularly, particularly 

interested to read the remarks of the member for Humboldt, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say particularly because I happened to be 

speaking oh, about a month or two ago to someone in  

Humboldt about their reasons moving from Regina to 

Humboldt. But more about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Humboldt said in her remarks — 

the Liberal member for Humboldt, the doom and gloom Liberal 

member for Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, said in her remarks: 

 

I suggest the Premier and the honourable minister of . . . 

economic development listen to the definition of the word 

“stagnant”. According to Webster’s New World 

Dictionary, stagnant means “without motion, not flowing 

or moving, a lack of movement, lacking in activity or 

interest, sluggish.” Need I say more, Mr. Speaker? 

 

These very words (these very words, she said) — sluggish, 

without movement, lacking activity or interest — are an 

apt description of the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Now this is the member from Humboldt. And I was very, very 

interested to hear her remarks because it contrasted sharply with 

the telephone conversation that I had a few months ago with 

somebody in Humboldt who tells me that they had difficulty 

finding housing in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, because there is too 

many people moving to Humboldt because of the local 

economy. She tells me that her husband is enrolled in a welding 

course and before they can finish, there are companies at the 

door trying to entice these students out into their industries 

because they're so desperate for workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did I find out from the economic development officer in 

Humboldt, Mr. Speaker? He says there is a serious shortage of 

labour and housing in the Carlton Trail region, i.e., Humboldt, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how can she say on the one hand that the economy is 

sluggish and at the same time in Humboldt the economy is just 

simply white-hot, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  There are some words we dare not use 

in this institution, Mr. Speaker. But to say that this is a 

contradiction of immense proportion, we can say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is one other issue that concerns 

me and that I’m very concerned about, and this is something 

that my colleague, the member for Regina Wascana, raised in 

her remarks, and that is the conservative attack that I see not 

only in the context of this throne speech and the various 

members who have raised this — the member for Humboldt, I 

believe; the member for Kelvington-Wadena; other members, 

Conservative members have raised this — and that is their 

attack on occupation and health . . . occupational health and 

safety regulations that have come forward as a result of 

improvements to occupational health and safety legislation a 

few years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And their attack all seems to be based on this basic premiss — 

and the member for Regina Wascana talked about this — that if 

you do away with these regulations, it’ll mean more jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. That seems to be the position they’re  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

taking. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is, don’t do this, don’t do this. 

Don’t do this to the working people of Saskatchewan — don’t 

do this. Don’t bring us down, okay? Do what you can, do what 

you can to ensure a safe working environment for 

Saskatchewan people. Please do that. Don’t attack in this way. 

 

I was interested that even as I was, you know, as we were 

listening to this non-ending attack on occupational health and 

safety, this non-ending attack on the government — and I might 

say, a non-ending attack on working people in Saskatchewan by 

saying that you deserve something less than the very best — 

that I received from United Steelworkers of America, a 

document called Death by Deregulation: The Story of Westray, 

Mr. Speaker, and this is a very sad chapter in Canadian history. 

 

But the report that they provided me is based on their 

submission to the Westray inquiry, and they conclude by 

saying: 

 

The Westray disaster happened because regulations 

governing mining practices and safety were not followed, 

and because the government, while fully aware of the 

situation, did not step in to enforce the law. Such behaviour 

is not unique to coal mines or to Nova Scotia. It is a result 

of the deregulation of health and safety, a policy goal now 

pursued by governments and employers across Canada. 

 

And I might say parenthetically, thankfully not by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And I go on here, Mr. Speaker, to read 

this quote: 

 

Every day in this country people die from work-related 

accidents and illnesses. Many more are injured or 

incapacitated by their work. Like all these victims, the 

twenty-six miners who died at Westray were ordinary 

people. They went to work to make a living and to provide 

for their families. Nobody went to work to die. 

 

The point is simple. Work can be made safe and healthy. 

With our advanced science and technology, and with all 

our resources to create wealth, there is no reason or excuse 

for a Westray explosion. 

 

And I might say, with all the wealth and all the resources that 

we have in this country, there is simply no reason to risk the 

lives of workers as they . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And so I hope you’ll work with us to 

improve working conditions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to, I want to turn to what is the 

second priority as outlined in the Speech from the Throne. And  

what I see here is a curious double standard, a double standard 

which has risen again today in the legislature; was apparent 

again the other day. And this is the Liberals — and the Tories, 

for that matter, but the Liberals particularly — attacking the 

government because there are closures in schools in various 

communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

They ignore the fact that even while funding has increased in 

previous years, schools close. Why do schools close? Because 

demographics change. People feel that they no longer want to 

support their community. They want to do their shopping 

elsewhere. They want to do their work elsewhere. But it should 

come as no surprise that at the end of the day that the 

government and the local institutions also have to question 

whether or not they can provide the same level of service, Mr. 

Speaker. Okay? 

 

But they attack us nevertheless and try to hold us responsible 

for these closures, when these in many . . . these are local 

decisions, Mr. Speaker. But not a word, not a word, not one, not 

one from them about Ottawa — Ottawa actually offloading and 

cutting back on its expenditures for health care. We’ll have one 

member say here, oh the province ought to do more for 

universities, we ought to do more for post-secondary education, 

we ought to do more for training, we ought to do more for 

students. We should do these things, we should find the money 

to do these things — and criticize us because we’re not doing 

enough. 

 

And I admit that we should be doing more. I think all of us 

share that opinion. We want to do more. We want to provide the 

very best education system. That’s why it’s one of our high 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. We want to do these things. 

 

But for them to stand in this House, stand in this House to 

criticize the provincial government for putting more money into 

education and saying it’s not enough, but never one word, not 

one peep about what the federal government is doing in this 

area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess the question that people at home at some point 

have to ask themselves, how credible are you people? How 

credible can you people be? How credible can you be when you 

criticize us for these things? How credible can you be when you 

refuse to say one word about the federal government and their 

offloading? Not one word from them, Mr. Speaker. Where’s 

their credibility? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third priority that is outlined in the Speech 

from the Throne is the commitment by the government to invest 

in children and to reducing child poverty, Mr. Speaker. And I 

don’t want to belabour the point. I think my colleague, the 

member for Saskatoon Sutherland, spoke clearly, eloquently, 

completely, on this topic, in this matter, Mr. Speaker, and I 

don’t want to . . . and I would simply be repeating his words. 

 

I can say that I sense some agreement from all sides of the 

House. There’s agreement that we work together to deal with 

this problem of child poverty. That we find within ourselves 

and among ourselves the will, the way, to deal concretely with 

this issue. That’s what I sense. Having said that, I would ask the  



276  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

Liberals to please mute your criticism, mute your criticism 

about us putting more money into initiatives such as child 

poverty. 

 

I would, you know . . . we heard, I think it was from the 

member for Humboldt, no end of criticism that we’re not doing 

enough at this point. And I just simply want to emphasize we 

have put more money, more money — how many times can I 

underline the word more? — more money, more, more, more 

money into supporting children and poverty. We increased it, 

notwithstanding all of the issues that faced us. All of the issues 

that faced us — debt, deficit — whatever you want to call it. In 

the darkest days of ‘91-92, we said it’s important that we 

increase our funding for this important area. And we did — and 

we have — and we’ll do more. Okay. We’ve done that. Okay. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now we also have moved I think, the nation forward to 

recognizing that this problem of poverty among children is an 

important policy issue that must be dealt with. And thanks to 

the leadership of the Premier and other ministers, we’ve been 

able to do this, to put this on the national table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And, Mr. Speaker, there seems to be 

now some national accord, some national agreement that we 

move forward in this important matter, okay. I sense that. 

 

Now I guess in that context I would just simply ask the Liberal 

members to work with us in this issue; not to on the one hand 

criticize us because we’re not putting in enough, but at the same 

hand, mute all of your criticisms about the cut-backs that 

Ottawa is inflicting on poor people when it comes to their 

reduction in transfer payments. Because that’s what it is. Now if 

you want to work with us in this important area, and I hope that 

you will, then please let’s work together. Don’t criticize us in 

this area and we won’t criticize your federal Liberals either, but 

let’s work together in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth priority that’s outlined in the Speech 

from the Throne — and it’s four of six so . . . I know the 

member’s looking at his watch, Mr. Speaker, but this is an 

important area. 

 

Now earlier I mentioned the conflicting statements about health 

care as articulated by the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley and the Liberal member for Kelvington-Wadena. 

Conflicting statements, and I don’t want to repeat them at this 

time. Although none of her colleagues use her excessive 

language, such as beatings, killer of medicare, predictably most 

Liberal comments are of the same ilk. The language is not quite 

as excessive as that Liberal member, but they’re similar. 

 

Now there are two exceptions, okay — two exceptions of this 

non-ending attack on the provincial government about health 

care. Two exceptions. First of all is the member for North 

Battleford, okay. And I might say you better get a grip on the 

member for North Battleford. You don’t want to have him 

saying positive things about health care, Mr. Speaker, when it’s  

your line to get out nothing but negative comments about health 

care, okay. 

 

Now in his remarks the member for North Battleford quoted a 

government poll, okay — a government poll. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You read that earlier there. You’re 

repeating yourself. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, no, no, no. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Sure. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, no, no. 

 

The member for North Battleford said that most people — and 

he’s quoting from a government poll — most people continue 

to be reasonably satisfied with the level of care they receive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Those are his words. I think in actual 

fact it’s the vast majority of people continue to be satisfied with 

the level of health care they receive, Mr. Speaker, but I’m not 

going to quibble about that. But the fact is that the member for 

North Battleford said that people continue to be reasonably 

satisfied with the level of care they receive. 

 

My question is, which is it? Is the government the killers of 

medicare that the member for Kelvington-Wadena suggests? Or 

are people continuing to receive the health care that they want 

and need in Saskatchewan, as the member for North Battleford 

suggests? Because you can’t have it both ways . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the Premier says the Liberals are both 

right, and I guess that probably reflects Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 

These are people that can speak out of both sides of their mouth 

at one time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I don’t doubt that there are anxieties, concerns about 

health care. Health care has seen a very major transformation 

these last three years. The process of change is never easy, 

never easy, no matter what you do. And of course you should 

know that because you’re undergoing quite a change yourself in 

your caucus, and it kind of reflects that you people aren’t 

adjusting very well to that. 

 

But the process of change is never easy — never easy. And it’s 

especially not easy in a sensitive area like health care. But there 

have been and there will continue to be improvements, Mr. 

Speaker. There will continue to be improvements because that’s 

our priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Even if it’s not the priority of the 

federal government — the Liberal federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. They were faced with a choice. And I think it’s the 

member for Regina South who went on at some length about 

how it is that social spending reflects about 17 per cent or 17 

cents of every dollar in Ottawa. But that is the area that the 

federal government sought to cut significantly — the federal  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Liberal government. The federal Liberal government, in setting 

its fiscal house in order, sought to cut funding for health care, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame, but that’s what they did. 

 

They said, we’re faced with these decisions; we’re faced with 

the conflict in terms of where we spend our money. They said 

it’s our priority to cut health care. That’s what they said. That’s 

what they said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Now they cut health care. They cut 

health care. And my question is, if you’re truly committed, if 

you’re truly committed to a better health care system, if you’re 

truly committed to a national vision of health, Mr. Speaker, can 

you pray tell us what it is that you’ve done as a Liberal caucus 

to register the concerns of Saskatchewan people to the federal 

government about their cuts in health care. 

 

Can you maybe table for the House, can you maybe table for 

the House what it is that you’ve done in this regard? Have you 

phoned or have you written or have you faxed or have you 

e-mailed or in any way communicated with the Prime Minister 

in this area, maybe with the Minister of Health, maybe the 

Minister of Finance? 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Order. Now all 

hon. members will be well aware that it is better to put the 

comments on the record than to be shouting them across the 

floor from both sides of the House. And I’ll ask all hon. 

members to allow the hon. member for Regina Victoria to 

proceed in a way that is audible to everyone. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So my 

question is would you be prepared to table with the Clerk of the 

legislature any copy of any correspondence, maybe even a 

telephone slip, a copy of an e-mail, maybe a copy of a fax, 

maybe a scribbling on the back of an envelope which reflected 

your thoughts about the next time I see the Prime Minister I 

should tell him these things? Anything at all. Would you be 

prepared to table with the Clerk of the legislature your concern 

about cuts in health care? Would you be prepared to do that? 

 

Can you tell us just how far your concerns in cuts in health care 

extended? Did they extend to, in any way, communicating this 

with the Prime Minister of Canada, with the Finance minister in 

Ottawa, maybe with the Minister of Health, maybe with Ralph 

Goodale as the senior minister responsible for Saskatchewan, 

maybe with a back-bench Member of Parliament, maybe with 

one of their aides in one of their offices — anybody at all, Mr. 

Speaker? Did you tell anybody about your concerns about their 

cuts to our health care system, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well judging from their comments, there hasn’t been any such 

communication, Mr. Speaker. And my question is their new 

Liberal leader, the doctor, just what kind of an oath does he 

demand of his Liberal members? Is it the Hippocratic oath or is 

it the hypocritical oath? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. The Chair 

recognizes that all hon. members are enthused by the possibility 

of a rambunctious debate, but I would encourage that we do it 

within the rules of debate. And I’d ask all hon. members to keep 

the House in reasonable order and allow the hon. member for 

Regina Victoria to continue. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, obviously we hit upon a 

few dangling participles in the comments here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that there were two exceptions to this 

universal condemnation by the Liberal caucus when it comes to 

the government’s record on health care. There are two 

exceptions — two exceptions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I already dealt with the member for North Battleford, who 

actually had some good things to say about health care in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He said that people were satisfied, 

the vast majority of people were satisfied with our health care 

system. 

 

Now the second was the member for Arm River. He was too 

busy dealing with other things related to health care to really 

have much time condemning the government about health care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the comments by the member for Arm River are 

interesting. And they’re interesting because the member for 

Arm River is the Liberal Health critic, the person who’s 

appointed by the Leader of the Liberal Party to speak for them 

in health care issues. That’s Dr. Melenchuk, the Liberal leader 

who is outside the caucus, as opposed to the member for 

Canora, who is the Liberal . . . who is the leader of the Liberals 

in the House and as opposed to the Liberal House Leader. 

 

Now the member for Arm River is the Liberal Health critic. 

And he was — and we will know in this House even if the 

public doesn’t know — that the member for Arm River was the 

first and the strongest supporter of Dr. Melenchuk in his pursuit 

of the leadership of the Liberal Party. That’s why he got his 

reward. He’s now the Health critic as opposed to the member 

for Wood Mountain who used to be the Health critic and now 

got shuffled off to something else. So the member for Arm 

River is now the Health critic — okay? — and reflects his solid 

support for the Liberal leader. 

 

Now we can assume, we can assume that when the member for 

Arm River speaks about health care that he speaks for the 

Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker. Verbatim, I would suspect, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now his speech was less condemning than it was an 

explanation of the Liberal leader’s stand on health care, Mr. 

Speaker. And what did we learn, Mr. Speaker? Well it was a 

very interesting speech indeed. Now I wasn’t sure what I was 

reading so again I pulled his speech off the Internet as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And a wonderful innovation this is, because it allowed 

me to work from home and access Hansard at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a wonderful innovation. 



278  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

Now what we learn is that the Liberal leader wants to do away 

with elected health boards and he wants to replace them with 

regional corporations that have appointed directors which is, as 

I gather, the Australian model. Probably be seven or eight 

regional corporations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe one 

or two regional corporations in all of Saskatchewan responsible 

for health care. And this is opposed to the 4 or 500 local boards 

which he says he prefers. 

 

Now I’m a bit confused here because he said, the member for 

Arm River — and we can assume that he’s speaking for the 

Liberal leader — simply said, it means the former government 

structure — that is, 4 or 500 boards — was more cost-effective, 

more decentralized, and more locally accountable. 

 

Then he goes on to say incredibly, now we find ourselves in a 

situation where we can’t return to the previous structure mainly 

because it’s not desirable in a rapidly changing health care 

environment. So he says, my preference is 4 or 500 boards; then 

he says, well we can’t return to that. 

 

Then he says, my real preference is a few regional corporations 

with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One regional . . . or one 

corporation to administer all health care, Mr. Speaker, with 

appointed members. Now there is a real inconsistency here 

about what it is that your position is. 

 

On the one hand you say, well our real preference is for 4 or 

500 boards, and I must say there’s nothing to prevent you if 

you’re the government for moving back to having 4 or 500 

boards. I’m not sure what it is that the member says when he 

says that in a rapidly changing health care environment we can’t 

move back to those boards. Is the member perhaps admitting 

that those boards didn’t work out very well? 

 

Why didn’t he just say so, that that model didn’t work? Is he 

agreeing with us that model doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker? That’s 

what it sounds like to me, that what he’s saying. 

 

(1615) 

 

He agrees with us that the old model didn’t work. That it can’t 

work in the kind of environment that we have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we also learn . . . we also learn from the member’s 

remarks that the Liberal leader — Dr. Melenchuk, the leader 

outside the House — is sensitive and defensive about an 

interview that he did shortly after being elected, on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television, on CBC 

television. 

 

Now what is it that the member said? 

 

Now the interviewer is Costa Maragos from CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) television. He says . . . he’s asking 

Dr. Melenchuk: 

 

Let’s talk about the NDP. Last week, the Royal Bank said 

Saskatchewan would be the first province to be debt-free. 

Who were you thinking of when you heard that? 

 

Melenchuk: I was thinking that Saskatchewan people have 

done a tremendous job because their taxes, utilities, and 

tariff rates have been increased (by) $1.3 billion since 

1992. And that balancing occurs at a direct transfer from 

their bank account to the bank account of the 

Saskatchewan government. 

 

Okay, fair enough. We weren’t asking the people in Manitoba 

to pay for our debt problems, or Alberta for that matter. But fair 

enough. Okay. 

 

Maragos: What inefficiencies would you find to make up 

that $1.3 billion? 

 

Maragos from CBC TV: What inefficiencies would you find to 

make up that $1.3 billion? 

 

Melenchuk: Well, health care . . . 

 

Health care? 

 

Maragos: How much would you save there? Give . . . a 

number? 

 

Melenchuk: I don’t know, because I haven’t seen the 

numbers. I’ll have to look at the numbers. 

 

Maragos: If you don’t know, then how can you say that? 

 

Melenchuk: Because I know there are inefficiencies in the 

system and I understand health care reform, and I 

understand health care systems. And I know that there are 

inefficiencies in the system right now (Mr. Speaker). 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, he wasn’t very clear about those 

inefficiencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member for Arm River wanted to point out that 

nowhere did our leader say that he would chop $1.3 billion 

from the provincial health care system. But he did indicate that 

current efficiencies in our administration would address part of 

this goal. It’s not quite what he said, but I admit, I admit that no 

person, no sane person could advocate chopping $1.3 billion out 

of a $1.6 billion health care budget, Mr. Speaker. Even for the 

Tories that’s a bit of a stretch, Mr. Speaker. Okay? 

 

But the question is and I guess the point is that when asked 

where would you find these inefficiencies, where is it that you 

would cut? Where is it that you would cut? 

 

His number one priority — number one, Mr. Speaker, not 

number two — his number one priority for cuts is health care, 

Mr. Speaker — health care. Shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, I would venture to 

say that if these are not cuts, then the good doctor will come 

forward and tell us about the hundreds of millions of dollars 

about health care inefficiencies that he knows about but he 

won’t tell us about because I think Saskatchewan people will be 

wanting to ask some questions about where it is that you want 

to cut the health care budget, Mr. Speaker. 



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

So let’s hear from the good doctor about where it is that he 

proposes to save hundreds of millions of dollars in health care 

spending, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear about 

this. We, we the NDP government, we put more money into 

health care, Mr. Speaker — more dollars. More dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Admittedly, not enough. And 

admittedly, this is something that needs to be addressed in the 

coming budget. But we put more money into health care, Mr. 

Speaker, as opposed to the Liberals in Ottawa. What did they 

do? Cut, Mr. Speaker. As opposed to the Liberal leader whose 

first priority is, Mr. Speaker, to cut, Mr. Speaker, in health care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The hypocrisy of it all, Mr. Speaker. The hypocrisy of it all to 

say that when we the NDP put money in, it’s never enough. But 

then to have the unmitigated gall to say, elect us, then we’re 

going to cut, well, Mr. Speaker, that’s quite a standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes that are remaining to me, I 

want to quickly touch on an area that other members have 

touched upon, and that’s the area of transportation, Mr. 

Speaker. That is a priority in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I don’t have much to say because other members, 

including the member from Saskatoon Northwest, has spoken 

very eloquently on this topic. But I just want to say one thing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The federal Liberal government, the federal Liberal government 

would have not have dared — would not have dared to do 

anything remotely similar to other areas of Canada, to other 

groups in Canada, as what they did to Saskatchewan farmers in 

cutting the Crow rate benefit, Mr. Speaker. They would not 

have dared to do that. 

 

Now whatever you believe, whatever you believe about the 

Crow rate . . . and I know that there are many, many members 

on that side of the House, the Tories included, who don’t 

believe in a subsidized form of grain transportation. They don’t 

believe in subsidized grain transportation. They don’t believe in 

those kind of subsidies. There are other members who believe 

that there is a role for the federal government to ensure that our 

grain transportation, that the Americans don’t have all of the 

advantage in terms of getting the grain to port. And that’s an 

ideological debate. 

 

But I don’t think that anyone can deny, anyone can deny the 

severity of the cut — about $400 million on an annual basis. No 

other area, no other region, no other group in Canada would 

have stood for that kind of punishment by the Liberal 

government. It’s as if they were saying, there’s not enough 

Liberals out there in Saskatchewan for us to really worry about, 

Mr. Speaker, so let’s go ahead and do it. 

 

And again, would you, on this matter, table for the House what 

it is that you have to say, Mr. Speaker, what it is that the 

members have had to say about this cut in entitlement to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker? Would you kindly tell the  

House what it is you’ve done in this regard, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by basically making a few 

remarks about finance, if I might be permitted to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And I might say for the PC’s, we hear 

the same old story when it comes to finance. The member from 

Moosomin gives some grudging acknowledgement that we’ve 

had a debt and deficit problem in Saskatchewan. He kind of 

acknowledges his government has dealt with it in an appropriate 

fashion. Then he goes on to say the same old stuff that they 

always say — well you know there was a debt before Grant 

Devine took over and he just simply kind of carried on with it, 

you know, so it wasn’t anything that we really did; we’re just 

kind of carrying on. Which as we all know — I’d put it for want 

of a better word, Mr. Speaker — is just so much malarkey. 

 

There was a $3 billion debt in the Crowns, which during their 

tenure in office moved from $3 billion to $5 billion. What is 

mostly significant though about their term in office, is the 

accumulated deficits. Where there was zero accumulated 

deficit, zero taxpayer supported debt in 1982, which then 

ballooned to about $8 billion in I believe 1991, in a space of 

nine years, Mr. Speaker; and on top of that, there of course 

other debt in terms of guarantees that they undertook with 

respect to Crown Life and so on and so on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I can say to that member and to the other 

Conservative members, you won’t be credible unless you ‘fess 

up. You have to acknowledge that something went wrong here 

in the 1980s. You have to come clean on this, Mr. Speaker. The 

members have to come clean. 

 

And of course, the other refrain we heard is so typical of the 

Tories. The member for Cypress Hills said, well you know 

there is more money around and I think everything would be 

okay if you just put more money into highways in my 

constituency. This is how we got into problems in the ‘80s — 

selfish Tories saying as long as you take care of my town and 

my constituency, everything else is okay. You know the money 

will look after itself. Well of course we know that’s not the way 

things work. And of course, they all sing from the same Milton 

Friedman supply . . . (inaudible) . . . songbook — cut the taxes, 

let the deficit and debt take care of itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course there’s a curious twist to this with the Tory leader 

saying we should let people know now when we’re going to cut 

the sales tax in the coming years so they can prepare for this. 

Well this is a brilliant stroke if I’ve ever heard one, Mr. 

Speaker. You can sure shut down the car dealerships in January, 

February, and March, I would think, not to mention a lot of 

other economic activity as people wait for the cut. Now that’s a 

real brilliant stroke. 

 

Now the Liberals — what do they have to say about the 

government’s fiscal policy? Now one, I might say that there is 

virtually no recognition at all that the present fiscal policy is the 

right policy, Mr. Speaker. There’s a total silence on issues of  



280  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1997 

deficit and debt. Well the member for North Battleford again, 

did allude to the fact that there was a perilous debt in 

Saskatchewan. Is that the words that he used? A perilous debt in 

Saskatchewan. Okay? 

 

Their sort of understanding of fiscal policy is simply to plead 

for understanding of the difficult choices being placed by 

Ottawa and its deficit fight. Not about here in Saskatchewan but 

in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. But as to Saskatchewan, silence. 

 

And of course, many Liberals parrot that old right-winged 

mantra that was the platform, their basic platform in 1995. Cut 

taxes, close your eyes, hope for the best, don’t worry about the 

deficit debt; those things will take care of themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also I might say there’s been a total silence this year on the 

harmonization of the provincial sales tax with the goods and 

services tax. I would have thought, given the wonderful 

experience of people in Atlantic Canada are now experiencing, 

that you might have made some proposals as you have in the 

past — some of you people have made in the past — about 

harmonizing the PST with the GST (goods and services tax). 

 

And explain while you’re at it, why you would want to transfer 

hundreds of millions of dollars in commitments from businesses 

onto the backs of consumers. But we haven’t heard anything. 

And my invitation stands, an invitation I made last year when I 

said, if you put forward a motion about harmonization of the 

GST with the PST, we’ll debate it in this legislature. So just any 

time you want to, you bring that forward and we’ll debate it, 

Mr. Speaker. I wish you would let us know your thoughts on 

this. 

 

Now finally, Mr. Speaker — and this is the one that really gets 

me — there seems to be what I would call, for want of a better 

word, kind of a dumbing-down process when I look at the 

remarks to members of the Liberal opposition. 

 

This is kind of taking questions by those who are not 

representatives from the public who may not know public 

finances and ask innocent questions about, well where does the 

money go? — but then to have those members repeat them in a 

rhetorical fashion in this Chamber. 

 

The member for Saltcoats is a good example, Mr. Speaker. He 

said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find the most difficult . . . I find the 

most difficult to understand these are finances. Okay? And 

there’s a great deal of detail here about the government reaping 

the benefits of all this wealth, and the debt not being paid down 

– which it has incidentally — cuts continue, and he doesn’t 

really understand what’s happening to the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I would say that admitting your ignorance in these matters 

is no virtue, is no virtue. The point is that you are the 

representatives of the people. It is your job, it is your obligation 

to understand these matters. You have to know about these 

things. You must do more than simply dumbing down and 

repeating what it is that people are innocently asking you. You 

have to know the answers to these things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I just want to briefly, Mr. Speaker . . . I think it was Josef 

Redlich in 1903 in The Procedure of the House of Commons 

who said it the best: “The whole law of finance” . . . and this is 

chapter 1, the “Fundamental Principles”: 

 

The whole law of finance, and consequently the whole 

British constitution (and that’s us too) is grounded upon 

one fundamental principle, laid down at the very outset of 

the English parliamentary history and secured by three 

hundred years of mingled conflict with the Crown and 

peaceful growth. All taxes and public burdens imposed 

upon the nation for purposes of state, whatsoever their 

nature, must be granted by the representatives of the 

citizens and taxpayers, i.e., by Parliament. 

 

By the representatives of the citizens and taxpayers. Now it 

seems to me that assumes some basic education or assumes 

some knowledge on the part of members about how finances 

work; that we have a right to expect, and their constituents have 

a right to expect, more than those naïve, rhetorical questions 

about, well gee, where has all the money gone. Because the 

answers are there. 

 

The Provincial Auditor for years was complaining that 

members didn’t have the information that allowed them to make 

an analysis of where it is the money went. And it’s for that 

reason that this government brought in summary financial 

statements, so that everyone can understand just where it is that 

our money is going. 

 

Is there any question you have about anything? Questions about 

the Bi-Provincial upgrader or the Cameco Corporation shares, 

Saskferco Products, Wascana Energy, SaskFor-MacMillan 

Limited partnership, Meadow Lake Pulp Limited Partnership, 

NewGrade Energy Inc. — anything that you want to know. The 

Liquor Board. The Liquor and Gaming Authority. There’s 

surpluses. 

 

Is there anything that you wanted to know? It’s here. It’s here. 

But of course you have to be able to read. But we do expect that 

you do that. And we do expect that you rise above ignorance. 

And we do expect that you acquit yourself honourably and well 

on behalf of your constituents and not to raise silly, naïve, 

rhetorical questions in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, my time . . . and I might say that I see that there’s 

no one in this House is sleeping, contrary to what Murray 

Mandryk has to say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Where’s Murray? Maybe he’s sleeping. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well Mandryk said that a deep sleeper 

is anyone who’s listened to me more than three minutes. And 

this is more like three hours and people are still awake, Mr. 

Speaker — and Mandryk’s not in the House, of course; he 

rarely comes in here except for question period. He’s probably 

sleeping. 

 

Let me just say I support the motion. I support the throne  



March 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

speech. It’s a document of hope, it’s a document of optimism. 

The priorities are right — jobs, education, children in poverty, 

health care, transportation, and maintaining our fiscal policy. 

Mr. Speaker, these are the right directions for 1997 and into the 

future. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:32 p.m. until 4:36 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 39 

 

Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Koenker 

Trew Bradley Lorje 

Scott Teichrob Nilson 

Cline Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

 

Nays — 13 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Draude Osika 

Hillson Julé Aldridge 

Boyd Heppner Goohsen 

Haverstock   

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Regina Northeast: 

 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 

Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Ways and Means 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Regina Northeast: 

 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 

the Committee of Finance to consider the supply be 

granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 

means of raising the supply. 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:42 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 

Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 

Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 253 

Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 

Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 254 

D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 254 

Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 254 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 254 

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 255 

Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 255 

Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 255 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

Babysitting Back Pay Compensation for Parents 

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 255 

Nipawin Seed Firm Expansion 

Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 255 

Tisdale Farm Equipment Business Expansion 

Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 

Tourism Careers for Youth Program 

Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 

Kid’s Poster Contest 

Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 

Debden Credit Union 

Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 

New SaskTel Facility Opens in North Battleford 

Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 257 

Transition-to-Work Programs 

Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Child Prostitution 

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 257 

Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

Education Funding 

Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 258 

Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

First Nations Taxation 

Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 258 

Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

Compensation for Parents Affected by Labour Standards 

Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

Gaming Addictions 

Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

Closure of Working for Women 

Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 260 

Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

Bill No. 209  The Measures to Combat Child Prostitution Act 



Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 262 

Bill No. 208 — The Employers of Babysitters Restitution Act 

Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

Bill No. 20 — The Small Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

Bill No. 21 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 1997 

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix 

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

Bill No. 23 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act/Loi sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

Bill No. 24 — The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings Transfer Act/Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le renvoi des 

instances 

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 263 

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 

Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 269 

Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

MOTIONS 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

Ways and Means 

Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 




