



















































Hansard: April 23, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1063 

 April 23, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions on behalf of citizens from Balcarres, Abernethy, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, and Dubuc. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions to do with the problem of youth crime, and 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Kamsack and Veregin. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a 

new hospital in La Loche that will provide adequate health 

care to northern residents. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Invermay, Fort Qu’Appelle, Watson, and all throughout 

the land. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the 

following petition and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interest of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And the people signing this all come from the community of 

Blaine Lake. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 37, ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: (1) on what statistical 

information did the minister base his comments regarding 

welfare fraud percentages in the province of 

Saskatchewan; and (2) please provide any studies and/or 

analysis done in this regard. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next move first reading of a Bill, the education and 

health tax amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Environment and Resource 

Management: (1) how many big game hunting licences 

were issues in Saskatchewan from April 1, 1996 to March 

31, 1997; how many game bird licences were issued in 

Saskatchewan from April 1, 1996 to March 31, 1997; how 

much money was collected through the big game 

compensation fee from April 1, 1996 to March 31, 1997; 

and (4) how much money was collected through the 

Saskatchewan wildlife habitat certification fee from April 

1, 1996 to March 31, 1997? 

 

And the second part of the written question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister also for Environment and Resource Management: 

 

(1) How many big game licences were issued in 

Saskatchewan from April 1, 1995 to March 31, 1996. And 

this is for the year of 1995. 

 

And I’ve also got a second notice of written question. That I 

shall give notice on day no. 37 and ask the government the   



1064  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for municipal services: (1) 

what interest rates are you charging on northern mortgages; 

(2) what is the ratio of mortgage payments assessed versus 

the actual mortgage payments received; (3) how many 

current mortgages are with working families; (4) how 

many families are in payment arrears and what is the 

average outstanding amount; (5) what is the arrangement 

between the province and federal government and what are 

the terms of reference to past social housing agreements, 

specifically mortgage arrangements; and (6) could you 

please provide our office with copies of any reports dealing 

with this issue. 

 

And I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker:  Hon. members, earlier today at Government 

House tribute was paid to 21 Saskatchewan recipients of 

national and provincial honours. We want to recognize them in 

the Legislative Chamber here today. And in just a moment I 

will invite the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and the 

Leader of the Third Party to make brief remarks. MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) will then have the 

opportunity to introduce their constituents individually. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, as you’ve indicated, 

it’s my great pleasure and honour to pay tribute to some very 

distinguished guests in your gallery, seated to my right. 

 

Today, as you indicated, Mr. Speaker, we are holding the 

honours recognition event, an annual event which gives the 

government and the Legislative Assembly an opportunity to 

recognize recent Saskatchewan recipients of national and 

provincial honours. 

 

This morning it was my honour and privilege to make 

presentations on behalf of the government to these 21 

remarkable people, followed by a luncheon at Government 

House, and in attendance the Lieutenant Governor and Mrs. 

Wiebe; yourself, Mr. Speaker; Leader of the Opposition; Leader 

of the Third Party; and other members of the Assembly, as well 

as of course the special guests, the recipients, and their friends 

and families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through their actions and deeds, their hard work 

and determination, their kindness and commitment, these 21 

distinguished people have made an indelible mark on their 

communities, their province, and their fellow citizens. 

 

They are officers and members of the Order of Canada who 

have been recognized nationally for their contributions; 

members of the Order of Military Merit, honoured for their 

distinguished military careers; recipients of the Medal of 

Bravery, recognized for risking his own life to save that of 

another; and members of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit who 

have made their own mark in our own province; and recipients 

of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, recognized for their 

invaluable contributions to their communities. 

 

This is an impressive roster of honourees, one of which all 

Saskatchewan people should feel very proud. 

 

Friends, the great Martin Luther King Jr. said the following, 

quote: 

 

Life’s most persistent and urgent question is what are you 

doing for others? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what a more wonderful world this would be 

if each of us had the same answer to that question by Martin 

Luther King as the selfless, dedicated people we honour today. 

 

A society is measured in many ways— its compassionate 

treatment of the vulnerable; its positive participation in civic 

duties; its commitment to culture; and its persistent pursuit of 

excellence. 

 

Today’s guests represent the very best in our society, the 

highest measure that we can attain. We should consider 

ourselves lucky indeed, as I’m sure that we do, to have such 

people as role models, a reminder not only of how far we have 

to go but how far we have already come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking and 

congratulating our honoured recipients this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to add to the 

words of the Premier, as I did this morning also at Government 

House. It is a tremendous honour and I feel very proud of the 

fact that we have 21 such distinguished ladies and gentlemen in 

our gallery today. 

 

What it tells me of course, is that we have tremendous talent in 

the province of Saskatchewan. We have people who are willing 

to sacrifice, not only their time and their energies, but also their 

income as well, in terms of doing better for the province of 

Saskatchewan. It tells me that every one of us has that ability — 

that ability to do something for someone else. 

 

And I take great pride on behalf of the official opposition in 

recognizing the tremendous accomplishments and the 

tremendous contributions of each and every one of you to your 

community, to the province of Saskatchewan, and to Canada as 

a whole. Thank you very much for those contributions. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, John F. 

Kennedy once said: “A nation reveals itself not only by the men 

it produces, but also the men it honours; the men it remembers.” 

Were President Kennedy alive today I’m sure he would have 

changed the ‘men” to “people,” but otherwise there is no 

change to the basic meaning of the phrase. 

 

We reveal ourselves in the people we choose to honour, and in   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

determining what achievements, positions, or sacrifices to 

single out for such dedication and distinction. And so 

sometimes we honour people not only for what they have 

brought out in themselves but also for what they bring out in 

other people. Such is the case today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am proud today to be a part of the ceremony honouring the 

fine men and women here today receiving the Order of Canada, 

the Order of Military Merit, Bravery Decorations, the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit, and the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

We are all here to express our respect, our appreciation, and our 

faith in such an outstanding group of individuals. You have all 

sacrificed your time, your talents, and your energy for others. 

Saskatchewan people have a reputation for giving — giving 

financially for worthy causes, giving of our time and our efforts 

to help our neighbours and those less fortunate, giving of 

ourselves to better the lives of others. 

 

All of the recipients here today prove that this reputation is well 

deserved and well earned. Recipients here today have done 

everything, from risk their lives to save another, to develop 

cutting-edge kidney research that benefits thousands. 

 

Today is our opportunity to say thank you, well done, and 

congratulations. On behalf of the third party of Saskatchewan, I 

offer you all of our most sincere thanks for your efforts and 

your dedication to the people of Saskatchewan and all of us. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  In just a moment, I’ll ask all honours 

recipients to individually stand while being introduced by your 

MLA, and then to remain standing for the applause that I know 

that you’ll receive. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to the Legislative Assembly, Dr. Marc A. Baltzan, 

Officer of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. W. Thomas Molloy, 

Officer of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to the Assembly, Dr. Walter Kupsch, Member of 

the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, Dr. Kamal 

Midha, Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

to you and to the Assembly, Mrs. Doris Knight, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mrs. Grace Pine, 

Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 

to the Assembly, Mr. Walter Podiluk, Member of the Order of 

Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Master Warrant Officer Emile 

Forest, Member of the Order of Military Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Chief Warrant Officer James Reid, 

Member of the Order of Military Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce through you to this Assembly, Mr. Doug Van de 

Kerckhove, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

again to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Angus Campbell, 

Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

to you, Dr. Howard Leyton-Brown, Member of the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit, Member of the Order of Canada, 

and recipient of the Distinguished Flying Cross. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize — 

I had a note sent in. I’d like to introduce Dr. Morris 

Shumiatcher, Member of the Saskatchewan Award of Merit. 

Could you stand, Morris? Thanks very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 

indeed to introduce to the Assembly, Ms. Tillie Taylor, Member 

of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



1066  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 

the Legislative Assembly, Ms. Judy Buzowetski, recipient of 

the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Lee Gisi, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of pleasure I 

introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Lou Hough, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

present to the Assembly, Mrs. Lillian Mitchell, recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Roy Nelson, of Glentworth. 

Roy was the recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Paul Rezansoff, 

recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

And I’m going to go one step further and today we’ll be having 

the second reading on a Bill on which he is very instrumental 

with, the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker. I like to think, Mr. Speaker, 

we always save the best for last, and I’d like to introduce 

through you and to you and to the members of the Assembly, 

Mrs. Ruth Swanson, who is also a recipient of the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to other members in the 

Assembly, seated in your gallery, a constituent of mine who is a 

former member of this legislature, former member of the 

cabinet, and former Speaker of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

John Brockelbank. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would also like to introduce in your gallery today another lady 

that has actually won a prestigious award, and it’s actually Mrs. 

Ruth Swanson’s daughter-in-law, Rita, who had her design 

chosen on the loonie for the country, the dollar. 

 

And I would like to tell you also that our constituency will 

never be completely broke, because at Churchbridge there’s a 

big monument with the loonie in her honour. So if you’re ever 

going through Churchbridge and you see that, that’s in this 

lady’s honour. 

 

Would you please welcome her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

NATO Flying Training Program Announced 

for Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this has been a very historic and happy day for 15 Wing Moose 

Jaw, the city of Moose Jaw, the province of Saskatchewan, and 

I venture to say, the nation of Canada. This morning, Mr. 

Speaker, we received official confirmation from the 

Government of Canada of what we all have been hoping for and 

working for over the last several months and years. 

 

Defence Minister Doug Young announced today that the NATO 

(North Atlantic Treaty Organization) Flying Training in Canada 

program will become a reality, and that its operational 

headquarters will be where it should be, in Canadian Armed 

Forces Base, Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, there is nothing to say 

except to say this is very, very good news indeed for 15 Wing; 

for the city of Moose Jaw and its local economy; for the 

province of Saskatchewan, for our provincial economy; for this 

nation, and indeed for our international reputation. It’s good 

news, Mr. Speaker, and today we are grateful to the federal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, many people need to be 

thanked, Mr. Speaker, thanked and congratulated — Mayor 

Boughen and the city council of Moose Jaw; base personnel; all 

members of this Assembly; the Department of National 

Defence; and the Government of Canada. 

 

They and we all worked very hard to see this day and now that 

the future of the base is secure, we can all be proud of what we 

have accomplished together. 

 

As 15 Wing’s MLA, I want to add my very personal gratitude 

to my colleagues in this Assembly and to all the people 

mentioned above for the great work that’s been done. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

NATO Flying Training Program 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would be remiss if 

I didn’t too offer my congratulations to the Hon. Doug Young, 

Minister of National Defence, on today’s announcement 

regarding 15 Wing Moose Jaw. As we all know, Mr. Speaker, a 

consortium, including such companies as Bombardier, British 

Aerospace, Embraer, and CAE, with the cooperation of the 

Department of National Defence, has secured letters of intent 

from several nations to train their pilots at 15 Wing Moose Jaw. 

We warmly welcome each of these new corporate citizens to 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations are also due the people of Moose 

Jaw and Mayor Ray Boughen for their hard work in helping the 

consortium secure this success. A debt of gratitude is also owed 

to many other elected officials, particularly Ralph Goodale, for 

fighting in the federal cabinet to give 15 Wing a chance in 

encouraging the NATO Flying Training concept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see significant progress, but there are many 

nations who have yet to sign. We wish the leaders of this 

project and the minister, best of success in pursuing other 

customers. 

 

Last evening I had the opportunity to meet with Mr. Young, and 

I can assure the members that he is a dedicated individual who 

will work hard to get more nations to sign on in an effort to 

preserve as many jobs as possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Book Day 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today is the second annual Canada Book Day and I want to 

take time to recognize this important event and to recognize, as 

well, Lawrence Martin, an Ottawa author who originated the 

idea of celebrating Canadian writing in this way. 

 

We in Saskatchewan are blessed with so many successful, 

readable, prize-winning and prolific writers to honour and 

promote on this very day. I want to congratulate all those 

throughout our province who I know are celebrating this 

richness in many cities and towns, joining our fellow Canadians 

by honouring the slogan “Give one, get one, read one.” 

 

And I want to share with members at this Assembly how I am 

planning to celebrate this very day. I am joining many of you in 

sending my warmest wishes to our colleague, the hon. member 

from Regina Northeast. Along with my words wishing him 

Godspeed for a full recovery, I’m sending him a copy of one of 

Canada’s most famous books, As For Me and My House, by 

Sinclair Ross; accompanied by Lorna Crozier from Swift 

Current, Saskatchewan, her most recent book of poetry, which 

was inspired by Sinclair Ross’s novel. 

 

So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

recognition of this very special day, Canada Book Day, and let 

us all try to get one, give one, and read one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Salute to 15 Wing in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join all 

members of the House today in saluting all of the individuals 

from the 15 Wing in the city of Moose Jaw that have received 

some very good news today. I only hope that this isn’t another 

federal Liberal ‘red book” promise that gets dumped into the 

circular fire if the Liberals get re-elected. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, while the news today is positive — it is 

positive — I understand that there is a possibility that 

Saskatchewan might lose our Snowbirds. That’s something that 

should be a concern to all of us. However we all should do our 

very best I think, Mr. Speaker, to watch the federal Liberals and 

hold them to their promise today. 

 

But today I want to congratulate all of the hard-working 

individuals from Moose Jaw and the surrounding area who 

made this happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Secretaries’ Day 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

understanding that you already today have been from your 

home to the airbase, to Government House, and finally to here, 

looking fresh and not out of breath, by the way. And I’m 

confident in saying that it was your secretary who mapped out 

your route, confirmed your schedule. Otherwise you might well 

be somewhere other than your proper place in your chair. 

 

The same can be said of each one of us. All this by way of 

saying that today is Secretaries’ Day, the day in which those of 

us fortunate enough to have able assistants get the opportunity 

to say openly what we know all year long — that our lives and 

work are made immensely more efficient and workable because 

of our secretaries. 

 

They deserve recognition because they make us look good. 

They allow us to accept praise for what is always a mutual 

effort and they don’t point fingers when we goof up. There are 

jobs, and there are jobs which provide support to those jobs. 

 

Today would be a good day for us all to accept the obvious — 

that one is as important as the other; that neither can exist 

properly alone. We need, as well as appreciate, our secretaries 

and I’m happy to affirm that and to thank our secretaries today 

for their work for us the year round. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Book Day 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Greystone, to 

recognize Canada Book Day. Today is Shakespeare’s birthday 

and also the anniversary of his death, as it is of the great 

Spanish writer, Cervantes. William Wordsworth died on this   



1068  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

day too. 

 

But that’s not why I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker. Today is also 

Canada Book Day, the one day during the year when we 

publicly recognize Canada’s excellent writers, and the 

producers and sellers of their books. A day in which Canadians 

are encouraged to buy and read Canadian books by our writers. 

Brush up on your Shakespeare, of course, Mr. Speaker, but 

spend your money and give your support closer to home. That 

is the purpose of this, the second Canada Book Day. 

 

Today Canada is celebrating our nation’s collective literary 

accomplishments in a number of ways — authors’ readings, 

prizes, book give-aways, and so on. In some provinces the 

provincial sales tax on books is being waived, a promotion not 

available to Saskatchewan booksellers because we removed the 

PST (provincial sales tax) on books long ago — one of the 

notable acts of this government. And 12 writers across the 

country, including our own Gail Bowen, are creating a 

progressive on-line story on the Internet for all to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real purpose of this day is to encourage 

intellectual fitness among Canadians, just as we promote 

physical fitness. A good Canadian book is, I suggest, the mental 

equivalent of three hours of advanced aerobics and every bit as 

important. I encourage all people to endorse and . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member’s time is expired; 

members’ statements continue. 

 

Tribute to Lawrence “Jake” Alcrow 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to share 

with the Assembly the contributions of Lawrence Alcrow, or 

Jake as he was known to his many friends in the community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. Jake passed away in April of last year. Jake was 

my first cousin. I can truly say that he’s dearly missed by 

members of his family and his community, his friend Suzanne 

Aubichon, and his daughter Cheryl. 

 

Jake was very active in sporting events in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And 

because of his love for sports the community decided to 

remember Jake every year in his favourite place, the golf 

course, with the Jake Alcrow Memorial Golf Tournament. This 

year marks the second anniversary of the event and support is 

growing. Last year 40 golfers participated in the tournament 

and this year there’ll be more than 100. 

 

Jake also made an integral contribution to the community 

through his services as chairman of the Ile-a-la-Crosse housing 

authority, and fire chief of Ile-a-la-Crosse fire department. Jake 

played a key role in building up that department, which saved a 

lot of property from destruction and perhaps saved lives. It is so 

unfortunate that we could not save his. 

 

Jake worked many years in heavy equipment in the mining 

sector, as well as giving his time as a Metis local president. Jake 

was a fun-loving individual who’ll be remembered for his 

outgoing personality, his wonderful sense of humour, his ability 

to talk to anyone and make them laugh at his teasing gestures. 

 

I’m very proud to have known Jake and to have him as a 

cousin. He was dearly missed by his family and the community 

of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Development of the Survival Whistle 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, all members will remember a 

few years ago when Ashley Christianson became lost while 

playing in the Barrier Valley area in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people searched for 

her and Walter Eckdahl of Snowden offered a thousand-dollar 

reward. Unfortunately, the outcome was not what Mr. Eckdahl 

and the rest of us have prayed for. 

 

However, Mr. Eckdahl had not given up on his desire to help 

prevent such tragedies. In association with Child Find 

Saskatchewan, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 

and numerous provincial camp grounds, Mr. Eckdahl has been 

active in developing and promoting the survival whistle, a small 

whistle . . . a small hockey-type whistle that could be carried by 

anyone who is faced with a dangerous situation — being lost, 

injured, or under attack. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to applaud Walter Eckdahl 

and Child Find Saskatchewan for promoting the use of the 

survival whistle and helping to prevent unnecessary tragedies. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Auto Insurance Rates 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are directed to the minister responsible for SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). When the provincial 

government introduced no-fault insurance they brought in a 

system that substantially reduced payments to accident victims; 

however we were told the no-fault system would protect the 

people of Saskatchewan from further rate hikes. The latest 

annual report from SGI confirms that the auto fund experienced 

a $7.2 million deficit last year, and that rate hikes may be 

necessary. When questioned about this last week, the minister 

indicated he was still awaiting information from his officials. 

 

Will the minister explain if Saskatchewan people will see their 

rates increase, and if so, to what does he attribute this rate hike? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

had indicated to the House and to the members opposite last 

week that my officials were reviewing in some detail the 

financial outcome of the auto fund as it relates to this year’s 

statement. What I’ve indicated as well to the House, Mr. 

Speaker, that when I have those details, that I would be 

providing them not only to this Assembly but certainly to the   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

public at large. At this point in time I don’t have that detailed 

information yet, Mr. Speaker, but will have that within the next 

short . . . within the next couple of weeks. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the 

implementation of the PIPP (personal injury protection plan) in 

Saskatchewan has seen three and a half years in this province 

without any rate increases to the auto fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  And I want to indicate that we have the 

cheapest auto rates anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker, today, 

and will continue to have that into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard in the past the 

minister state that the SGI increases, in terms of the theft and 

damage costs, have steadily increased, and in fact that is one of 

the reasons why the auto fund seems to be sinking deeper and 

deeper into the red. SGI’s annual report notes a growing 

concern about theft and damage; however the Minister of 

Justice has told this House that car theft, quote, “is not a 

common problem.” I ask the minister responsible for SGI who 

is right? Which one is the correct answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s 

important to realize . . . the member opposite is asking about the 

kinds of costs that are associated to vehicle thefts in the 

province, to SGI specifically. I indicated previously, Mr. 

Speaker, and say to the member opposite, that approximately 7 

per cent of the costs to the auto fund are attributed to what 

might be considered theft. And that of course would be 

attributed to both adult and youth offences in that particular 

category. So there has been some increase in that area, which is 

correct, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think what’s more important — and I know that the 

members opposite are in a huge hurry, Mr. Speaker, to have 

auto rates increase in this province — but I want to suggest to 

the member opposite that I have here in front of me an article or 

a brochure that was circulated by the province of Manitoba last 

year, June of 1996. And they say here, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 

paying one of the lowest rates in Canada, one of the lowest rates 

that they’re paying in Canada, and they were paying $993. Who 

is the lowest rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker, published by 

Manitoba? Guess who that is? Saskatchewan is at $861, 

published by the Manitoba auto insurance fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, it is true that we continue to 

lose money in the auto fund. We have a $7 million loss this year 

that the minister needs to be able to explain. 

 

I’ve also heard the minister in charge of SGI indicate that 

vehicle collisions involving animals is partly to blame for the 

auto fund’s $7 million loss. Now if I wonder, is it merely 

coincidental that an apparent increase in animal-related 

collisions comes after this government introduced its big game 

compensation fund, which requires that hunters pay $11 when 

they purchase a hunting licence. 

 

After all between 1995 and ’96, the number of white-tailed deer 

licences purchased dropped from 72,000 to 60,000. There 

would appear to be a connection. There would appear to be a 

connection between the fact that 12,000 fewer hunters are 

controlling our white-tailed deer population on highways . . . 

 

Will the minister explain why his government is contributing to 

a problem that may result in SGI rate increases in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought that the 

responsibility of the minister of SGI was to ensure that the auto 

fund was stable and to provide some kind of an opportunity 

here to balance the auto fund. I had no idea, Mr. Speaker, that 

the minister of SGI had any responsibility for the reproduction 

of wildlife in this province, Mr. Speaker, no idea. 

 

But I want to suggest to the member opposite that there are lots 

of reasons for why the auto fund has increased its costs to do 

business in Saskatchewan. Number one, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we’ve had two very serious winters in this province, of which 

the automobile insurance rates have gone up because of the 

increase to the repair costs. The technology in the new vehicles 

today, Mr. Speaker, is significantly greater than it has been in 

the past, and the cost of repairing those vehicles obviously put 

pressure on the cost of the cars. 

 

But I think what else is important here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we’re told that when the economy of a province is better, so 

does the insurance costs of repairing vehicles increase. And as a 

result of that, we have a very, very prominent economy in 

Saskatchewan today and that’s affecting our automobile 

insurance rates as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rabbit Lake Health Centre 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the residents of Rabbit Lake have 

been told that their health centre is going to be closed the end of 

June. Mr. Speaker, this was a former hospital, downgraded by 

the government. It’s only 10 years old. The local residents 

raised $250,000 to build this facility and now it’s going to be 

closed for lack of provincial funding. 

 

When the provincial budget was released, the Minister of 

Health told us that there were two messages he wanted to get 

out. One, that health care jobs were now safe, no more firing of 

nurses. And two, no more closure of facilities. 

 

Can the government tell us why, given that promise that the 

cuts were over, the downgrading was done, why is the Rabbit 

Lake Health Centre now closing? Why do we lose another 15 

long-term care beds, another 25 employees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



1070  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in terms of the facility to 

which the member refers, I am confident that the district of 

which that facility will have been a part will have made a 

careful and considered decision about that facility, and facilities 

and programs within their district. I’m confident of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what I am further confident of is this: this government has 

back-filled 100 per cent every dime of health care funding from 

the Liberals in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker; plus, Mr. Speaker, plus 57 

more million dollars. That’s what I’m sure of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the truth is that the residents are 

being bundled out to all different homes in a hundred mile 

radius of Rabbit Lake. Family visits are going to be reduced 

because they won’t be close to where they have lived their 

entire lives. 

 

You keep telling us we have the best health care system in the 

world. Well we had the best health care system in the world 

until you took the meat cleaver to it. 

 

Will you explain how it is that you still have $16 million to 

fritter away on an NST fiasco in the United States but you don’t 

have money for the Rabbit Lake Health Centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, do I have to remind the 

member again of this government’s financial commitment to 

health care in this province? Do I have to do that again? He 

nods his head. 

 

Then let me remind him, Mr. Speaker, that unlike his Liberal 

counterparts in the Maritimes and in other parts of this country, 

unlike his federal Liberal government, we have not cut health 

care spending, Mr. Speaker. I repeat, we have back-filled every 

dollar taken from health care by the federal Liberal government. 

And in this budget year we have added, Mr. Speaker, $57 

million. 

 

Again I say I am confident that the district of which that facility 

that the member speaks, at Rabbit Lake, will have made a very 

careful and considered decision and that the needs and the 

health needs of their people will be adequately met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, so far this week the government 

has blamed university tuition fee increases on the university 

administration instead of inadequate funding from the 

provincial government, they have blamed the gutting of the 

provincial drug plan on drug companies, and now they blame 

the closing of the Rabbit Lake Health Centre on the federal 

government and/or the local health district. 

 

My question to the Minister of Social Services: are you running 

a provincial government or are you running an excuse factory? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, it is good to have this 

defence of the federal Liberal government from the provincial 

Liberal caucus in this case. It is just good to see what’s 

happening here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A federal Liberal government, Mr. Speaker, who before 

election committed to Canadians they would rid us of Bill C-91, 

providing prescription drug cost benefit for every Canadian. 

They didn’t do it. They committed they would rid us of the GST 

(goods and services tax). They haven’t done that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they committed to consider health care and 

medicare a sacred trust, they called it. Well their handling of 

this sacred trust has been to slash, slash, slash the funding for 

health care across Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can just tell you this. I can just tell you this, 

Mr. Speaker. I for one and this government, we’re tired, we’re 

sick and tired of the federal government making the cuts and the 

people feeling the pain and the provinces being asked to take 

the blame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to know if the minister 

cared about the people of Rabbit Lake or cared about making 

excuses, and I think I got my answer. Thank you. 

 

Yesterday my colleague from Humboldt underlined the need for 

legislation to address the growing problem of child prostitution 

and called upon the minister to support her Bill. The minister 

indicated in his response that either the issue was already 

covered in present legislation or was covered by the Criminal 

Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, defining child prostitution as child abuse is 

something that is clearly within provincial jurisdiction. And . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The Chair is having some 

difficulty being able to hear the hon. member for North 

Battleford put his question. Now there’s much enthusiasm for 

assisting both the questions and the answers, but I’ll ask all hon. 

members to allow the members on their feet to be heard. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, that’s fine — I quite accept that 

the emptier the barrel, the louder the echo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, defining child prostitution as child abuse is clearly 

within provincial jurisdiction. Alberta and Manitoba are trying 

to address the issue. Why doesn’t Saskatchewan? Why will you 

not accept responsibility? Why will you not give credit to the 

member for Humboldt in adopting these measures that are 

within provincial jurisdiction and will aid the problem of child 

prostitution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if there’s time 

in question period to clarify the issues for the member, and I 

would have expected he would understand some of these issues. 

 

The member from Humboldt has recommended in her proposal 

for legislation that we do two things. One, that we extend The 

Child and Family Services Act to include up to age 18. Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you today that our current Act has provision 

in it to deal with 16- and 17-year-olds. Done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other suggestion that the member has made is 

that the Minister of Social Services and the department and the 

Government of Saskatchewan should be able to receive 

donations. Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, that now is the case — we 

can receive donations. 

 

Now I am not here to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we should not 

be looking at all of our legislation to see if there is not other 

effective ways we can deal with the children on the streets and 

those adults who would abuse them. But one thing is for sure, 

one thing is for sure — and this would apply across Canada — 

if we could achieve the changes in the Criminal Code to make it 

easier to prosecute those adult abusers, we would go a long 

ways in dealing with this issue. And that is something I am sure 

the member could this afternoon call his friends in Ottawa, tell 

him to get at it before they call the election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Aboriginal Taxation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, another month has 

passed and the White Bear Casino is still refusing to pay its 

taxes. Back in March your government set up an April deadline 

for them to pay up or have their liquor licence pulled. That 

deadline came and went and nothing was done. And now 

you’ve set another deadline of May 4, and White Bear officials 

say they’re going to ignore that deadline as well. Mr. Premier, 

you keep drawing a line in the sand and they keep kicking the 

sand in your face. 

 

Mr. Premier, are you going to act on this new deadline, or are 

we simply . . . or is it simply another idle threat that the White 

Bear Band can ignore without fear of penalty? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite’s 

information is inaccurate. He’s obviously been reading the 

paper again. Because we don’t want to comment on individual 

tax cases and the circumstances surrounding them, I will not be 

commenting on the matter he’s raising. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, if any other bar in 

this province had been refusing to pay its taxes, you’d have 

yanked their liquor licence months ago. But White Bear just 

keeps going with one extension after another and after another. 

Nobody gets to — nobody that I know of in this province — 

gets to negotiate whether they pay their taxes or not. We 

wonder why the double standard. If an Indian band isn’t paying 

its fair share, that’s unfair to every other taxpayer in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to put an end to this blatant, 

blatant tax evasion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I say again that the reference 

that the member opposite makes with respect to a deadline has 

nothing to do with the tax collection mechanism. But I will say 

to the member opposite and to all those who are watching, that 

we are in every case of every taxpayer in Saskatchewan who 

avoids the payment of taxes, taking aggressive action in order to 

ensure that those taxes are collected and this will apply to this 

case as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hunting Licence Fees 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, perhaps White Bear has a 

reconstruction fee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister for the 

Environment. Mr. Minister, last year when you imposed your 

new $11 hunting fee, many hunters said it was the last straw 

and they were going to quit hunting. As it turns out, over 11,000 

deer hunters have followed through on that threat. In 1995 there 

were 71,500 white-tail licences sold; last year there were 60,400 

after your $11 fee went into effect. This means less money was 

being spent in communities by hunters. It means more deer 

were left to damage crops. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now admit that your $11 big game 

damage fee was a mistake and cancel the fee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Contrary to what 

the hon. member believes, having the big game damage 

compensation program in place was one of the best things we 

have done. With over 1,800 claims and valued at one and a half 

million dollars in compensation pay-outs to landowners, we are 

very pleased to have the big game damage program in place. 

And we have since then of course added $2 million from 

general revenue to top up the program for this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly it’s 

only the NDP (New Democratic Party) that think a new tax is a 

good thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, the purpose of this fee was to raise money to pay 

big game damage, but you actually took in less money in 1996 

than you did in 1995. The 71,500 licences you sold in 1995 at 

$46 apiece raised about $3.45 million. The 60,400 licences you 

sold in ’96 at $57 apiece raised about $3.3 million — $150,000 

less than the previous year. 

 

Mr. Minister, you would have been better off leaving the cost of   



1072  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

deer licences alone and simply paying the big game damage out 

of existing revenues. And that’s not even considering the loss of 

economic activity and taxes due to fewer hunters, or in addition, 

the big game damage caused by more deer, or less deer being 

killed. 

 

Mr. Minister, after question period I will be introducing 

legislation to cancel your ill-conceived big game damage fee. 

Will you support this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not be 

supporting this legislation because the fee will be in place this 

coming year. 

 

We had about a 10 per cent drop in the number of licensed 

hunters out in the field. This is attributed to a number of factors: 

an early fall, early winter. Hunters just simply did not go out. 

We also had the case where Metis hunters did not have to 

purchase licences. 

 

So there’s a number of factors which did see this drop in the 

number of hunters out. But we expect this will pick up again. 

Usually after an increase, there is a drop in the number of 

hunters out in the field. 

 

Our licences are on par with those in Alberta and we will 

continue to work with both the hunter organizations as well as 

landowners to ensure that crop depredation is dealt with in the 

most fair and equitable manner as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the fall of 

1995 we also had snow on the ground before November 1, so 

last year was not an exception, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, a couple of months ago you issued a warning 

about dogs killing deer. You said that if you caught any dogs 

killing deer, you’d go out and kill those dogs. Of course there’s 

a couple of reasons dogs have been killing deer. One, because 

they’re dogs; two, because there are too many deer this year 

because of your stupid $11 fee. 

 

Mr. Minister, instead of threatening people’s dogs, why don’t 

you help control the deer population by dropping your $11 fee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I have hand it to the hon. member. 

He’s brought everything possible into this question. We are 

going to continue on with the fee. And the member’s 

comments, many of them are not accurate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do not have record high numbers of deer. We do not shoot 

every dog that we observe chasing deer. There’s a lot of 

common sense and discretion used. Unlike the member 

opposite, we believe in working with the people, and we will 

continue to do so in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Housing in the North 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a news 

flash for the Minister of Northern Affairs. There is no housing 

markets in northern Saskatchewan and people are having a great 

amount of problems with housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve recently received a number of concerns from 

people who are working up North and living in government 

housing. These working people believe they are being penalized 

because they try and make a living. They must pay the 

government 25 per cent of their gross income on a 25-year 

mortgage. That may work in southern Saskatchewan, but it 

doesn’t work in the North. 

 

Some of the monthly rents range from 600 to $800 per month. 

Over 25 years, Mr. Speaker, that payment amounts to between 

180 to a quarter of a million dollars for one house in northern 

Saskatchewan. If these people try to sell their homes, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ll not be able to recover anything but a very small 

portion of those amounts. We’re not suggesting those on social 

assistance should be punished, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the minister please explain why people who are attempting 

to work for a living are being penalized for their efforts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Number one, Mr. Speaker, I’m actually 

very proud to answer this question because for the first time in 

the history of northern Saskatchewan we have 1,000 people 

working at the mines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  For the first time in the history of 

northern Saskatchewan, we have 50 per cent of the workforce in 

the many areas of the different jobs that are there. That is what 

we’re proud of. 

 

Now in answer to that question on housing, the federal Liberals 

have cut down housing to zero — zero on housing construction. 

They’re out of social housing. They have a bit of RRAP 

(residential rehabilitation assistance program) program, 

maintenance program. They might even cut it out after this 

coming election; $8 million by this government in housing in 

the next three years — $8 million by this government, and the 

federal Liberals, zero. That is our commitment to housing and 

we will continue to help the people of the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of the 

thousand-odd jobs the Minister of Northern Affairs is speaking 

about, many of those people live in government houses and 

very soon some of them won’t be able to afford to live in 

government houses. So on one hand, you give them a job; on 

the other hand, you throw them out of their house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the North desperately needs workers and 

industries that when people work . . . we have a policy that 

discriminates against the working people. Robert Aubichon of 

Buffalo Narrows is one of those people. He’s working, he’s   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

contributing to the economy and the tax base; yet he must pay 

an unreasonable mortgage rate to pay down his home. 

 

What is of great concern to me is how a working family cannot 

afford a home in northern Saskatchewan. We need a 

two-pronged approach in northern housing, Mr. Speaker — one 

for social housing and the other for working families, similar to 

the recently announced remote housing program. Now that’s a 

program that works, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will this government at least agree to develop a pilot project to 

establish the true market value of homes in the North so that 

realistic mortgage rates can be charged, which would eliminate 

this incentive against working people? And will the minister 

look at expanding the success of the remote housing program to 

existing mortgages? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, again I would like to tell the 

member from Athabasca that indeed we have $8 million for the 

next three years for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Where are the Liberal dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Any Liberal dollars? Zero for 

construction on housing — zero. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to, in regards to jobs — yes, a lot 

of the people are having jobs in the North. Some of the jobs are 

$15 an hour at the lower end. Some of the people are 22 and 

$23 an hour. For the first time people are being paid good 

wages in the mines, and the member from Athabasca may not 

be proud of that but I’m proud of that and I’m proud of the 

workers in northern Saskatchewan, who are going to be 

building their own houses. 

 

We’re also having a new strategy in housing which will have a 

situation where there is sweat equity and a lot of those workers 

are starting to do that, Mr. Speaker. And they’re moving 

forward and building their own homes as we move forward to a 

new future, and members should be supporting us on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 228 — The Saskatchewan Big Game 

Damage Compensation Fee Act 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of a Bill No. 228, The Saskatchewan Big Game 

Damage Compensation Fee Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the Government Whip on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, to request leave of the 

Assembly to make a motion which would routinely transfer the 

estimates from the Legislative Assembly to the Standing 

Committee on Estimates. I hereby request leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Watrous: 

 

That the estimates for the Legislative Assembly, subvotes 

LG01 to LG06; estimates for the Ombudsman and 

Children’s Advocate, subvotes LG07; and supplementary 

estimates for the Legislative Assembly, subvotes LG01 and 

LG03, being vote 21, and the estimates for the Provincial 

Auditor, being vote 28, be withdrawn from the Committee 

of Finance and referred to the Standing Committee on 

Estimates. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 18 — The 

Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 

Technicians Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to make a couple of points this afternoon regarding Bill No. 18 

and how it may apply to the technologists and technicians of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think very clearly we must recognize that this Act will 

establish the legal authority to allow the Saskatchewan applied 

science technologists and technicians to establish their own 

professional association. There has been a very significant 

lobby. Many years of hard work has been put in by the people, 

the technicians, the technologists who work in this province, to 

indeed be able to create that professional association. 

 

I want to also indicate that the level of recognition and 

certification is very, very important with the mobile labour 

force that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. People 

move from one job to another in terms of areas in the province, 

and it is very important that a professional organization has the 

ability of course to not only register but also to be aware of the 

various people that are working within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

  



1074  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

We’re also very encouraged by the fact that . . . I think the 

recognition of a professional association may create greater 

employment opportunities here in Saskatchewan. We are aware 

of course, that when a group becomes a professional 

organization it gains national recognition, and as a result we 

may be able to attract other people who will be able to join the 

Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians 

Association and come here to Saskatchewan to work. 

 

Bill No. 18 lays out the standards and guidelines that all 

professional members of the association will have to follow. 

And we’ve taken a good, close look at that to see whether or not 

it corresponds to other professional associations, how it will 

relate to the other associations, whether there are different 

guidelines than other professional associations. And we found 

that this is very, very comparable and compatible with what 

occurs in most professional institutions. 

 

We’re also very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to denote that a lot of 

impressive background work has taken place on this Bill. We 

see many, many hours of work by the technicians and the 

technologists in terms of putting together the guidelines, the 

rules, the regulations that are contained in this Bill. 

 

I’ve had the pleasure of meeting with . . . and I’m just going to 

recognize three of the individuals who I found very, very 

helpful. I’d like to recognize Jaime Briltz, Ron Smith, and 

Daniel Crites. These three people were very willing to share any 

concerns that they had, and of course it was a two-way 

communication in terms of the ability for us, as an opposition, 

to be able to contact these members to find out whether or not 

there were specific concerns from individuals, which we did get 

a number of phone calls from individuals, flagging little 

concerns; that they wanted to be aware that these were 

understood by the association executive. And I want to 

commend these people for their dedication to helping us better 

understand, and I think as a whole, the province of 

Saskatchewan, better understanding why there was a need for 

such a Bill. 

 

There are a few specific questions that we have relative to 

specific clauses, Mr. Speaker, and those I’m sure that the 

minister will be more than willing to address and explain during 

the Committee of the Whole. And with that I would suggest that 

the Bill proceed. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

share just a few brief words on Bill 18. This is legislation that is 

long overdue. I can remember dealing with some of the issues 

discussed in this legislation, and brought to a head in this 

legislation, I can remember dealing with these issues in the 

mid-1980s and nothing happened then; nothing happened in the 

’90s. We now find ourselves in the year 1997 and, as befits the 

professionalism that the technologists and technicians bring to 

their work here in Saskatchewan, they now will have 

professional legislation. 

 

I want to commend them for their persistence in the face of 

considerable — well let’s say begrudging — acknowledgement 

of their profession, their persistence in pursuing their objectives 

and finally seeing to it that government does respond to their 

needs so that they can respond to the needs of society through 

their profession. 

 

And I’d like to in closing commend Jaime Briltz in particular 

for her leadership role in directing the profession. And this is 

legislation that’s long overdue. I’m glad to see it on the floor of 

the legislature. I say, let’s get on with the show and give it third 

reading. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 11 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is an 

interesting Bill and there are certain parts of that particular Bill 

that we support. I think particularly the change of moving the 

redrawing of boundaries to ten years from five is definitely an 

improvement. Leaving it at five means that any particular 

constituency is not going to be sure who they’re going to have 

for an MLA in the next election. And I think that need to draw 

that affiliation between an MLA and his constituency is an 

important aspect. And people in constituencies should be 

allowed to at least vote for an MLA at least twice. And this 

should allow for that and we support that part of it. 

 

Without that we would have a situation where an MLA could 

find himself in a different situation with a different set of 

constituents every time that the public goes to the polls. That 

would make it very difficult for him to represent a constituency 

fairly because at all times he’d have to pay attention to the area 

around the boundaries of his own constituency because those 

might well be part of his next constituency. And so there’d be 

that kind of a tendency to sort of have to almost cover the whole 

province, not knowing where you’re going to be at. This Bill 

corrects that problem, and to that extent is a very positive Bill. 

 

However there is a couple of things about this Bill that we find 

negative and we find that they are really totally unacceptable. 

Basically, rural Saskatchewan gets kicked fairly hard with this 

particular Bill. And that is particularly section 14 which makes 

an amendment that we now have a voter population and that is 

changing to the population of each proposed constituency. So 

now we have a unique situation that you count the total number 

of bodies in a constituency, not the number of voters. 

 

Now the explanatory notes point out that this has been the case 

in the past election. We didn't like that change, and we sure 

don’t like this change any more because it’s the same sort of 

thing in trying to get it through again. 

 

It just happens to be another nail in the representation in rural 

Saskatchewan, where in rural Saskatchewan there will be more   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

voters per constituency than you’ll have in other areas. It’s bad 

enough that rural Saskatchewan lost eight seats. We have very 

large constituencies out there. This particular amendment 

makes those constituencies still larger and puts them at another 

disadvantage. 

 

The job of an MLA, as we know, is to answer to your voters. 

According to this particular change you’re not answering to 

voters, you’re answering to all the particular bodies that are in 

there and not necessarily just to the voters. By watering down 

the connection between the constituency and the voters, you 

water down the concept that we always had — that you get one 

vote as an individual. In this case it’s quite different. 

 

Let us look at what will happen in the 1995 election. I think 

we’ll see where we’re going with this rural situation that we’re 

discussing, where rural Saskatchewan gets kicked again. 

 

In Moosomin in that 1995 election there were 11,407 voters. 

Cannington, again 11,491; Cypress Hills also over 11,000, with 

11,014. If we start looking at the city and we look at the number 

of voters, here’s what happens. Notice those rural ones were all 

over 11,000. Urban ones: Regina Dewdney, 10,158; Regina 

Elphinstone, 10,764; Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, 10,417; 

Saskatoon Fairview — now we’re under 10,000 — 9,378; 

Saskatoon Riversdale, 9,820. 

 

There’s a big difference. Where the rural areas had 11,000 

voters, these city ones are down to 9,000, barely 9,000 voters. 

This adds up to variations that are as high in some cases as 17 

per cent between the rural and the urban seats. 

 

Now we already have constituencies in rural Saskatchewan that 

by their size are virtually hundreds of miles from end to end. 

And now we’re going to ensure that the number of voters in 

those constituencies are higher by 17 per cent. You’ve increased 

the size, you’ve increased the numbers of voters in there. 

 

Can’t be a coincidence. I’m sure those numbers were noted 

before. It happens to be that word we’ve heard about since we 

started school decades ago. It’s called gerrymandering, and it 

hasn’t changed. It’s manipulating the boundaries to the benefit 

of the people that happen to be in the situation to do that. 

 

We object to that particular amendment. Instead of striking out 

the one remaining reference to voter population, that phrase 

should be reinserted throughout the rest of the Bill and 

particularly into the constituency formula. 

 

Our caucus will seek to address these problems in committee. 

Until that time we will withhold final judgement on this Bill, 

and I move to adjourn further debate. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker:  It has been moved by the hon. member for 

Rosthern that second reading debate on Bill No. 11, The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997, be now 

adjourned. 

 

The motion is lost and debate continues. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to make a few comments about Bill No. 11 today 

and be able to I think get a better understanding of where Bill 

No. 11 was when the Assembly looked at it in 1993, and in 

terms of the proposed amendments that we see coming before 

us now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the drawing of fair and equitable constituency 

boundaries is one of the most important aspects of our electoral 

system and we have to ensure that the rules governing the 

creation of those boundaries are fair to everyone in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the main point of Bill No. 11 is to change the 

requirement of drawing . . . of redrawing the boundaries in 

Saskatchewan every five years. Under Bill 11, that requirement 

will be increased to 10 years, and from our perspective, that’s 

acceptable. Because, Mr. Speaker, people should know at least 

from one election to the next where they’re voting and who 

they’re voting for. By re-jigging our constituency boundaries 

every five years, there is little certainty from one election to the 

next. Towns switch from constituency to constituency with each 

successive election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might note that in the Canora-Pelly constituency 

there are residents who have been in three different provincial 

constituencies in the last three elections. It is a situation that 

causes confusion for voters and it’s a situation that doesn’t 

allow voters to become familiar with their elected members. 

 

I think that’s especially true now that the requirement that total 

constituency populations for the 56 southern ridings be within 

plus or minus 5 per cent of the provincial average — excluding 

the two northern constituencies. Such a small variance, Mr. 

Speaker, may require the boundary commission to make 

constant changes at the time of redistribution to follow shifting 

population patterns, meaning some areas may find themselves 

in significantly altered constituencies every time we hold an 

election. 

 

Changing the boundaries every 10 years, again, Mr. Speaker, 

will lessen this confusion somewhat and form at least some 

stability between the people and the elected MLA for a couple 

of terms. At the very least it’ll allow the people to know what 

constituency they are in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of constituency boundaries has been a 

very contentious one over the last two administrations with one 

party accusing the other of rigging the system in its favour. Of 

course when any political party misuses its authority and rigs 

the electoral system, it taints the process that brought each and 

every one of us here to this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think either of the two parties that have 

been in power in Saskatchewan over the last 20 or 25 years are 

completely guilt free when it comes to adopting laws that were 

or are to their political advantage. And when parties take 

advantage of their position to tilt the system in their favour, it 

only adds to the cynicism of the voters. 

  



1076  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

I think we saw the fruition of such cynicism in the last election, 

Mr. Speaker, where voter turnout fell to an almost historic low. 

In some ridings voter turnout in 1995 barely topped 50 per cent. 

In Prince Albert Northcote for instance, Mr. Speaker, only 52 

per cent of the eligible voters actually cast a ballot. In 

Saskatoon Fairview, only 51 per cent voted. I think these are 

telling statistics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When people lose faith in their electoral system, we have a real 

problem on our hands. And we have to do everything in our 

power to ensure that faith is re-instilled in them. Obviously this 

growing cynicism has found its roots beyond the electoral 

system and The Constituency Boundaries Act, but it is one 

important element. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this Act was amended in 1993, the 

government stated its intentions were: one, to bring the 

population variances between constituencies closer to a 

province-wide norm; and two, reduce the number of seats in the 

legislature. And of course at the time it was sold to the people 

of Saskatchewan as a step forward for democracy and a great 

saver of money. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, it was merely a coincidence that every 

one of the seats that had to be enlarged and every one of the 

seats that disappeared were in rural Saskatchewan, whereas the 

NDP’s traditional political strength lies in the cities. Call me 

cynical, but I think this may have had more to do with the 

changes at the time than any noble purposes by the members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our democratic system dictates, of course, that we 

do stick closely to the principle of one person, one vote. 

However, throughout the history of our country and our 

province, exceptions have been made to allow citizens to have 

the same type of effective, personal representation regardless of 

geography. 

 

At the national level we see wide, wide disparities between the 

populations of ridings from province to province. And these 

exceptions were made to provide all citizens with adequate 

representation. In fact the federal system has actually given our 

province more seats than is warranted by our population. If a 

strict one person, one vote system was adopted federally, 

Saskatchewan would have 11 seats in parliament as opposed to 

the 14 we do have currently. And of course exceptions are 

rightly made right here in our provincial system as well. 

 

The two northern seats do not even come close to the provincial 

average in population, and nor should they. However, we as a 

province have decided that the area is simply too large to be 

adequately represented by a single member. Even at the current 

size, it must be very difficult for the two members from the 

North to get around their entire constituency to talk with those 

they represent personally. So it’s quite reasonable to suggest 

that because of geography we have to make these exceptions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you that there are areas in 

southern Saskatchewan that also fit this description. There are 

some ridings in rural Saskatchewan that have also grown to 

immense proportions. You need only look at constituencies like 

Wood River or Cypress Hills or Thunder Creek to realize how 

difficult it must be for an MLA to get around the constituency 

regularly. And these are only a few of the examples. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, we have to keep in sight the tenet of one 

person, one vote, as much as possible. But as well, I think we 

must also recognize there are more things that go into equality 

than simply numbers. Equality of population cannot be our only 

goal. 

 

When constituencies grow to such immense proportions, 

especially those we see in our south-west and southern regions, 

one has to question whether the people in those ridings are 

being treated equally with those from those constituencies that 

are more manageable in size. 

 

And yes, I’ve heard the arguments that with the advent of 

superior communication tools, such as the fax machines and the 

cellular telephones, representing larger areas is now far more 

possible than it once was. To be certain . . . to a certain extent, 

that of course is true. 

 

But I would point out to the members opposite that even the 

invention of the cellular telephone is of no help in those areas 

where there is no cellular service. To a large extent those 

unserviced areas mirror precisely Saskatchewan’s larger 

constituencies. I reiterate that population variances are allowed 

in other provinces, at the federal level, and even right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

While I am not advocating and will never advocate 

overwhelming unfairness in terms of constituency population, I 

do maintain that in certain cases in southern Saskatchewan we 

should look beyond strict population when drawing our 

electoral boundaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing Act contains quite a bit of confusion. 

The minister in charge of this Bill, the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education, states that much of this confusion 

has come about because of an error in the 1993 legislation. In 

section 14, the term, voter population, is used instead of total 

population in subsection (1). And section 5 of the Bill before us 

today moves to correct that so-called mistake. The minister says 

it was a mistake, and judging from the incompatibility of this 

section with the rest of the Act, I will accept him at his word. 

 

But none the less, I think the whole notion of voter population 

versus total population is a very interesting one. Because as we 

all know, in each of our ridings we represent a certain number 

of people who are not eligible voters. Whether they’re under the 

age of 18 or whether they’re not yet Canadian citizens, there are 

a certain number of people who aren’t allowed to vote. 

 

They’re our constituents, to be sure, and deserve every bit as 

much attention, but they are not eligible voters. So the question 

comes up, when we’re discussing this issue, whether we should 

base our formula on total population or on voter population. 

Obviously the government has decided now on total population. 

Back in 1993, no one was quite sure because of the ambiguity 

in the legislation. 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

And, Mr. Speaker, in reviewing Hansard from 1993, I didn’t 

see where this rather glaring ambiguity was brought up by 

either the government or the official opposition of the day, 

which surprises me because it sticks right out there for all to see 

today. However, that’s neither here nor there when we’re 

looking at 1997, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The question I think we should ask though is, what is the right 

population base to use in our electoral system? In time this will 

cause wide variations because voter population in some ridings 

. . . between voter populations in some ridings. In looking over 

the Chief Electoral Officer’s report done after the 1995 

elections, I think we’re only just beginning on that path. I 

believe the true extent of this pattern will be seen in greater 

detail the next time we redraw the electoral map. 

 

For the most part, in 1995, the voter population of most ridings, 

rural or urban, were fairly consistent. With some exceptions of 

course, as has already been noted. For the most part, ridings 

have voter populations around 11,000 people. 

 

In researching this issue, I’ve heard arguments from both sides 

of the fence. Those who argue that total population is the fairest 

do so on the basis that you represent everyone in your 

constituency equally, even if they’re under-age or are not 

eligible voters for whatever reason. And that’s true, Mr. 

Speaker. However, there is another side to the story. 

 

When you look at the demographics of Saskatchewan, it’s 

pretty clear that areas outside of our two larger cities are 

growing older quickly. As young families leave rural areas, the 

density of people under 18 increases in the cities while it falls in 

rural areas and smaller cities and towns. 

 

There are examples of some variations in voter population 

already, Mr. Speaker, as pointed out by my colleagues. 

However I contend it’s something we’re going to be seeing a lot 

more significantly down the road. As rural areas continue to age 

and a higher and higher percentage of children are found in the 

cities, we’re going to begin seeing a lot more voters in rural 

ridings than in urban seats. Yes, the total population may 

remain relatively equal; however voter population will not. 

 

And I think it’s a very, very important point, Mr. Speaker, 

because obviously at election time, we as political candidates 

must seek out eligible voters for their support. Is it fair that 

candidates in one riding may have to seek, in the future, 

probably 13 or 14,000 voters while those in another riding may 

only have to seek out 9 or 10,000? 

 

(1500) 

 

I don’t think there’s any arguing that that’s where we’re headed, 

unless we see a huge shift away from current demographic 

trends. While I would be thrilled if such a trend reversal 

occurred and more of our young people stayed in their home 

towns to raise their families, I don’t expect that to happen, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And of course I’m also concerned that if total populations 

continue to fall in certain areas, the size of constituencies 

outside of the cities will just keep getting larger and larger. I 

don’t think this is good for our system and I don’t think it’s 

good for those who we represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to ensure our electoral system remains 

fair, but we must also be wary of putting into place a system 

that is so rigid it creates another type of unfairness for some 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

The people we represent are not simply numbers in a formula. 

They have real issues, real concerns. And they expect their 

system to allow them adequate representation no matter what 

part of Saskatchewan they happen to live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 12 — The Farm 

Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 

make a few comments today, Mr. Speaker, in regards to what I 

see in the Bill in sort of a legal sense, but I think there’s a 

bigger question that should be answered here before this goes 

further. 

 

The Bill itself, when I take a look at section 47(2), what it’s 

really doing is in a sense taking any of the risk away from the 

lenders. The banks, they have the ability to go out and make the 

profit, loan the amount of monies that, you know, any feeder 

association is going to require, and perhaps expand to who 

knows how large. And yet it’s really the taxpayers who are put 

at risk. And that’s our role in here in the legislature — to ensure 

that the taxpayers of the province are looked after, and not any 

one organization or group. 

 

And what concerns me about this one section is that perhaps 

what’s really happening is that the taxpayers are being . . . 

taking all the risk. The banks are in a position where they can 

reap all the rewards. And there’s no due diligence. I mean 

there’s nothing in here . . . because of this one clause where the 

lender, if they had not reasonably have known that there was 

going to be something untoward happening with the loan, with 

the money, with the guarantee, they’re not at risk — the 

taxpayers are. That is of course one large concern and it should 

be for the taxpayers of this province who are having to pick up, 

you know, these costs. 

 

And the other section that I had read that is a concern is section 

50(10) of the Bill. And this one has to do with the liens that are 

put on, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the one concern that really 

comes out here is whether or not there is enough notice given to 

those, you know, custom operators as far as what their loan . . . 

or their lien status, I should say, really is. 

 

Now because they’re deemed as custom operators and they   



1078  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

have to follow the rules and procedures put out by the 

provincial supervisor, they then know of course that they fall 

under the Act for dealing with these commodities and cattle. 

 

But what assurance do they have . . . or what knowledge should 

they have that in fact they would lose their lien if they weren’t 

the ones to make a written statement, an agreement with the 

association, you know, the custom operator and the association? 

But the custom operator would lose his lien right if he didn’t 

have that statement early on. And perhaps what’s missing here 

in this one section is any notification that perhaps the custom 

operator should be given about what status his lien would be at. 

 

Now having said that, I mean the Bill and the amendments to it 

are fairly short, to the point. And we’ll deal with a lot of this 

stuff once it reaches Committee of the Whole. But I think the 

bigger question that we’ve got to ask ourselves here today is not 

whether or not the legalese is correct in the Bill but whether or 

not the debate should surround the details of this legislation, or 

whether the debate should be whether a government should be 

putting Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money at risk for such a 

program at all and . . . or in this manner. 

 

And let’s think back at what’s happened here in the last years. 

And I believe this came about in the ’70s where we had a plan 

by the Blakeney government at that time. It was called the beef 

stabilization plan, Mr. Speaker, and probably what . . . You 

know the intent is always good; that we were going to end up 

with a much larger feeding operation; that we’re going to, with 

that, get large slaughterhouses and all the spin-off jobs that 

surround this. But when we take a look at what happened with 

the beef stabilization plan, I would have to ask the minister to 

show me where the benefits really were for the province. Did 

we have any? 

 

And that’s not to say we shouldn’t have tried. I’m not saying 

that at all. But were there benefits there? And I think in the end 

that’s why that plan was scrapped. There were some abuses to 

the plan; it was very lucrative to many. And did it increase our 

livestock operations or feeding operations? Well, no. 

 

After that came the Devine government, and they had a hundred 

dollar a head cash advance. And we all know how that fell flat, 

because they would have supervisors or inspectors go out into 

the farms and ranches and they found out that in fact what was 

happening — there weren’t any cattle, and there wasn’t any 

money left either. So that fell flat. 

 

We’ve had a period of time where, you know, governments of 

different stripes have tried to get Saskatchewan to a point where 

they’re seen, I guess, in North America as large-scale feed 

operators. And I just don’t think that the taxpayers have 

benefited for what they’ve put out in terms of risk and in terms 

of monies. They haven’t seen any benefits. 

 

And now what we’ve got is government-backed loans. And if 

the minister had taken the time, if the minister had taken the 

time to talk with many in the industry to find out the problems, 

and in fact talk to his own supervisors and find out the problems 

that have been associated with some of these 

government-backed loans, and the numerous scams that were 

associated around some of these loans . . . and there were; there 

were many. We’ve heard all kinds of this from industry people. 

 

And there again, is it something that we should be into? I’m not 

saying that we shouldn’t try and help an industry; but if there’s 

obviously, after 15 or, I guess, 20-some years, no benefit, I 

think we’ve got to rethink what we’re doing. 

 

Let’s be serious. Let’s take a look at our province. And nobody 

more than I would love to see large-scale feeder cattle 

operations in the south-west, in my own constituency. But, you 

know, in Saskatchewan we have a harsh climate. And who 

knows better than the people there, after a seven-month winter, 

Mr. Speaker. She’s been a long one. But you know what that 

means? These harsh climates, these really cold winters, we’re 

putting through a lot of expensive feed through these animals. 

 

On the other hand, what we have in Alberta is real large-scale 

feeder operations. And with that we’re also seeing some of the 

world’s largest slaughter operations being brought in. When 

you go south to Calgary, you talk to some industry people that 

go south to Calgary, and what they’re finding is . . . they’ve 

nicknamed it feeder alley on the one highway. 

 

So is it up to Saskatchewan, is it the role of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, to try and compete with this? Because I don’t 

think we can. I think what we’ve had here in Saskatchewan . . . 

we have a lot of farm-family operations that have mixed some 

grain, cow-calf operations. Why wouldn’t we really try and do 

well where we can do well? 

 

We’ve got a lot of marginal land. I know in the south half of the 

province there’s marginal land that was broke up, put into crop. 

And I won’t go too far down that road today, Mr. Speaker, but 

we all know the problems that we’re having in transportation of 

grain product today. Perhaps a program to join with the federal 

government; I know they’ve had permanent-cover programs 

before. 

 

But let’s expand some of these ideas. Or some of the areas up in 

the North where, you know, it’s late season; they can’t get some 

of those areas seeded up in the bush. They can raise a lot of 

cattle, thousands and thousands of cattle. But do it in the 

cow-calf operation where it’s still basically run on the family 

farm, and supply these slaughterhouse or feeding operations in 

Alberta, instead of putting all this taxpayers’ money at risk to 

try and compete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So really I think the question is much larger here today. It’s not 

so much the details of the Bill, it’s whether or not we should 

have the program at all. Whether or not we should be looking at 

putting . . . if there is Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money going to 

be put at risk, are we putting it in the right program with this? 

 

And I’m going to actually ask for a meeting with the minister to 

have this discussion before the Bill goes much further, to see 

whether or not there’s some common ground; that perhaps we 

can go in an entirely different direction. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll take my seat. 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25  The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce the 

officials first. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

my left is Brij Mathur, ADM (assistant deputy minister) in the 

department; and right behind Brij is Nick Surtees, executive 

director; and behind me is Perry Erhardt, legislation officer in 

the Department of Municipal Government. 

 

(1515) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials here today. 

 

Just as we get into this, and I have a few questions on this Act 

amendment, I’d like to make kind of a comment on what our 

concerns are, Madam Minister, and then if you’ll bear with me 

for a few minutes, we’ll get into a few of the questions. 

 

In recent years there have been a few dangerous gas pipeline 

fractures across Canada. These spectacular explosions are 

extremely threatening to nearby communities, homes, livestock, 

and the surrounding area. 

 

As the minister is well aware, Saskatchewan has hundreds of 

pipelines stretching across our landscape, and as a result the 

safety of nearby residents must be the foremost priority. In fact 

just a couple of years ago there was a gas line explosion just 

west of Regina right along the highway. People standing over a 

mile away from the billowing smoke and flame could still feel 

the heat coming in waves. Even though the explosion was near 

Grand Coulee, the flames rising hundreds of feet into the air 

could be seen from Regina. 

 

This incident caused grave concern for emergency crews and 

crews from SaskEnergy, who worked for hours on the scene 

until the remainder of the gas in this section of pipeline could 

be burnt off. Homes within a few miles of the explosion had to 

be evacuated. I also think officials may have even shut down a 

school in a nearby community for the day. 

 

Fortunately, Madam Minister, no one was injured during the 

accident. Fortunately the toxins that were released into the air 

from the explosion were not significant enough to pose a 

serious threat to the environment. But if the explosion had 

occurred a little closer to a nearby farm, or even for that matter 

closer to the edge of Regina, the results could have been much, 

much different. 

 

This is just one example of a problem with an underground gas 

pipeline but it clearly demonstrates that the safety standards and 

maintenance of gas pipelines in Saskatchewan cannot be taken 

lightly. The potential for a disaster is tremendous if the highest 

standards of safety, maintenance, and materials are not applied. 

 

Mr. Chairman, although the initial amendment contained within 

Bill 25 makes quite a minor change to allow for technicians 

other than a professional gas fitter to do a painting or cleaning 

of the gas pipelines, I have some serious concerns about the 

amendments which will give cabinet the authority to 

unilaterally change the regulations relating to The Gas 

Licensing Act. 

 

Nearly every piece of legislation that this government has 

pushed through the House during the past two years contains a 

provision that allows cabinet more authority to unilaterally 

change regulations. This legislative technique clearly allows the 

government members to chip away at the real democratic power 

of this House. By using this technique, the NDP government is 

taking away the power of public scrutiny that should be offered 

in this Assembly whenever major legislative changes are 

proposed. 

 

But the amendment contained within Bill 25 will allow cabinet 

the power to make changes to The Gas Licensing Act without 

any consultation with the industry and the public that may be 

directly affected by future changes. I believe that as elected 

members of this House, we must make every effort to ensure 

that the interests of the public are best served by the legislative 

changes. I do not believe that handing over more regulatory 

power to the NDP government does serve the best interest of 

the people we are all here to represent. 

 

Furthermore, I do not believe that the secretive regulation 

changes concerning The Gas Licensing Act are necessary and 

could potentially compromise public safety in the long run. And 

if government proceeds with legislative changes that have not 

been received with the proper consultation and input . . . I know 

that this is a very real possibility, and it just recently happened 

with the fiasco over regulations changes to The Labour 

Standards Act which changed the rules regarding payment of 

some types of child care workers. 

 

Unfortunately there are countless examples where the 

government implements legislative changes behind closed 

doors, away from the eyes of the public. And it is the people of 

Saskatchewan who pay the price for the government’s mistakes. 

However before I get to that, I would like the minister to 

explain exactly what non-related safety-related activities are 

included under the maintenance of gas pipelines. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I’m not sure whether the member 

mis-spoke himself in those very last words where he talked 

about gas pipelines. And I recognize the seriousness of the 

situation that the member outlined earlier, and of course these 

incidents are not to be taken lightly by anyone, but these events 

are far, far beyond the scope of this Act or this amendment. 

 

Most of the kind of pipelines that the member refers to would 

be interprovincial or trans-Canada or cross national borders. 

Regulation of those would come under the purview of the 

Department of Energy and Mines and would in most cases be 

federally regulated and not subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to   



1080  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

provincial legislation. 

 

Further, on the member’s comments with respect to increasing 

the power, if you like, of government or elected people. In 

regulations this is becoming a standard clause, not to give more 

power, which is not what this does, but to provide more 

flexibility so that if in consultations, for instance, with the 

industry it is seen that some amendments could modernize the 

regime, then there is the ability to do that in regulations. 

 

And while it’s . . . while regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 

not required to be brought to the House, nothing, nothing can 

ever be accomplished in regulation that supersedes the intent of 

the original Act. And so the reference to regulations is simply to 

provide a responsiveness of the government, more flexibility. 

Because when the sessions of the legislature are only held once 

a year, sometimes things change. 

 

And in response to that, maybe in response to a request from the 

industry, you might want to make some changes in the 

regulations. But I repeat, nothing can ever be accomplished 

through regulation that is not contemplated or allowed for in the 

legislation. So there’s nothing secretive about it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s simply the way governments at the federal and 

provincial levels work. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I’m afraid 

I disagree with you when it comes to regulations, because I 

believe there’s much more power within those regulations than 

you’re letting on. 

 

And I would like to comment on one other thing you said, and 

you made a good point. That when we only sit once a year 

that’s it’s . . . I realize it is hard to not come out with regulations 

because some things need attending oftener than the one year. 

So that’s actually a better reason that we should be sitting in the 

fall and in the spring. So I would hope you would carry that 

message back to the Premier. We would back you on that one 

100 per cent, Madam Minister. We agree with you there. 

 

I’m not sure, when we go back to what you were talking about 

in your answer there, maybe we didn’t communicate well here. 

But I’d like to know, who decides what types of maintenance of 

gas pipelines fit into the non-safety-related category? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I need to have 

some clarification from the member. He keeps referring to gas 

pipelines. Now I’m not sure what he’s talking about. This 

legislation covers domestic and commercial installations in 

buildings from the meter forward. And so the term pipelines — 

gas pipelines — I think doesn’t properly . . . is not the proper 

reference here. This concerns the regulation from the meter 

onwards or forward of the integrity of the gas system. And it’s 

meant to, by removing the word “maintenance” to make the 

distinction between work that needs to be done by a qualified 

gas fitter or gas installer, and such routine procedures as the 

cleaning or painting or changing the filter in an appliance. 

 

So while it is a line, it’s part of a system. But when he refers to 

pipelines, he leaves the impression that this legislation has a 

much larger scope to the distribution system, which it does not. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, we maybe . . . our 

communication here was not that well, and maybe I was not 

getting the understanding of what we were talking about. But 

can you explain then what lines are actually . . . Are we talking 

inside buildings only? Are we not talking outside of buildings 

to do with any of the gas fittings at all? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would vary on 

the application, but basically we’re always talking about the 

apparatus or the system which is beyond the meter; no part of 

the distribution system that is ahead of the meter. It’s only from 

the meter on. Now some of it may be inside; some of it may be 

outside. As the member will appreciate, in a house for example, 

you have your meter, and basically the gas lines that go to the 

consuming appliances are mostly on the inside. 

 

If you had a larger installation like a farmyard, a greenhouse 

operation, an industrial operation, there might be a number of 

buildings for instance that were served in that complex which 

were all beyond the meter. So some of the gas line that serves 

appliances there might be outside, underground, some of it 

might be inside. But it’s always . . . what we’re talking about 

here and what this legislation is confined to is the system that 

serves the gas consuming appliances that are beyond the meter. 

So it’s between the meter and the burner, if you like. It’s that 

part and that part only. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I 

think we know we’re coming from the same spot here. Grain 

dryers, I would presume though, would come under this 

amendment, would they not? Because they are after the meter. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Grain dryers and any kind of a gas 

consuming appliance, and the gas line from that appliance back 

to the meter, are covered by this legislation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Now correct 

me again if I’m wrong here and getting a misinterpretation of 

what we’re talking about, but up to this point, before you put 

the amendment forth, I presume that someone . . . or the person 

providing the maintenance or painting or whatever it be of these 

lines — whether they’re after the meter — did that person have 

to have a licence before, and now what we’re talking about is 

that this person does not have to be licensed? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the situation was 

that a person, a serviceman doing that kind of work, the kind 

that we talked about — cleaning, painting, so on — would not 

have had to be licensed as a gas fitter. But because of the 

language in the Act there was some confusion and so that is 

simply what we’re addressing here, through the removal of the 

word maintenance, is to clarify what the roles are and what the 

requirements are for the serviceman engaging in that work. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would 

presume then that what this would also do is that it would make 

it somewhat cheaper then to maintain these lines now that we 

realize who can and who cannot do the maintenance? 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well of course normally to engage a 

service person who has a qualification that meets journeyman 

standards, or standards in the trade, would be more expensive 

than a serviceman. But that of course is something that’s 

decided by the market-place. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Does this 

legislation that we are talking about now coincide with our 

neighbouring provinces like Alberta, Manitoba, or for that 

matter across the country? Is this a standard piece of 

legislation? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m told that in 

jurisdiction . . . that this is pretty well standard within 

jurisdictions that do regulate. And that the use of the word 

maintenance is superfluous because installation, alteration, you 

know, the other terms that are used, would be all-encompassing, 

and that the use of the word maintenance is not required. It 

causes confusion and that’s why we’re amending the Act to 

remove it. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Being that 

this Bill does not have . . . is not a very lengthy one, I think 

that’s all the questions I have at this time, although I will be 

introducing an amendment to it in clause 5. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d now like 

to formally move the following amendment, and the 

amendment is that reads: 

 

Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by deleting the 

words “on assent” and substituting the words “upon 

consideration and acceptance by the Committee of the 

Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 

regulations proposed pursuant to clauses 25(a) and (a.1) of 

The Gas Licensing Act as being enacted by section 4 of this 

Act”. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to stand 

in my place to speak against this amendment. The member . . . I 

will outline the procedure for the benefit of the member. 

 

What happens in the development or changes of regulations is 

that, say for instance someone in industry brings forward a 

request for an amendment to the regulations which makes them 

more modern, or easier to apply, or whatever the reason might 

be. Then the department would review that. 

 

If they felt that it had . . . They would have to feel that it would 

have merit before they would propose the amendment which 

would then go to a committee of cabinet called the legislative 

. . . or the Regulations Review Committee. The Regulations 

Review Committee is, as I said, a committee of cabinet, chaired 

by a cabinet minister, with staff and resource people from the 

Department of Justice and the relevant department that’s 

requesting the change in regulations. 

 

The merit of the change is debated, and if it is seen to be a 

positive, then drafting instructions are given to make that 

change. The members opposite should not be paranoid about 

this process. It is absolutely necessary to have regulations apart 

. . . to have a more flexible procedure for changes in 

regulations, as distinct from legislation. 

 

But what the members opposite need to understand and 

appreciate is that you cannot accomplish anything by regulation 

which is not contemplated in the legislation. That is a safety 

feature. That is the feature of the whole scheme that makes 

government accountable, that makes the members of this House 

accountable, is that if the legislation is crafted with care, the 

legislation cannot be amended without coming to this House. 

And you can’t . . . no government can achieve anything by 

regulation that they can’t achieve through legislation. So there 

is no reason to be suspicious of this process. 

 

Therefore we could not be placed in the position — no 

government could be placed in the position where they would 

have to come before the Legislative Assembly to change every 

little tit and tottle of regulations through the whole governance 

scheme. So we have to oppose this amendment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 

Minister, then I’m afraid we’re going to have to agree to 

disagree because this is one of our main bones of contention 

with this House and the way it works right now. More and more 

things are being done by regulation. And you can minuscule the 

amount of legislation that is done, and the intent of the 

legislation that is done by regulation, but it is still being done 

and not being done in the House here where it should be 

debated. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:37 p.m. until 3:45 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 12 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Osika Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Aldridge 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

 

Nays — 27 

 

Van Mulligen Wiens Atkinson 

Johnson Whitmore Goulet 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Renaud Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Scott Teichrob Serby 

Stanger Murray Wall 

  



1082  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Langford Thomson 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Chair, I would ask the permission 

of the committee to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to 

all the members for that kindness. I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you to all of the members of the Assembly, two 

guests who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. And I would 

draw the members’ attention to Ms. April Bahr and Mr. Chris 

Miller. These are two students from Thom Collegiate who are 

here to do a research project on members of the Legislative 

Assembly. And I would ask all members to make them feel 

very welcome here today, and to thank them for taking time out 

of their schedule after school to work on this project. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I report the Bill, 

No. 25 of 1997, without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

my left, the ADM, Brij Mathur, who I’ve introduced 

previously; and the senior policy consultant in the cultural area, 

Margaret Morrissette. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A House 

business and research memo dated March 21, 1997, in the 

summary of The Multiculturalism Act 1997, claims that the 

new Act proposes to, quote: “replace the outdated 

Saskatchewan Multicultural Act, 1974.” 

 

Let the record show that it is our belief that this is incorrect. 

This Act repeals the Saskatchewan multiculturalism Act, 1978 

and replace it with a new and presumably updated version that 

reflects changes that have occurred in the multicultural field 

over a period of 19 years. 

Madam Minister, in your introduction of the Bill you stated, 

and I quote — and please bear with me as I will be quoting you 

at some length: 

 

Adoption of this legislation will lay the groundwork for 

developing progressive multiculturalism legislation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am decidedly interested in pursuing with you, during the 

clause-by-clause examination, your plans and timetable for the 

future development of progressive multicultural legislation. 

You have my unqualified support in such an undertaking. You 

claim, and I quote: 

 

A new Multiculturalism Act will continue to support 

cultural retention, heritage languages, and inter-cultural 

understanding. 

 

This is certainly fine in theory, but what about in practice and 

on the ground? Again, during the clause-by-clause statements, I 

may ask you to outline the practical, concrete steps you plan to 

take to make this a reality. Again I quote you: 

 

The Multiculturalism Act, 1997, Mr. Speaker, will 

encourage respect for the multicultural heritage of 

Saskatchewan and encourage the continuation of our 

multicultural society. 

 

Many questions remain and the most primary one is, how are 

you planning to ensure the respect for, and the continuation of 

multicultural society in terms of the many cuts and challenges 

they face in the future? Moral suasion only goes so far. You 

state, and I quote: 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, The Multiculturalism Act will define 

the role of the minister responsible in ensuring the 

development of (the) multiculturalism policy. 

 

Again, during clause-by-clause examination of ministerial 

powers, I’ll ask you — and may ask you — to elaborate on the 

steps you as a minister will take to ensure development of 

multiculturalism policy within and outside of government. 

 

Finally — I won’t quote you again — you say at the end of 

your introduction of the Bill: 

 

It will begin to develop a framework for multiculturalism 

policy for the province of Saskatchewan, policy which also 

addresses current concerns of our communities and 

including each of us in the scope of multiculturalism 

policy. 

 

And that’s the end of quotes, Madam Minister. The intent of the 

Act is commendable and the wording pushes all the right 

buttons. In the end though the question is, what does the new 

Bill do that the old one did not do? It is not readily apparent 

with what clause faults or wrongs the Bill corrects or 

overcomes. I am concerned that the Bill will live up to its good 

intentions, and it’s not clear how it will. Certainly talk is cheap 

and the proof is in the pudding. The Bill does away with the 

Saskatchewan multicultural council, and with the making of   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

grants by the council for multicultural purposes. 

 

Presently, multiculturalism is funded from the lotteries; 

generally he who paid the piper calls the tune. There are no 

provisions in this legislation for funding of any sort. Without 

the Saskatchewan multicultural advisory council and without 

any funding commitments, how do you expect to carry any 

clout or wield any influence in the multicultural community 

with legislation of this sort? 

 

Other than high-blown rhetoric, what resources will you as the 

minister bring to bear to support this Bill? And, Madam 

Minister, actions speak louder than words when it comes to the 

multicultural community. And I’ll certainly invite the minister 

to comment on some length on these questions and issues I 

raise. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you very much. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to be able to respond to the 

comments of the member opposite. 

 

First of all though I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to other members in the House, four representatives of the 

multicultural community who are here in the gallery today, in 

the west gallery, to observe the debate on the Bill. 

 

There is Lydia Chatto — she’s on the board of the 

Saskatchewan Organization of Heritage Languages; Dr. John 

Newton, a board member of the Multicultural Council of 

Saskatchewan; Martha Mettle, office administrator of the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan; and Heather Rude, the 

program director of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming our 

guests into the Chamber today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Now in response to the questions of 

the member from Athabasca, I’d just like to say first that the old 

Act, the old provincial Act, provides a very limited definition of 

multiculturalism as the right of different communities to 

preserve their distinct cultures and to share them with others. 

The member is right in his observation that the original 

legislation was passed in 1974. There was an amendment in 

1978, but this new legislation doesn’t amend the 1974 

legislation, it actually replaces it. So it has more, much more 

impact than the measures that were taken in 1978. 

 

Then I’d like to add as well that the proposed legislation 

addresses those issues of cultural retention, inter-cultural 

understanding, but it goes further to promote the learning of 

languages, to promote anti-racism, cultural expression, equity, 

and immigrant settlement issues. So the scope of 

multiculturalism has been expanded to encompass social, 

economic, and human rights issues. 

 

The new legislation reflects these issues which the old 1974 

legislation did not. And it’s a serious statement of sociological 

principles. 

 

When the member asks what will we do, we will continue to 

consult with members of the multiculturalism community on 

the various issues. But the Bill itself in section 5, as the member 

will have observed, lists six duties of the minister in the context 

of this legislation which will ensure that when carried out in 

concert with members of the multicultural community, that 

plans of action can be developed on each and every one of the 

issues based upon the priorities that the multicultural 

community identifies. 

 

And we will work through those issues and make sure that 

multiculturalism policy is promoted throughout government 

departments and our communities through those action plans 

developed in concert with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. I think all members of the House 

are very appreciative of the various cultures and backgrounds 

which go into making up our great province. And I think we all 

recognize that the first nations heritage and the Metis heritage 

and aboriginal heritages generally are one of the ethnic mixes 

which has been traditionally undervalued in our province. And I 

think only recently are we coming to realize that one of our 

most important heritages is in fact our first one. 

 

Another ethnic heritage I would like to mention briefly this 

afternoon, one of the more interesting ones in our province, 

near North Battleford, is the black heritage which has recently 

come to public attention for the publication of a new book, 

Deemed Unsuitable: the history of black settlement in the early 

days of the homestead period. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I think it’s particularly important because I think 

oftentimes we have been guilty, as those of European 

backgrounds, of thinking of persons of colour as being new 

immigrants. Well some of them are new Canadians, but the 

black settlements around Maidstone are a very old part of the 

homestead era of this province. And I think it’s important that 

we recognize that there are indeed persons of colour in this 

province whose contributions go back to the early days of our 

province and have been part of the North Battleford story from 

the very earliest days of our community. 

 

However I do have a question of the minister. In some circles, 

as the minister knows, multiculturalism has become 

unfashionable and unpopular. And as I see it, the challenges for 

multiculturalism, or the arguments against multiculturalism, are 

twofold, and I would ask the minister to address them for us. 

 

The first is when we uphold our own background, our own 

heritage, the challenge for us is always to do that in a sense 

which one in no way declares our superiority to persons of other 

backgrounds. And so how do we show our pride in our heritage 

without in any way trying to detract or take something from 

persons of a different heritage? I think that’s always a challenge 

that multiculturalism has to address. 

 

And the other challenge in multiculturalism which has caused 

some people to criticize it is, how do we take pride in our 

distinctiveness and our differences while on the other hand in   



1084  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

no way try to remove ourselves from the fact that we are 

Canadians, we are Saskatchewanians, we are part of the larger 

community, part of the larger whole? And as you know, some 

people are critical that multiculturalism tends to emphasize 

what we have different from our neighbours as opposed to what 

binds us to our neighbours and to the larger community. 

 

And please don’t misunderstand me. I’m not saying I subscribe 

to that philosophy, but I think these are the two challenges that 

multiculturalism must always address: one, pride in our heritage 

not detracting from the contributions of any other heritage; and 

two, pride in our heritage, our distinctiveness, that in no way 

detracts from our membership in the larger Saskatchewan and 

Canadian community. 

 

I’d like her to address those philosophical matters if you would, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank 

the member opposite for his thoughtful questions and 

observations, and I think that our provincial motto “from many 

peoples, strength” sums up the philosophical approach in very 

few words very aptly. 

 

He’s mentioned the very important addition to this Act which 

was an important omission in the 1974 legislation, and just take 

this opportunity to correct . . . The member from Athabasca 

referred to an amendment in 1978 and I inadvertently agreed 

with him. But the only amendment to the ’74 legislation was 

made in 1983 — just a technicality. 

 

But the inclusion in the 1997 Multiculturalism Act, of 

aboriginal culture and some recognition that the first nations 

people’s culture is to a great extent oral, . . . and recognizes that. 

Also there are, in the last census, 125 different countries of 

origin given by the citizens of Saskatchewan. So that is how 

diverse, really. This is 125 different countries and then in 

addition to that we have the diversity of our aboriginal people 

where there are many distinct groups and at least six different 

first nations languages spoken just in this province alone, that 

I’m aware of. 

 

The member also mentions the black settlement, the people who 

came after the American Revolution. I had the opportunity to 

read that book, Deemed Unsuitable, written by Bruce Shepard, 

the current curator of the Diefenbaker centre in Saskatoon, and 

found it very interesting. 

 

And again, so often when the term multicultural is used, people 

tend to think about . . . or many people do unfortunately think 

about only visible minorities. And we have to remember the 

diversity of this province and the many countries that people 

come from. 

 

So the express purposes of the new Act are to recognize that the 

diversity of Saskatchewan people with respect to race, cultural 

heritage, religion, ethnicity, ancestry, and place of origin is a 

fundamental characteristic and always has been, of 

Saskatchewan society, or has been ever since it’s begun to be 

settled, which isn’t really that long in relative terms. We’re so 

young; not even a hundred years old as a province, where some 

civilizations in the world are many thousands of years old. 

 

But that it is a fundamental characteristic of Saskatchewan 

society that enriches the lives of all Saskatchewan people. It’s 

to encourage respect for the multicultural heritage of 

Saskatchewan and to foster a climate for harmonious relations 

among people of diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds 

without sacrificing their distinctive cultural and ethnic 

identities. 

 

And I think that addresses the comments that the member was 

making about, how do you highlight as one group the 

characteristics of your culture without taking away from or 

detracting from that of others. 

 

So I think that truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were in the 

forefront in Canada, being the first provincial government in 

1974 to pass multicultural legislation. And we are in the 

forefront again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in that our new legislation 

that’s before us today is the only such in Canada that does 

recognize aboriginal people and their culture, and that is as 

proactive in promotion and development as this piece of 

legislation is. I think it’s a great day, really, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, as I see it — 

and I’d be interested in knowing if you agree — I see basically 

three major groupings in terms of the cultures which make up 

our province; obviously each has many sub-groupings within it: 

(1) the aboriginal; (2) the heritage cultures, that is, those of us 

who are now third, fourth, fifth, sixth generation Saskatchewan 

but we still remember what our original roots were; but they are 

no longer personal roots but there is still a sentimental 

attachment to the initial . . . the initial land from which our 

ancestors came; and (3) those new Canadians who still continue 

to have personal and individual ties with their country of origin. 

 

It strikes me that in terms of multiculturalism, that each of these 

groups has a different focus and different needs. I wonder if you 

agree with me on those three . . . those three broad groupings; 

that that’s a valid observation. And if their needs are addressed 

separately. Say the Ukrainian community which is now 

approximately a hundred years old here, and of course the 

persons of Ukrainian origin, their ties, they are no longer 

personal and individual, versus those who may possibly have 

been born in another land. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that it’s 

important to think of it this way. That a multicultural society in 

Saskatchewan includes every citizen of Saskatchewan. It 

includes us all. And I think . . . I don’t really agree with the 

classification, the groupings that the member opposite suggests. 

Because I’m not sure whether you’ve had the opportunity yet 

— to the member from Battleford — as a member of the 

legislature, to receive and respond to an invitation to attend one 

of the many citizenship courts that takes place around our 

province on a regular basis. 

 

And I never cease to be amazed, when I attend one of those 

citizenship courts, that, say out of 70 or 80 people that are 

qualifying for citizenship at that particular court, that there   



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

might be 20 or 30 countries of origin from all over the world 

and embracing every race, religion, culture, from every part of 

the globe. And this is taking place on a regular basis in all the 

centres throughout our province. 

 

And I often think . . . I always go away from those events 

feeling so fortunate to be a Canadian by accident of birth. And I 

often think that these people, in order to qualify for citizenship, 

have to undergo a course of education and a very rigorous 

examination. And I sometimes think that those of us who are 

Canadians by birth should be required to take that examination 

periodically, and maybe if we can’t pass it we should be 

deported — I don’t know who would want us. 

 

But I really think that sometimes we have so much that we take 

for granted. And people come here for so many different 

reasons. So many . . . of course some people come here as 

refugees, but many people have made huge sacrifices in terms 

of leaving family and material possessions, and all kind of 

things that we might value, behind in order to enjoy freedom of 

expression, freedom of religion, all of the freedoms that we 

treat sometimes very cavalierly; where other people struggle so 

hard in their own countries to achieve that. And sometimes 

when they can’t, they come to Canada looking for that instead. 

 

And when you talk about groupings, I think . . . I want to give 

you an interesting statistic. And this is a personal anecdote in a 

way. But recently I was told by someone in authority who 

knows about these things, that in the Canadian census, one after 

the other, the only ethnic . . . or race that is increasing in 

Saskatchewan is German. They’re the third-largest ethnic 

group. And I thought to myself — he made this statement — 

and I thought, well there isn’t a lot of immigration from 

Germany. I very seldom, when I go to citizenship court, see 

new immigrants from Germany. 

 

So what is the cause of this? So I asked him what it was. And 

he said it was — and I can relate to this — if you want to talk 

. . . Sometimes people look at me as a white person and say, 

how could you possibly know anything about racial 

discrimination? 

 

Well just try being a young child in a Saskatchewan, small 

Saskatchewan town of Mennonite German ancestry in the 

Second World War where our family had left Germany 

generations before. Over a hundred years before they had come 

to Kansas and then up through Swift Current into Saskatchewan 

in the 1800s. And we had no connections whatsoever. 

 

And yet our house — my grandmother’s house because my 

father was engaged in the conflict in Europe; I was staying with 

my grandmother — her house was raided by the RCMP because 

she had some relatives in the 17th century in Germany who 

were writers, and they had bound books, which was quite rare 

for the 1700s, that were written by her ancestors. This was not 

subversive literature; this was poetry. This was philosophical 

literature. But it was seized and it was never returned. 

 

And my sister and I, as frightened children seeing this happen, 

and it took . . . there was a stigma attached to being German in 

the 1940s — from ’39 to ’45 — in Saskatchewan, as 

everywhere. And it’s taken 50 years for people who changed 

their name from Schmidt to Smith or whatever to conceal that 

identity, it’s taken them two generations, until the most recent 

census, to admit their ancestry. 

 

And that’s why this is a . . . it’s a growing group. It’s not 

growing; it’s just that more people are acknowledging that that 

is their ancestry. Because now being far removed from those 

events, they now feel confident enough to talk about that. 

 

(1615) 

 

So that’s just one example of how pervasive this kind of 

discrimination, and racism can be into the lives of ordinary 

people who are citizens of Canada, who always have been, who 

might think that they’re immune from this kind of thing, where 

they’re not. 

 

And this is the kind of proactive approaches that we want to 

build, the kind of relationships that we want to build between 

all Saskatchewan people, and not to stratify certain groups at 

certain levels. We want every citizen of Saskatchewan to feel 

part of a progressive, multicultural community. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Just a few 

questions for the minister. I didn’t take the opportunity to 

welcome your staff and I’d like to do that at this point in time, 

and also welcome the guests that are here today to view what 

we hope is a very short passage of this particular Bill. 

 

When you assumed the multiculturalism portfolio, was it 

because you expressed a distinct interest in this portfolio? And 

how does the assignment work in terms of the Premier? Is it 

naturally attached to the portfolio of Municipal Government? 

And also, in light of the introduction of this Act and the work 

required to implement it, do you expect that you will continue 

to be responsible for the multicultural portfolio, given your 

insight on some of the importances of multiculturalism in the 

opening statement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, not to be 

flippant about this, and I wouldn’t want to be in the Premier’s 

shoes, but the Premier of a provincial government selects his 

cabinet for whatever reasons he selects his cabinet, and the 

longevity of the minister is entirely his decision to make and 

nobody else ever knows. 

 

But multiculturalism is part of the responsibilities of the cultural 

division of the Department of Municipal Government. And 

Municipal Government, the name of the department, is not very 

descriptive, I recognize, of the activities that are in it. But there 

really is the Municipal Government framework within that 

department. There is the cultural and recreation branches, and 

there is Sask Housing, and then of course as part of the 

regulatory, there is also the public safety issues. That’s why my 

main claim to fame is having my name on the elevators. But   



1086  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

please don’t call me to fix the ones in the legislature when they 

catch you between floors. But the public safety issues are part 

of that regulatory part. 

 

So it’s a very interesting and diversified portfolio. But the 

cultural has a permanent place in it, and it’s been part of that 

department now since what was called the Family Foundation 

was disbanded in 1992 and all of those functions were moved 

into the department of then Community Services, now called 

Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just a quick 

point on the elevator point that you raised. My young daughter 

asked why every few months the names change on the elevator, 

and we indicated that in politics there is a lot of ups and downs. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I must remind the members that 

we are no longer on clause 1. We are on clause 2 and all 

remarks must pertain to clause 2. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. How would 

the purposes of the Act arrived at and how do they differ from 

the purposes of the Act that it actually replaced, again given 

your insight into multiculturalism? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a very 

long history to these changes, and it’s involved very committed 

efforts of a large number of people over the years. 

 

Efforts began in the late 1980s, culminating in a 1989 report of 

a task force on multiculturalism which recommended new 

legislation. In 1990 government published what was called the 

Saskatchewan government response to the task force report. In 

1993 the government received the recommendations of the 

minister’s Advisory Committee on Multicultural Legislation 

and that provided the basic framework. 

 

Then in January 1995, the then minister of Municipal 

Government released a discussion paper called RESPONDING 

TO THE COMMUNITY: Proposals for Cultural Development, 

which began a process of restructuring and rejuvenation of 

Saskatchewan’s cultural community. 

 

One of the seven recommendations listed in the document 

proposed undertaking public consultations in preparation for the 

new Saskatchewan multiculturalism legislation. 

 

There were focus groups. Members opposite might be interested 

to know that 77 per cent of the respondents of the focus groups 

believed that the quality of life in Saskatchewan was 

strengthened by these efforts in multiculturalism; and 67 per 

cent believe that the government and its institutions should 

promote policies, programs, and practices that enhance the 

understanding and respect for the diversity of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that outlines for the member part of the process that 

there’s been. The proposed legislation addresses the broader 

issues of cultural retention, inter-cultural understanding, 

promotion of learning of languages, antiracism, cultural 

expression, equity, and immigrant settlement issues. 

 

So the scope of multiculturalism has expanded to encompass 

social, economic, and human rights issues, and the new 

legislation reflects these issues. 

 

I did forget to mention that within the department and the 

funding portion is responsibility for the lotteries, which funds 

the cultural and recreation, including, through the Saskatchewan 

. . . through the SCCO, the Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 

Organizations, obtains their funding from the lotteries. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, with leave, to introduce 

a guest to the committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and 

through you to the rest of the folks assembled here this 

afternoon, I’d like to introduce to you a group of five grade 11 

and 12 students from Herbert School. And they’re accompanied 

by their teacher, Ms. Marilyn Keaschuk, and chaperon, Ms. 

Janzen. 

 

And we’re running a little bit late here this afternoon, I 

understand, but I’m looking forward to meeting with you later 

after you’ve had your tour of the legislature. So we’ll talk to 

you later. And everyone give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 39 

(continued) 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And thank you to the minister for 

being here, and welcome to our guests as well. 

 

In that particular clause there’s a statement there that says: 

 

It is the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan to: 

 

(a) support the continued development and expression of 

all cultures within the framework of democratic 

principles and the laws of Canada; 

 

That last part about the framework almost sounds like a 

qualification. Was it your intention to say that democratic 

principles will in some way modify the multiculturalism policy? 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’re 

interpreting this clause somewhat differently. I’d just like to 

read the whole clause: 

 

4 (a)  support the continued development and expression of 

all cultures within the framework of democratic principles 

and the laws of Canada; 

 

Support refers to moral support and encouragement as well as 

providing for a potential financial support. And as newcomers 

arrive, the multiculturalism and cultural expression of 

Saskatchewan evolves. And this clause is meant to be a 

recognition of that and allow room for development within that 

framework. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  We have a similar situation I think shows up 

in clause 4(d). It seems like a qualification. Aren’t you working 

a bit at cross-purposes if you have a Bill that emphasizes 

individualism on one side and the importance of ethnic groups 

at the same time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the way I 

read clause (d), it doesn’t speak to individual rights in a sense 

that the member opposite interprets. To “promote the full, free 

and equal participation of all individuals in Saskatchewan 

society.” And I see that . . . my interpretation of that would be 

individuals acting as part of the whole with regard to their 

fellow citizens in the multicultural society that Saskatchewan is 

. . . (inaudible) . . . in that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Just following up on that particular question, 

are we then to assume that every individual in Saskatchewan 

will be getting some assistance or help through this 

multicultural policy? If not, we’ve left someone out. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not 

what this Bill is about. Although we did make mention of how 

activities are funded through the proceeds of the lotteries and so 

forth. This legislation, like the previous legislation, supports, as 

we’ve said and as it spells out, promotion of learning of 

languages, promotion of issues that deal with racism and all of 

the other parts of the legislation that are referred to. 

 

But it doesn’t . . . In order to take part in a democratic system, 

the individuals have to have freedom to do that. Every citizen 

will benefit by the positive atmosphere that’s created, but it 

certainly doesn’t contemplate that there will be, for instance, 

grants given out to each individual or the sort of thing that I 

sense that the member opposite is leading to. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Moving on to clause 4(e), and 

that particular clause binds government to work in partnership 

with community groups to promote cooperation and 

understanding among cultures. Does this create any new duties 

for the government? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are . . . 

there is no new expenditure contemplated by this legislation. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay. Thank you. Moving on to the 

following one, which is clause 4(f), and that one brings up the 

language issues. And as you know, it’s a bit of a bone of 

contention about the voters in the province, if they should be 

dedicating resources to bilingualism in a province which has 

some fairly low language groupings. Will this clause extend the 

government’s bilingualism efforts or will it provide similar 

linguistic rights to other language groups? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course this 

clause says in whole: 

 

promote the official languages of Canada and recognize the 

many different languages spoken in Saskatchewan; 

 

And we already do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in very many 

ways. In terms of the official languages of Canada, we 

recognize the . . . in this legislation we’re recognizing the 

aboriginal languages of first nations people. We are, and 

continue to recognize that Canada is a bilingual country. 

 

We know that many of the programs . . . We don’t see this 

costing more money. But with some of the programs, for 

instance the francophone school issue where those costs are 

paid by the federal government in recognition that this is 

officially a bilingual country, then obviously we should be 

proactive in pursuing those opportunities and that funding on 

behalf of the francophone community. And it should recognize, 

as it says here, the many different languages spoken in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I think the member opposite will likely know, in his 

position as an educator, that we have one of the finest heritage 

language opportunities and . . . I hesitate to call it a structure. 

But it’s really a volunteer system where volunteers who speak 

many different languages, teach and promote others on a 

volunteer basis, supported with some funding from the 

Department of Education but very . . . you would almost call it 

seed funding in relationship to the wonderful work that these 

volunteers do. And certainly in the context of this legislation, 

we would want to encourage that and expand that, because it’s a 

very efficient way of achieving some progress — significant 

progress — in those areas. 

 

But basically, we don’t see the passage of this legislation 

costing, for instance, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan more 

money. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  On the matter of languages — and you 

brought in the Department of Education — could you comment 

on the cooperation that’s taking place presently between what 

your department is doing here and the Department of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would respond 

to that that in this area, and probably largely because of the 

framework of legislation that we’ve had, that there’s very good 

cooperation interdepartmentally between any of the agencies 

that are involved. 

 

For instance, in the languages area there’s good cooperation   



1088  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

between our department and the Department of Education. In 

the immigrant settlement area there’s very good cooperation 

between our department and the Department of Social Services, 

for example, which helps to support the Open Door Societies, 

and the like. So there are examples throughout the piece, of 

very good cooperation between different government 

departments in this area. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. One question on 4(j) — 4(j) sets 

a general policy of . . . and I’ll take it from the Act: 

 

. . . administer services and programs of the Government of 

Saskatchewan in a manner that is sensitive and responsive 

to a multicultural society. 

 

Do you expect as a result of this clause that departments will 

issue policy guidelines to ensure that civil servants are acting in 

a politically correct manner with respect to multiculturalism? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this, as we do 

now, would be not only through hiring practices in the Public 

Service Commission, but throughout government. We continue 

to promote a cross-cultural education for employees, 

particularly those at the service level and a number of others 

that I think are proactive initiatives, to achieve the policies that 

are being promoted throughout the framework of this Bill. 

 

And certainly we always do, and this government at large does, 

not just through the Public Service Commission but throughout, 

try to promote a recognition of the multicultural nature of the 

province of Saskatchewan and its people. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clause 4, certainly 

this clause is the meat and bones of the Act and contains 10 

subclauses. And as you said when introducing the Bill: “It will 

begin to develop a framework for multiculturalism policy for 

the province of Saskatchewan.” Again, my apologies for 

quoting you once again. 

 

Madam Minister, a journey of 10,000 miles certainly starts with 

the first step and this Bill is just the beginning. I’m interested 

in, and all of us are interested in the subsequent steps that will 

bring us to a multicultural destination. 

 

And each subclause begs a number of questions in terms of 

what specific actions, programs, policies do you contemplate as 

necessary for implementation of each clauses? What resources, 

staff, and funding do you envision as required? What are the 

key interest groups and stakeholders you will need to consult 

and cooperate with? What is your hoped-for end result? And 

what is your timetable for achieving the results? 

 

These are some of the questions for all the different subclauses 

that we have. And just for the sake of time perhaps you can just 

kind of give us a quick overview of some of the clauses and 

some of the anticipated efforts that you want to undertake as 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman of the Committee 

of the Whole, the Inter-Multicultural Committee is preparing a 

document for the government which will examine the potential 

for consolidating multiculturalism, including funding, within 

one agency or structure — that’s leading to the single arts 

agency. 

 

We want to continue to communicate with and consult with 

representatives of the multicultural committees who were 

nominated from a broad representation of multicultural 

organizations. This committee is an examining of structure 

which would be open to the economic development of 

multicultural initiatives. It could include any number of 

initiatives originating from the community itself. And it would 

be up to the new funding structure board to work with the 

community, the three levels of government, the corporate 

sector, and the academic sector to develop further opportunities 

for multiculturalism, economic benefits that go beyond the 

current significant contributions made by multicultural festivals 

and so forth. 

 

So we don’t have a timetable. We have . . . enunciate some 

goals here. We work with the community, who identifies to us 

their priorities, because we can’t of course have the, I guess, 

energy to move forward on all fronts at the same time, at the 

same intensity. So we listen to the community in terms of 

developing their priorities and then we move forward on those. 

 

And I think that our past record shows that working together in 

that collaborative way that we have made considerable 

progress. So rather than having a timetable, we work with the 

community and work on their priorities as they become 

identified. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This clause 

spells out the powers that you and the subsequent 

multiculturalism ministers have at your disposal to carry out the 

intent and to implement the provisions of the multiculturalism 

policy. 

 

Subclauses (a) and (b) are critical for wielding ministerial 

powers for the advancement of multiculturalism: 

 

(a) review provincial legislation, policies and programs to 

determine if they reflect the multiculturalism policy; (and) 

 

(b) monitor the efforts of departments, agencies and Crown 

corporations of the Government of Saskatchewan in 

performing their services and developing programs in 

accordance with the multiculturalism policy. 

 

The vigorous and sustained exercise of these ministerial powers 

is key to the successful implementation of this legislation. I 

invite the minister to tell us her plans, timetable and methods 

for exercising the powers granted her in subclauses (a) and (b) 

to review legislation and monitor department and agency effort 

in compliance with The Multiculturalism Act of 1997. And I 

also want to take this opportunity to thank the minister and her 

staff for her efforts and her answers. Thank you. 

 

  



April 23, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 

 

The Committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1645) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

The Chair:  I’ll begin by inviting the minister to introduce 

her officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you very much. To my left is 

Mr. Graham McNamee, who is the chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. And right behind him is 

Marilyn Turamich, who is the secretary to the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, welcome to your officials. 

 

Madam Minister, I believe every year the board identifies a list 

of priorities or goals to aim for. Could you maybe just give us a 

broad overview of what some of those goals are this coming 

year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the mission of the 

broad goals of this Municipal Board are to ensure financial 

credibility for local authorities, and ensure that appeals 

respecting planning assessment, fire prevention, municipal 

boundary and property maintenance are heard fairly. That’s in 

broad scope, Mr. Chairman, the mission. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, I think with the reassessment coming to light, and I’m 

sure you agree with me, the amount of appeals, the number of 

appeals . . . I guess we have no idea how many there’s going to 

be out there but I would suggest there’s going to be an awful 

lot. 

 

If a person, say, for an RM (rural municipality) for an example, 

a taxpayer, a ratepayer out there decides he’s going to appeal 

his assessment and goes before the local council and is turned 

down, so re-appeals and goes to the board of revision, what is 

the cost that will be charged that taxpayer at that point? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The answer to the question the 

member opposite has posed is that the fee to appeal to the 

provincial level, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, is $50 per 

hundred thousand of assessment to a maximum per appeal of 

$600. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay. So if I understand that right then, I 

guess in a situation of a farmer for an example, if he appealed 

all his land — his land was valued at a million dollars for an 

example — the cost would be $500. Is that right? Am I 

following that right? Like it’s $50 per hundred thousand of 

every hundred thousand of assessment that he is appealing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  To a maximum of $600 per appeal. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  That’s new for this year? That seems to me 

to be awfully high all of a sudden for anybody to appeal. Was 

that in there last year? Was that the same . . . 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There has always been a fee to appeal 

and the fee is refundable upon a successful appeal. If the 

appellant does not succeed, obviously then that money is used 

to defray the costs of the system. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, maybe . . . and I touched 

on it before, the number of appeals and I’m sure your people 

must have . . . you must be trying to make some guess as to how 

many appeals you may have. I guess my question is, do you 

have any idea of the amount of appeals that will come in and 

are we going to be capable of handling the number of appeals 

that you feel that may come to the forefront? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  It’s difficult to anticipate, but the 

estimate is from 3 to 5,000 appeals are expected to be filed. In 

anticipation of that, one full-time and eight part-time members 

have been added to the panel of members to hear appeals, and 

two additional clerical staff have also been secured for the 

reassessment period. 

 

So there is . . . As a result of the lateness, if you like, because of 

the changeover and the difficulties that the municipalities are 

having obviously with meeting the deadlines, it’s likely that 

appeals will be coming in later in the year as well. 

 

So I think what is anticipated is right now the backlog, there is 

virtually no backlog, so the work is very current. And appeals 

won’t come in until a bit later than average. So I would really 

anticipate that about this time next year the workload of the 

municipal government, Municipal Board, will be fairly onerous 

because they may still be dealing with late appeals from this 

year and early appeals from next. But they’ve tried to plan 

ahead to anticipate that as best as possible and to add the staff   



1090  Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 1997 

so that appeals can be dealt with in a timely manner. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think I 

would say that I really feel for the people that are going to have 

to deal with these appeals this year because I think we all 

realize the situation we’re in with reassessment and a number of 

the problems that have come to the forefront. 

 

Madam Minister, how much money do you think . . . how much 

money do you plan to save with the passage of Bill No. 4 — 

The Municipal Board Amendment Act because of reducing the 

quorum number in order to hear appeals? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  In answer to the question, the intent of 

the changes to the legislation were not to save money but to 

make sure that there were members available to be empanelled 

so that appeals could be dealt with in a more timely way, and to 

reduce the amount of travel required for appellants. So the 

answer is we really don’t expect it to save any money. We just 

expect it to be more responsive. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, how many members do 

we have that can go out now and listen to appeals? How many 

people will there be that can maybe help speed the process up if 

the numbers are greater? But how many do we have at this 

present time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We have at the present time 16. And 

we did, as I said earlier, add a number of members in 

anticipation of a heavier workload. But the answer at this 

moment is 16. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I see, Madam 

Minister, that you have allowed the budget $508,000 for the 

Assessment Appeals Committee. Would that not have been a 

smart move to increase that funding this year being that the 

number of appeals are going to I believe sky-rocket. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t remember the 

exact amount of the increase but I do know that it was increased 

this year. We did increase the budget in anticipation of a 

somewhat increased workload, so there is more money there. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, do you have any idea how long would an average 

property owner have to wait in order to get a hearing on their 

assessment appeal? And maybe, how does that compare to a 

couple of years ago? If you can actually, I guess, answer that. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think the long-term 

average is within a six-month period and we hope to be able to 

maintain that through this more . . . likely more intense period 

of appeals. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Given the 

tremendous amount of confusion surrounding the reassessment 

process, have you set aside any contingency funding to help 

educate the public about the most recent changes? And I guess 

maybe what I’m thinking of there is the .84 factor and that. Has 

any money been put into showing people what it really amounts 

to? 

Because I think there’s a lot of misconceptions out there, where 

first the education tax shifted to the rural taxpayer, and then as 

you know now with the .84 factor, it’s back to the urban. I think 

in doing that we’ve caused more than just confusion; we’ve 

caused some very upset people out there. 

 

But I think possibly by explaining exactly what has been done 

here might help the situation. Has anything like that been 

looked at? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The activities that the member 

opposite mentions are not part of the mandate of the Municipal 

Board, so you wouldn’t expect to see those items in this budget 

or in these estimates. That would be a function that has been 

carried out by SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency) and the Department of Municipal Government jointly 

through their, for instance, workshops that they held throughout 

the province last fall in a number of various locations for 

administrators and councils. 

 

And councils are also encouraged — and many of them have 

made it a practice, even in other years — to hold local open 

houses during the time the assessment roll is open so that 

people can go in and get information, have their assessment 

notice clarified for their benefit prior to the deadline for making 

an appeal. In this way, a great many appeals and the cost of 

dealing with them in the system are avoided. So that’s not part 

of the budget though, or the mandate of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1063 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1063 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1063 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1064 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1064 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1064 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1064 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1065 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1065, 1066 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1066 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1066 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1082 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1086 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 NATO Flying Training Program Announced for Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

 NATO Flying Training Program 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

 Canada Book Day 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

 Salute to 15 Wing in Moose Jaw 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

 Secretaries’ Day 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

 Tribute to Lawrence “Jake” Alcrow 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1068 

 Development of the Survival Whistle 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1068 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Auto Insurance Rates 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1068 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1068 

 Rabbit Lake Health Centre 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1069 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1070 

 Child Prostitution 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1070 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

 Aboriginal Taxation 



 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

 Hunting Licence Fees 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

 Housing in the North 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1072 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1072 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 228 — The Saskatchewan Big Game Damage Compensation Fee Act 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1073 

MOTIONS 

 Referral of Estimates to Standing Committee on Estimates 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1073 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and Technicians Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1073 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1074 

 Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1074 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1075 

 Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1077 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 25  The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1079 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1079 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1081 

 Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1082 

  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................... 1082, 1085, 1088 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1083 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1086 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 25 — The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

 Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Municipal Board Vote 22 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1089 

 

 


