



















































Hansard: March 27, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 487 

 March 27, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

and I’ll just quickly read the prayer for you: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to order increased efforts and 

enforcement and to pressure the federal government to 

amend the Young Offenders Act to reflect principles of 

restitution, stricter sentencing, and public identification of 

offenders. 

 

I’m pleased to present this petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people primarily from the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of people throughout the province 

who are concerned about the detrimental effects on our society 

due to the government’s gambling policy. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Lloydminster, Muenster, 

mostly from Muenster on these petitions, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 

today some petitions regarding big game damage in the 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, shrubs 

and trees, which are being destroyed by the overpopulation 

of deer and other big game, including elimination of the 

$500 deductible; and to take control measures to prevent 

the overpopulation of deer and other big game from 

causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from the Kincaid, Mankota, and Hazenmore areas of the Wood 

River constituency. I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens with respect to the government’s gambling 

policies. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province, and the people 

who live here. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on the petition are from St. Gregor, Humboldt, 

and Cudworth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

change the big game damage compensation program to 

provide reasonable compensation. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Justice: what is the total cost of the 

operational review of the public prosecutions’ division of 

Saskatchewan Justice submitted by Peter Martin and Earl 

Wilson of Calgary 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill, the integrity 

of members of the Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my distinct pleasure to welcome to the Assembly today 6 

students who are in your gallery, accompanied by their teacher, 

Warren Gervais. These are people from SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology); they’re from the 

adult basic education class. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I may say in passing that this is the last day before 

a long weekend. Fridays are often fairly lively, never more so 

than before a long weekend. It is perhaps appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, that the only school group we’ve got with us today are 

adults to witness our proceedings. 

 

I’d ask all members to . . . 



488  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Easter Greetings 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today begins 

the final weekend of the Easter season, the most significant 

religious observance for Christians. Today is Holy Thursday, 

the day on which the commandment to love our neighbour was 

given, and tomorrow is Good Friday, and of course Sunday is 

Easter. 

 

A Legislative Assembly, I know is not the place to promote a 

particular creed, but as we prepare to take a break, to spend time 

with our families, friends, and constituents it is not out of place 

to reflect for a moment on what the season represents to all of 

us. 

 

Most importantly, Easter is the Christian expression of gratitude 

for the end of a season of adversity, to be followed by the 

season of rebirth and new beginnings. Spring follows winter 

just as in the Christian tradition life follows death. Easter week 

begins with betrayal, suffering, and death, and closes with 

renewal and rejoicing — a fitting observance of the cycle of life 

in the natural world and in our lives. Optimism out of 

pessimism, joy out of sorrow, good out of evil, and life out of 

death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we should throughout the year, we pray for 

peace among the nations, for goodwill to all people, for respect 

for the less fortunate, for seed to the sower and bread to the 

eater. And I know that all members will join with me in wishing 

everyone today, a happy Easter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teenage Inventor 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to congratulate a young inventor from the Humboldt area, 

Andrew Benning. Andrew is a 16-year-old grade 11 industrial 

arts student. As a project for his industrial arts class he invented 

a bale-moving gadget. 

 

While many people have welded together various contraptions 

to move these huge wads of hay, few, if any, 16-year-olds have 

achieved this sort of accomplishment. 

 

Andrew’s design consists of a pair of iron teeth operated by a 

hydraulic cylinder, which when closed firmly, secure the bale. 

The three-point hitch then raises the bale off the ground. And 

because the two teeth grip the bale in the centre, unrolling the 

bales for feed and bedding for the Benning’s 175 head of cattle 

is no longer a back-breaking problem. They just take the twines 

off and set the bale down and drive ahead. It works very slick, 

and the estimated cost to make it was approximately $200. 

 

Congratulations, Andrew, on your invention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Northwest Health District Accreditation 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The health care 

system of this province is one of the finest in the world. The 

people of Saskatchewan have worked hard to maintain the 

system as a world leader in providing universal health care. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring special attention to one 

health district in particular. The Northwest Health District lies 

within my constituency of Meadow Lake. Earlier this month the 

Canadian Council on Health Services Accreditation awarded 

the Northwest Health District the highest possible accreditation 

ranking. The ranking, Mr. Speaker, reflects the evaluation of the 

quality of care and the continuous improvement of that care to 

patients. 

 

The significance of this award, Mr. Speaker, is multiplied when 

one recognizes that the health district was one of only five or 

six other health districts throughout Canada that received this 

accreditation. This is a tremendous achievement for the staff, 

management, physicians, and board members of the Northwest 

Health District. 

 

Has health care changed? Yes. Have we adapted to those 

changes? Yes. Will we continue to adapt in order to provide 

Saskatchewan residents with the best health care system 

anywhere? The answer again, Mr. Speaker, is yes. 

 

I want to ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the achievement of the Northwest Health District 

in continued efforts to provide residents with high quality health 

care. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Regional Drama Festival Participants 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anyone who has 

participated in a drama production knows it requires a 

phenomenal amount of preparation and hard work to produce a 

successful production. The community of Wadena recently was 

able to enjoy the results of this hard work and preparation by 

seven schools who performed ten productions at the 

Saskatchewan Drama Association regional festival in Wadena. 

 

The festival entries from Wadena Composite, Invermay High 

School, Wynyard Composite High School, Yorkton Regional 

High, Sturgis Composite School, and Kamsack Comprehensive 

School, and Sacred Heart School were assessed and critiqued. 

Sacred Heart School won the competition and will represent the 

region at the provincial drama festival in Swift Current with 

their production of Life After Hockey. 

 

It gives me great pleasure to recognize the award winners from 

Wadena. Ryan Jesmer and Amy Gutek, acting award of merit; 

Alayne Lennox and Cameron Tweidt, light and sound design; 

and Paul Kulyk and Kyall Glennie, achievement in acting 

awards. 

 

Congratulations, staff and students of Wadena Composite for 

hosting this successful event; to the award winners;  



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

participating students from seven communities for your hard 

work in producing these productions. And good luck, Sacred 

Heart School, as you participate in the provincial drama 

festival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Kentucky Fried Chicken Outlet 

Wins National Recognition 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One thing on which 

all members of this Assembly on both sides can agree is that an 

important engine of our economy is small business. Small 

business throughout the province supplies a large number of 

jobs. And we can agree that small businesses survive and 

prosper because of their hustle and their ability to meet the 

needs of the consuming public. Those that don’t, don’t survive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a small business in Weyburn has just had 

this ability recognized on a national level, and I am happy to 

extend that recognition to members of this Assembly. 

 

The Weyburn KFC (Kentucky Fried Chicken) outlet has just 

been named the number one Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet in 

Canada. Out of 800 outlets, the one in my constituency was 

named the best. 

 

Great Saskatchewan service teamed with Saskatchewan quality 

chicken has made another Saskatchewan success story. 

 

I am happy for Larry Seimens, Christine Erickson, and Glenn 

Lucas, and for their staff, all of whom won, as the award says, 

for service, selection, and satisfaction. 

 

I congratulate them and invite all members, especially the 

Premier who is a fine connoisseur of KFC, down to Weyburn 

for a good meal served well. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bridgepoint Centre for Eating Disorders at Milden 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, there are many people 

throughout this province who must deal with personal 

problems. We hear regularly about problems such as alcoholism 

and drug addiction. Treatment centres and focus groups have 

been established throughout the province to provide the 

necessary help that will enable people to overcome these 

personal problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to bring the Assembly’s 

attention to a centre that offers help and treatment to individuals 

attempting to deal with eating disorders. The Bridgepoint 

Centre for Eating Disorders, located in the community of 

Milden, is the first of its kind in Canada. In operation since the 

fall of 1995, Bridgepoint offers counselling, weekend retreats, 

and crisis management to sufferers of eating disorders. These 

disorders are many and varied, ranging from bulimia to 

anorexia nervosa. 

 

Raising the awareness of eating disorders, Mr. Speaker, and  

increasing the amount of support services available to the 

public, like Bridgepoint has done, will go a long way to helping 

the many people who are suffering from an eating disorder. 

 

I think today it is appropriate for all members of this Assembly 

to congratulate the achievements of the Milden community. 

They are demonstrating what rural communities in 

Saskatchewan are capable of accomplishing. They are providing 

a much-needed and often unrecognized service to the residents 

of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Congratulations to the Regina Pats 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate the Regina Pats on really what has been a terrific 

season. Not the finest end that one would wish for, but a terrific, 

terrific season. 

 

They went through this year with a record of 42 wins, 27 losses, 

and 3 ties. In the process, and this is important for Reginans and 

people in the area, they entertained more than 150,000 people. 

That’s up more than 33,000 from their previous record 

attendance. 

 

So the Regina Pats have really, really put a good product on ice. 

Unfortunately they cooled off at exactly the wrong time. When 

the weather was warming up and it should be play-off time, 

they cooled off, went into a slump, and our hearts I’m sure go 

out to them for that after such a terrific season. 

 

Unfortunately, last night the Red Deer Rebels ended the Regina 

Pats’ season. But as the Melville Advance says in a power of 

positive thinking editorial: 

 

. . . there have been setbacks. And it’s the set-backs we 

hear most about. But good things are happening. There’s 

no denying the power of positive thinking. 

 

And we do have reason to be positive. 

 

The Regina Pats have got a very good base to build on next year 

and I wish them all of the very best. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Spring has Arrived 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been a very 

long, windy and snowy and cold winter. However, spring and 

the birth of new life has arrived. No matter how severe the 

winter is, the horned larks return in February. Similarly, 

regardless of the amount of snow cover and cold temperatures, 

crows and Canada geese arrive in March. 

 

Bird migration is triggered by the length of daylight hours. 

Availability of food is also a factor determining migration. The 

spring migration will continue into early June, and surprisingly 

the fall migration is under way by late June. 

 

Hibernating animals such as Richardson’s ground squirrels have 

emerged from their burrows. Within a couple of weeks,  



490  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

frogs will awaken in the fine mud at the bottom of sloughs and 

ponds. Crocus buds appear as soon as the soil warms and can 

already be found on south-facing prairie hillsides. 

 

Spring is indeed a time for renewal of life — for all of life — 

birds, mammals, amphibians, and plants. Spring is a time of 

courtship, nesting, raising of young, and flowers. As an 

example, great horned owls have been sitting on eggs for two 

weeks already. 

 

Spring is also a time when people spring into action. At the 

earliest opportunity, people shed their heavy winter clothes, 

drain water off their property, wash their cars, rake and clean up 

the yards, light up the barbecue, and bask in the sun. 

 

Unfortunately, winter is always hard to get rid of and 

undoubtedly we will awake to a white landscape at least once or 

twice in April or May. We can be assured, Mr. Speaker, spring 

will win out over winter and we can look forward to green 

grass, shady trees, and sunny skies. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Fire Prevention Levies 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 

opposition has urged this government on more than one 

occasion to consider exempting fire-fighting equipment from 

the provincial sales tax. Our calls came after the Naicam fire 

department indicated that the additional PST (provincial sales 

tax) cost hinders the community’s ability to purchase essential 

equipment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of where the government would find the 

finances for this purpose, they may wish to examine the fact 

that all fire insurance contracts in Saskatchewan are subject to a 

1 per cent levy to pay for fire prevention services and fire 

suppression. At present this tax raises some $2.1 million, and of 

this amount 1.3 goes directly into general revenues. 

 

Will the minister explain why this government is not directing 

all of these funds into fire prevention-related services as they 

are supposed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, first of all I’ll leave 

aside for the moment the sometimes repeated case by the 

Liberals and the Conservatives that there should be dedicated 

tax spent exclusively for dedicated purposes. That I think is an 

argument which needs to be threshed out during estimates. And 

generally speaking, all of the money ends up going to the 

general coffers. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, more fundamentally to the 

question put by the hon. member. This House and the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan are absolutely and rightly 

confused about where the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan stands 

on the question of taxation. 

Because the member gets up today and says that she has asked 

for what? — a further narrowing of those tax items which are 

subject to the PST by excluding fire-fighting equipment, and we 

pay tribute to the volunteers and all those people who do a 

wonderful job in fire-fighting. Narrowing the tax base, that’s 

what she says, the PST. 

 

What does her leader say? Her leader says on November 26 — I 

have the copy right here — “Grit wants tax harmonization.” 

Quote: “Saskatchewan should follow the Atlantic provinces and 

harmonize its sales tax to the federal GST, says Liberal . . .” 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the Premier has 

given us another sermon, but what I really want to know is, for 

the people of this province, why can’t we use the money that 

has actually been dedicated to fire prevention? 

 

We’ve got communities out there who are working very, very 

hard. We have volunteers that are putting a lot of time and 

effort into making sure that we will actually have some fire 

prevention in our area. This isn’t something for rural 

Saskatchewan or urban; it’s for everybody. It can help the 

whole province. Our recent surveys that we’ve did found out 

that there’s about $200,000 is all it would cost if you would 

actually put the money back, if they wouldn’t have to pay that 

tax. 

 

Would you please tell us why you won’t make this exemption 

for fire-fighting equipment in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  You know, you tell the legislature and 

you tell the fire-fighters why it is that the Liberal leader of the 

provincial government wants tax harmonization. Tell us, is your 

position tax harmonization? You must tell the people of 

Saskatchewan whether you’re for tax harmonization, because if 

you’re for tax harmonization you are not going to exclude the 

fire-fighters, you’re going to expand the fire-fighters. You’re 

going to have the repairs. You’re going to have the other 

aspects of the fire-fighters included in the taxation. You want 

harmonization. That’s the Liberal position. 

 

Don’t get up and grandstand, when you have people in the 

legislature saying you want the lower tax base for the PST when 

your official position is to expand it. And in the Atlantic 

provinces when you’ve expanded it, you have doubled the PST 

everywhere. That’s your position, not our position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Establishment of Youth Justice Committee 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, since 1984 there has been 

provision in the Young Offenders Act for the Minister of 

Justice to establish a youth justice committee in this province. 

Now of course the last few weeks the Liberal opposition has  



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

been pressing for the appointment of a youth justice task force, 

a suggestion which last week in the legislature the Premier 

ridiculed. 

 

I was disappointed that the Premier had taken that position on it 

and then I was very surprised and delighted to see that on the 

order paper there is now in fact a suggestion for the 

government, for the minister, to proceed with a youth justice 

committee. 

 

And I wish to ask the minister if we are going to get a youth 

justice committee and if this is a response to agitation from the 

city of Regina and the Liberal opposition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not sure what the member is referring 

to. If it’s a reference to the legislation in this session then I 

think perhaps I should basically say that it’s to deal with some 

of the questions that the Department of Social Services has in 

administering the Young Offenders Act. And I’m not sure if 

you have more questions but that’s practically what it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is in reference to Bill 34 

which is providing for the establishment of youth justice 

committees. And I just want to get this straight. As members 

opposite have been gracious enough to point out, I’m 

sometimes a little slow. But I want to make clear, is the 

decision to move on a youth justice committee now a mere 

coincidence, a random occurrence, that has nothing to do with 

the problems in the city of Regina and the petitions introduced 

in the legislature by my learned friend for the constituency of 

Melville? Or is this a response to our position in the legislature 

which was ridiculed by the Premier last week? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

member that we will have ample, ample opportunity in 

discussion of the legislation outside of question period to 

discuss what is in the legislation. 

 

I will remind the member what is in the legislation. The 

legislation which is now proposed before the House would 

protect those citizens of our province who today are serving on 

youth justice committees in their communities — already 

existing. 

 

The legislation will protect those individuals from any liability 

that may accrue against them as a result of serving in their 

communities. 

 

The member from North Battleford should have a chat with the 

member from Wood River and learn of the great work that’s 

going on in the community of Shaunavon in this very regard 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Roads Funding 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, rural 

municipal councils have been dealt another blow. The 

government is axing the futures program. As a peace-offering 

the government is offering RMs (rural municipality) a one-time 

pay-out of $16 million. This, Mr. Speaker, is money owed to 

RMs for roads that have already been built. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this payment comes with strings attached as it eliminates the 

RMs from being able to go into futures. 

 

When the government came to power in ’91, Mr. Speaker, it cut 

the futures from four to two years. Now the government is 

cutting the two years out. How can the Minister of Municipal 

Government expect RMs to do road projects of more than 1 

kilometre unless they pick up 100 per cent of the cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for that question. RMs this year are getting, in addition 

to the future pay-out of $16.3 million, $4.4 million from the 

infrastructure program and 21 million from the Crow offset. A 

total of $40 million. 

 

And the futures program, Mr. Speaker, had a design flaw. There 

was no schedule, no schedule to pay the money back. And it 

was a liability that the province owed to municipalities. We’re 

honouring our commitment to pay back that money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the future, if there is another futures program, it will be 

designed in such as way that the time lines are finite and 

everybody understands from a financial point of view exactly 

where they are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister is definitely right. 

Everybody understands where they are — the RMs are left on 

their own with no government funding. Mr. Speaker, the 

government’s axe doesn’t stop with the future program, and to 

my amazement, and to the complete decimation of the rural 

road system, the minister has dropped the cost-sharing 

agreement for farm access programs, if I am understanding this 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has already slashed rural government 

funding by 50 per cent, and now the minister has even gone 

further and killed the farm access program. The government’s 

job creation performance is dismal to say the least, Mr. Speaker, 

and the latest action is just another nail in the economic coffin 

of rural Saskatchewan. Road construction will come to a 

complete standstill and road contractors won’t be hiring and 

engineering firms in small centres such as Yorkton will 

probably be forced to close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the Minister of Municipal Government 

even have the nerve to show her face in public when it’s 

obvious she has written off rural Saskatchewan? Will the 

minister please reconsider these drastic measures and give the  



492  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

people of rural Saskatchewan some hope that they will have 

rural roads to drive on in the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

members opposite should have a caucus meeting sometime and 

decide exactly what their position is. A few days ago they 

wanted more housing in rural Saskatchewan because there are 

people . . . there’s a shortage of housing. Now rural 

Saskatchewan is going to empty out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farm access . . . there’s still maintenance and 

re-gravelling for farm access roads. It is necessary, in this 

period of changes to the grain transportation system, to pay 

more attention to the main roads and not extend the network by 

further construction of farm access roads. 

 

The rural municipalities have exactly the same amount of 

money they’ve traditionally had, Mr. Speaker. There’s the same 

cost sharing. The only thing that’s changed is the flawed futures 

program that got hatched during the decade of the ’80s, and as 

most financial considerations in the 1980s, it was flawed. So 

it’s gone but the municipalities have their money in their 

pockets. 

 

I think the old saying, a bird in the hand is worth two in the 

bush, is just as true here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Free Votes 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, more and more voters 

are demanding that their MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and MPs (Member of Parliament) be allowed to vote 

on behalf of their constituents instead of being forced to toe the 

party line. 

 

Yesterday I introduced a private members’ Bill to allow more 

free votes in the legislature. Under the proposal a government 

could only be defeated under a specifically designated vote of 

non-confidence. Individual pieces of government legislation 

could be defeated without bringing down the government or 

forcing a early election. 

 

Mr. Premier, I was very pleased yesterday to hear the Health 

minister is considering our private members’ Bill calling for a 

health ombudsman. You have now had some time to look at our 

private members’ Bill, I would hope. Would you consider 

supporting the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, again at the 

appropriate time when the legislation comes up for debate in the 

House, all of us or some of us will have a response to the 

proposal put forward by the Conservatives, as opposed to 

question period. 

 

However since the question has been asked in question period, I 

would say that we need to liberate the role of all members of  

the Legislative Assembly to express on some matters their 

opinions based on their own personal beliefs and conscience, 

which may have no relevance to political ideology or mandate, 

political mandate, for election. 

 

I’m not sure that in the case of a budget, that that is one of those 

instances. The budget, the throne speech, several other 

documents, are very central to a government’s confidence and 

the government’s form of conducting business. And in the 

consequence that your idea that some form of a non-confidence 

motion would trump the vote on a budget and therefore 

back-benchers could vote however they would want to vote — 

although I confidently predict that almost all of this House will 

or should vote yes for this budget today — I don’t think that in 

the case of the budget, this is a case that free votes are involved. 

 

We’re studying it; we’ll give you a response at an appropriate 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Public Prosecutions Review 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

certainly grateful and we thank the Premier for the fact that we 

will have an opportunity to debate this piece of legislation in the 

not-too-distant future. 

 

But I have another question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

we have another example of this government’s inability to meet 

deadlines. When the Martin review on public prosecutions was 

first announced over a year ago the minister said it was 

expected to take about six months. On March 11 in this House 

the Justice minister promised that the Martin report would be 

released within two weeks. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we learn of another deadline extension. 

The minister is now saying April 7. Mr. Minister, what is the 

hold-up? Is the Justice department in even a bigger mess than 

you expected? Or is there something in the report that you want 

to hide? What is it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that 

question. You will be receiving a copy. All members of the 

legislature will be receiving a copy of the full report on April 7. 

And I would ask you to review it carefully and give your 

comments to me. We are also at the same time releasing a 

response to a number of the . . . well to all of the 

recommendations, which will allow for further discussion at 

that point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Minister. Mr. Minister, at that time will you as well let us know 

what this cost has . . . the cost that this report is to the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan? We were told that it was expected to be 

around $100,000. We’re now informed that it’s going to be 

much higher. Will you also include the figures of the cost of the 

report when you release the report, please? 

 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We’ll plan to release the costs of the 

report when we know what they are. At this stage we don’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canadian Wheat Board Contracts 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, I’m sure you are 

familiar with the Warburtons contract. Canadian Wheat Board 

has cooked up a special deal with some select Manitoba Wheat 

Pool members to sell wheat at a $30 per tonne premium over 

and above what other farmers get. The wheat is then sold to the 

Warburtons Mill Company in Britain. This is a sweetheart deal 

for the Manitoba Pool. No Saskatchewan farmers can 

participate. It’s unfair and it’s discriminatory. It may even be in 

violation of the Canadian Wheat Board Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing about the Warburtons 

contract? Have you contacted Ralph Goodale to complain about 

this sweetheart deal for the Manitoba Wheat Pool? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, you know what this is of 

course, is a continued attack on the Canadian Wheat Board and 

I think the hon. member’s leader might do what the leader in 

Alberta did. When they so badly lost he had to remove his 

minister of Agriculture . . . (inaudible) . . . to save him some 

embarrassment because he was such a strong supporter and 

confident the board was going to win. So now that he’s moved 

out maybe his leader would want to move him out to save him 

some embarrassment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board trades grain around the 

world in a manner that gives Saskatchewan farmers a bonus, a 

premium of over $300 million annually. And I just ask the 

member again and again and again: please, why do you want to 

continue your attack on the Canadian Wheat Board and remove 

that $300 million from farmers’ pockets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear from 

the minister’s answer he has absolutely no idea what he’s 

talking about. Why is that minister defending the Canadian 

Wheat Board and not Saskatchewan farmers? Because this is a 

perfect example of the Wheat Board’s double standard. If a 

farmer went out and negotiated a contract like this on his own, 

people like you and Ralph Goodale would throw him in jail. 

But when the Canadian Wheat Board cooks up a sweetheart 

deal that benefits only some farmers, that’s perfectly okay with 

the minister. And worst of all, we have no idea how many other 

such sweetheart deals the Wheat Board has cooked up because 

the Wheat Board is exempted from freedom of information. 

 

Mr. Minister, why the double standard? Where’s the pooling 

you and Ralph Goodale are always crowing about? Why aren’t 

you demanding that Saskatchewan farmers be given a chance to 

sell their wheat under the Warburtons contract? Or better yet, 

why aren’t you demanding that farmers be allowed to negotiate 

premium deals like this on their own under a dual-marketing 

system which a recent study for the Department of Agriculture  

says the Wheat Board will flourish? 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I guess we heard the point, 

as I said earlier — dual market. Dual marketing means the end 

of the Wheat Board — another blow at the Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, think of it this way: why would this opposition 

caucus promote the destruction, dismantling, of a trading bloc, 

when all over the world we are seeing larger and larger trading 

blocs formed for power purposes, for the benefited amount. 

And what these people want to do is Balkanize western Canada, 

take away the premium prices that farmers get, and they’ll do it 

any way they can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I ask the member to answer this 

question: why do you want to take over $300 million away from 

farmers in western Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway Maintenance 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 

today, Mr. Speaker, is for the Minister of Highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, each and every day I receive letters 

about Saskatchewan highways, and calls on our 1 800 621 

Bump Line, and each and every day the calls are shocking and 

dramatic. One of the calls was from Mr. Bob Joyce of Dodsland 

who phoned me and asked that I raise with you the poor 

conditions of Highway No. 3 north-west of Rosetown heading 

to Dodsland. He states that this highway is impassable, that the 

province could stock fish in these potholes, and that truckers 

actually charge more money to haul over this highway. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you give Mr. Bob Joyce your assurance today 

that you will have your Department of Highways repair this 

highway today, or immediately install enough warning flags for 

each and every one of those large potholes that you refuse to 

repair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell 

the member opposite that . . . I think he was here when our 

Finance minister gave the budget address, when she stated very 

clearly that we’re going to spend another $30 million this year 

on highway construction — up 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over 

last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the 

Finance minister said that we are committing $2.5 billion to 

roads in the province, in Saskatchewan, over the next 10 years. 

 

But I wanted to tell the member opposite that this a good 

opportunity to give my little road report again because flooding 

is still occurring in the south-west part of the province. And I  



494  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

get this updated each day, Mr. Speaker, from the department 

officials, so I want to make a few statements here. 

 

No. 2, 9 kilometres south of Bushell Park — water on road, 

reduced speed required. No. 8, 24 kilometres north of Kamsack 

to 15 kilometres south of Pelly — water on the road. No. 13, 16 

kilometres west of Aneroid to 17 kilometres east of Cadillac — 

local detour, road closed, bridge out, reduce . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister’s response is exactly what the people are saying — the 

highways are in horrible condition. Just don’t agree with them 

— fix them. 

 

Mr. Minister, another caller to the pothole patrol hot line comes 

from Judy Sawchuk of Fort Qu’Appelle. Judy says that the 

60-mile stretch of Highway No. 52 from Willowbrook to Ituna 

is so bad that she won’t drive her car on it. In fact there are so 

many potholes on this highway that vehicles must drive on the 

wrong side of the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now all hon. 

members will recognize that although the hon. member for 

Wood River is located close to the Speaker, the Speaker is 

having difficulty being able to hear him put his question, in 

spite of comments from all caucuses in the House, and I would 

ask all hon. members to come to order and to allow the hon. 

member for Wood River to put his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In fact Judy says 

there are so many potholes on this highway that the vehicles 

must drive on the wrong side of the road and face the threat of 

oncoming traffic. 

 

Mr. Minister, Judy Sawchuk asks that you please fix these 

potholes before someone gets hurt. And please, Mr. Minister, 

please get more warning flags up to warn the people of the 

danger. 

 

Will you do this today, Mr. Minister, before people coming 

home for the holidays risk their lives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for his 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was reading a little article in The Estevan Mercury the other 

day and it says here — and this is a quote from a Mr. Glen 

McPherson, MLA Wood River constituency, opposition 

Highway critic . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the hon. member 

knows that he is not to use proper names of members in the 

House, and it didn’t sound to me as though it was a quote that 

he was giving when he was using it. I simply caution him on 

that point and ask him to . . . Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The article  

states very clearly, and I quote: 

 

Once the fiscal situation our federal government has faced 

is brought under control the way it has been done here in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:   

 

. . . then that level of government should direct a large 

portion of tax collected to where it is intended — the 

highway infrastructure. 

 

Very interesting comment. I mean one story in the Estevan 

paper but another story in the legislature, and often we hear 

that. 

 

But I want to tell the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the 

reason I give the highway report here, because it’s an Easter 

weekend. People should have caution when they’re driving, 

especially in the south-west. I would recommend that anybody 

driving over this weekend, they should get a hold of the 

Highways’ road information line at 787-4986. We want to warn 

them because there is some difficulties every time there is a 

flood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you’re still just 

making my point. All levels of government that collect fuel 

taxes for the highway system should put those dollars into the 

highway system. But thank you for helping out with the point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the safety of our school children that 

spend hours on school buses and the safety of the sick and 

elderly that now travel much further for their health care needs 

should be paramount to you and your government. However the 

people of Saskatchewan do not feel safe on our highways. 

 

As Doug Hennifer stated when he phoned the pothole patrol hot 

line, and I quote: 

 

Somebody is going to get killed on that stretch of Highway 

No. 48 between Kipling and Highway No. 9. 

 

And there are miles of Highway No. 35 north of Cedoux, that is 

like a goat trail and a danger to people needing to drive this 

highway. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you give your assurance in this House today 

that these stretches of highways will receive your department’s 

immediate attention so that no one needlessly has to die in 

traffic accidents this Easter weekend.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that 

question. I want to remind the member one more time — I hope 

he will remember that this government is putting an extra $30 

million into road construction this year, $2.5 billion over the 

next 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

And what does the federal government do? The Liberals in 

Ottawa, what are they doing? We’ve asked them to help us with 

a national highways program. They say no, Mr. Speaker. The 

federal government in this country put 6 per cent into highway 

construction, the lowest of all the industrialized countries in the 

world, Mr. Speaker. And they support the federal Liberals and 

argue about a government that puts $2.5 billion into highway 

construction. I don’t understand it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, I respectfully 

request that questions 28, 29, 30, and 31 be converted to notices 

of motion for return (debatable). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  And items 1, 2, 3, and 4 are converted to 

motions for return (debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 

rise in this Assembly and respond to the budget. Mr. Speaker, 

contrary to what some members across the floor might expect, I 

have no intention of making this budget into what it is not. 

There are some good things in this budget, and in fairness to 

people of Saskatchewan I’m not going to pretend that I 

disapprove of them. 

 

On budget day, for example, I had invited a constituent who 

operates a dairy farm, and he’s just now preparing to construct a 

new dairy barn. And earlier this year when I had learned the 

Premier was suggesting extending the input tax credit for PST 

paid for inputs to build hog barns, I was a bit concerned. I’d 

informed this particular constituent and I’d invited him here to 

see whether this credit would be fairly extended to inputs 

involved in the construction of dairy barns as well. Well we 

were both pleased to learn this credit would be fairly extended 

to dairy as well as hog barns and also the construction of 

horticultural facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also be remiss if I didn’t mention that I’m pleased with the 

cut to the provincial sales tax. In our election campaign we also 

proposed cutting the PST, and I believe the members opposite 

made the right decision by cutting this tax. While the cut to the  

PST is a laudable initiative and may temporarily ease the public 

clamour for further reductions in this tax, I’d like to take an 

opportunity to remind the members opposite about one of their 

past positions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might be thinking I’m 

going to twist the facts. Well I assure you that this isn’t the 

case. But it’s only appropriate to remind the members opposite 

of their earlier commitments in an effort to encourage them to 

act fairly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my expectation that the Premier will be 

speaking soon after I’m done here today, and I direct this 

reminder at the members opposite, but most particularly at the 

Premier. 

 

In January of 1991 the New Democratic Party caucus released a 

paper entitled Tax Fairness for the 1990s. It was their way of 

addressing what they believed was going to be a hot issue in the 

1991 election. 

 

On page 3 of that document, the New Democratic members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, stated: 

 

A graduated income tax is the most progressive. A constant 

or flat income tax rate is the least progressive since it does 

not take into account the relative difference in ability to 

pay. That’s not fair. That’s regressive. Tax fairness based 

on the ability to pay — that’s progressive. The PC flat tax 

— that’s regressive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this paper went on to note that large 

families, the elderly, and those with high medical expenses 

were hardest hit by this flat tax. 

 

Well for the benefit of members opposite and the Minister of 

Finance and particularly the Premier, I’d like them to reflect on 

their party’s comments on the issue of the flat tax. Right now, 

Mr. Speaker, this flat tax, which as they admit penalizes the 

poor, is set at 2 per cent of individual income. Few people in 

this province get any relief from this burdensome and unfair 

tax. 

 

If the members opposite want to do something positive for the 

people of Saskatchewan, quit penalizing the poor, the sick, and 

the elderly. Get rid of this tax. Remain committed to what you 

said you would be committed to do. 

 

Obviously the Premier, the Minister of Finance, and all the 

members of the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus deserve 

to be reminded of what they said on page 20 of their Tax 

Fairness for the 1990’s. On that page they said they were 

committed to that, and I quote, “The tax system must be 

progressive and it has to be based on the ability to pay.” 

 

Well make good on that commitment and get rid of this unfair 

tax and ensure that our tax system is indeed based on ability to 

pay. 

 

I remind the Premier, commitments aren’t just something that 

you make before elections; they’re things you keep after  



496  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

elections. Two votes have passed. The 1990s are almost over. 

So please, for the sake of integrity, make good on this promise 

to ensure we have fair taxes, not PC (Progressive Conservative) 

flat taxes, in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment on some of 

the concerns which the budget measures presented by the 

government have on the Thunder Creek constituency. Before I 

do though, I’d like to make a few comments with respect to the 

member from Regina South. 

 

There’s been some debate in this House as to whether . . . as to 

the abilities of this member. And young as he is, albeit, but 

what’s important here is that he’s gained the confidence of his 

constituents in an electoral race against another member of his 

community, Mr. Ross Keith. And as the Premier will know, the 

voters are always right. And I assure the member from Regina 

South that he has my full respect as a member of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s encouraging to see younger people run for 

elected office. And while the member is not a Liberal, his work 

as a back-bencher has been worthwhile. Last year, for example, 

while on the Public Accounts Committee, the member voted 

with members from this side to ask that a commission be 

formed to investigate unfunded pension liabilities and other 

pension matters. He voted this way despite the opposition of his 

more senior colleagues, such as the Minister of Finance. 

 

The member from Regina South deserves our respect and I 

hope he’ll continue to work hard during his term in this 

Assembly and remain open to suggestions from the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  In respect to the Thunder Creek constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are pleased with some aspects of 

the budget, but they remain concerned about or opposed to 

others. My constituents are cautiously optimistic about 

increases in spending to health and education, Mr. Speaker. 

They are cautious about promised increased spending to health 

because our region of the province suffered heavily over the last 

few years. 

 

Thunder Creek rests in a part of south-west Saskatchewan 

which is sparsely populated. Many towns in fact have outright 

disappeared. I can think of Kelstern as an example, Mr. 

Speaker. It once had over 600 people, but the last of the 

residents of that town moved out a few years ago and if you 

drive by that site now you’d never know that it was once a 

bustling community. 

 

My point in providing the members with an example like that is 

that the communities which remain in this area can ill afford to 

lose any more infrastructure in the form of schools, hospitals, 

and government offices and services. If we want to maintain 

healthy communities, our governments must remain committed 

to not destroying core services which will result in the 

destruction of trade patterns towards small, rural centres. 

 

Over the past five years of cutting, communities like Vanguard, 

Gravelbourg, and Bateman have lost many services. While the 

government promises to put additional money into health care, 

we know it can’t reverse the damage that’s already been done. 

 

With factors like inflation, my constituents wonder whether the 

modest additional monies that will be provided will be enough 

to cover rising salary, utility, equipment, and input costs. They 

also wonder whether new rounds of cutting will be necessary if 

the proposed increases in the budget are not enough to cover 

inflationary costs. 

 

Only time and future budgets will prove whether health care 

will be adequately funded so as not to deteriorate further in the 

future. It’s my sincere hope that the members opposite will 

provide the monies needed to ensure that health budgets keep 

up with inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another health-related concern in my constituency, 

also relates to this budget, is a concern about retaining doctors. 

There’s a particularly great concern in the South Country 

District about retaining physicians, and in the Moose 

Jaw-Thunder Creek Health District the concern also exists but it 

relates more to retaining a sufficient core of specialists within 

that community. 

 

Nevertheless I’m hopeful that the steps the government has 

proposed to deal with this difficulty will be adequate to provide 

my constituents with the health services that they require. The 

job of convincing people their proposals work, however, rests 

squarely on the government members opposite. 

 

One final concern about health care which the constituents of 

Thunder Creek continue to be affected by, regrettably — and it 

remains in the budget — and that is that the Department of 

Health continues to provide money to the health districts 

according the needs-based funding formula. If residents of a 

district travel to other districts to receive services, this 

government will eventually adjust that district’s funding to take 

that out-migration into account. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency for the most part is covered by a 

number of health districts which have a small population base. 

In addition, most have smaller facilities. Thanks to years of 

health cuts, many patients in Thunder Creek must now travel to 

Regina to get many of the services that they need. 

Out-migration is now just a part of the system. 

 

Under this government’s funding formula, this out-migration 

will result in the allocation of even fewer dollars to the smaller 

health districts which cover most of Thunder Creek. Even the 

city of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan’s fourth largest city, is 

affected, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of the Moose Jaw-Thunder 

Creek Health District, and because of it’s proximity to Regina, 

many residents of that city, and the district, travel to Regina. 

And it results in less revenue under this government’s formula. 

 

Many of my constituents depend on Moose Jaw for medical 

services and any cuts to that district, thanks to the government’s 

unfair funding formula, will continue to adversely affect my 

constituents. 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Mr. Speaker, if this government wants to turn the cautious 

optimism of my constituents into optimism on their handling of 

health care, then please address concerns like the unfair funding 

formula. Assure them that their services and facilities will 

continue to receive the funding that they require. 

 

My constituencies . . . or my constituents are also cautiously 

optimistic about what is coming for education. They hope 

school closures are over, and that divisions will have the 

revenues they require to attract teachers. At the post-secondary 

level they are hopeful that the announced increases will allow 

universities and other post-secondary institutions to delay these 

increases to tuition that might prevent other young people from 

attending. 

 

Just yesterday they learned that the funding levels in this 

government’s budget weren’t sufficient enough to help the U of 

R (University of Regina) avoid a six and a half per cent tuition 

hike. It’s for reasons like this, Mr. Speaker, that I can’t support 

this budget. 

 

(1100) 

 

On education, Mr. Speaker, I must also note another concern 

that I have. Recently we saw a tremendous outcry in Regina 

over suggestions that many schools might be closed and new 

ones constructed at a significant cost to the taxpayer. 

 

Well my constituents find it sadly amusing that they often lack 

the operating monies needed to provide a host of educational 

programs, including some sciences, while capital monies are 

used to build massive and impressive-looking structures in our 

two larger urban centres. Our investment should be in people 

rather than buildings. 

 

On the issue of highways, Mr. Speaker, I note that there’ll be 

increases in spending on our highways, as nominal as they may 

be. While my constituents might think it is a little better than 

nothing, they still think what is being proposed here is far too 

little to address the crumbling state of our highways. For this 

reason I also cannot support this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite know — and we heard 

from him again today — my colleague from Wood River 

launched the pothole patroller program. The idea behind this 

was to give people a forum to impress upon this government 

their great concern for not only their local highway, but for our 

whole highway system. 

 

One of my constituents wrote me and said that in travelling 

from Moose Jaw to Coderre the potholes were “too numerous to 

count.” Another travelling on Highway 19 counted some 120 

potholes over a 30-kilometre stretch of road. Another counted 

“lots” over a 25-kilometre stretch en route to Corrine, just to the 

east of my constituency. 

 

Another constituent wrote and told me there were hundreds of 

potholes between Gravelbourg and Swift Current, and the same 

between Gravelbourg and Moose Jaw. Still another describes 

the road between Herbert and Chaplin as “a real car buster.” 

Lastly, one constituent describes the road between Briercrest  

and Moose Jaw as “one continuous pothole,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oh yes, also I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention that that same 

constituent told me to keep up the good work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Until these potholes and these highways stop 

crumbling faster than they are repaired and rebuilt, Mr. Speaker, 

the constituents of Thunder Creek will remain sceptical about 

the government’s commitment to good highways. 

 

Two highways which are of a particular concern, Mr. Speaker, 

are Highways 339 and 334. These two highways link the cities 

of Moose Jaw and Regina on the Trans-Canada to the Claybank 

brick plant and Long Creek golf course, as well as other tourist 

attractions. 

 

I constantly hear the government members discussing just how 

committed they are to ensuring that our tourism industry 

continues to grow. They say they’re committed, but each year 

these two highways continue to crumble. If they sincerely want 

people to see these world-class attractions and others without 

the need of a 4 x 4, I suggest they show us some money and fix 

these two highways. 

 

I challenge any of the members opposite to take the time to 

travel towards Avonlea and Claybank. When they return, 

whether they would admit it publicly or not, I’m sure they 

would agree with my constituents that these highways need 

more attention. 

 

Well the member suggests they have no money. We know what 

they really have are choices. They can choose to engage in 

some silly activities. They can leave funds socked away in the 

Liquor and Gaming fund. They can waste money 

cross-subsidizing Crowns which have neither a social purpose 

or a chance of economic gain. But in the end the result is the 

same. 

 

They must choose what sort of priority our highways are going 

to have. While they fail to give this infrastructure the priority it 

deserves, each new hole in the asphalt represents another debt a 

future generation must bear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I admit there are positives in the budget, I 

remain deeply disappointed with the government’s decision to 

cut municipal grants. Governments, despite suggestions made 

by the Premier and some of the members opposite, local 

governments, are some of the most efficient of any government. 

Most local governments have been cutting for years, and there’s 

little room for further cuts. 

 

Many municipalities in my constituency are now facing 

considerable flooding problems. Some have taken flood 

prevention measures to avoid damages, and I question whether 

there will be enough money available to do these sorts of things 

in the future after these cuts. In addition, I question whether 

there will be enough money to fix the roads which might be 

washed out by the flooding. 



498  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, while I do not support cuts to local government in 

this budget, I believe I’ve been fair to this government. My 

constituents are pleased with some of the provisions of the 

budget. They’re cautiously optimistic about others. And they 

are most certainly opposed to provisions like cuts to their local 

governments. I’ve been fair with the budget put forward by the 

members opposite, and all that I would ask is that the members 

opposite would just show the same regard. 

 

Throughout this debate the members opposite, of the 

government caucus, have been calling on us to be more 

optimistic, to look to the future and help offer hope to 

Saskatchewan people. I agree with them, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Saskatchewan deserve a level of discourse in this 

House which is not focused on the negative. 

 

Regrettably, throughout the debate, Mr. Speaker, I heard the 

government members make some terribly negative remarks. If I 

were to search the legislative Internet site for a federal Liberal, 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’d get references to each speech offered 

by the members opposite. While the Premier has not spoken in 

this debate, I’m sure his remarks will be no different, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in each of those references I’m sure I would find 

negative remarks made by each and every member opposite 

about the Government of Canada. 

 

While the members suggest optimism and hope are the order of 

the day, they fail to rise to their own words when it comes to the 

federal Liberals, who now serve as the Government of Canada. 

I’m saddened by the remarks of the members opposite in this 

regard. 

 

While they insist that everyone be optimistic and hopeful about 

their record of office, they fail to extend the same courtesy to 

the federal government. While hope and optimism are 

important, I believe it’s more fitting to just be fair when 

considering the actions and policies of any particular 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the paper I read with some interest 

some comments made by the Parti Québécois Minister of 

Finance on the presentation of his budget. Well the separatists’ 

Finance minister blamed absolutely every ill on the federal 

government and the federal Liberals, Mr. Speaker. He not only 

blamed every single ill on them, but he did his best to twist 

other issues so as to paint the Canadian government in a poor 

light. Mr. Speaker, the separatists do this because they want 

Quebecers to believe that Canada and our federal system do not 

work. They do this for their own political gain. 

 

When I look across this floor, Mr. Speaker, and listen to the 

comments of the members on the government side, I’m 

ashamed for them. Each and every day in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly in this debate, they’ve attacked the federal 

government. They’ve used exactly the same despicable tactics 

and arguments that the separatists would use to prove that 

Canada doesn’t work — for their own political gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each and every member on that side has let their  

tremendous hatred for Liberals lead them to standing up in this 

House, slamming the federal government, the federal system, 

and Canada itself. What is sad about all of this is that they know 

governing a country as diverse as Canada is by no means easy. 

In fact it’s possible only when we as Canadians and we as 

legislators demonstrate those traditional Canadian values of 

compromise, patience, and understanding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  The members opposite know full well that 

Canada is a country whose future depends upon our ability to 

overcome regional, ethnic, linguistic, and even social divisions. 

In order for Canada to work, we as Canadians must defend our 

values of compromise, patience, and understanding. Mr. 

Speaker, this great country we so value hangs in that balance. 

 

Each day in this House during this debate, and many others, 

I’ve watched the members opposite attack and undermine each 

of these traditional Canadian values in what has become a 

shameful un-Canadian display. The members know full well, if 

this country is to succeed as it has for the last 130 years, they as 

legislators have a special responsibility to uphold those 

traditional Canadian values. Yet they attack them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Each day in this House we hear them attacking the federal 

government. In doing so, they show no sense of compromise, 

patience, or understanding. They sit there and they shamefully 

fan the flames of regionalism with no regard for the future of 

the country — no regard, Mr. Speaker, for the values which 

Canadians hold dear. 

 

The members opposite attack the feds on everything, regardless 

whether any of their criticisms have any sound, logical basis. 

They stand up and they argue that they’re defending programs 

like medicare, social welfare, and infrastructure spending, while 

they attack the very values that made these things possible. 

 

It’s our Canadian values of compromise, patience, and 

understanding that make health care and social programs 

possible. Those same values make equalization and cost-shared 

infrastructure programs possible. Without those values, Canada 

will not survive. Without Canada, these programs certainly 

would not survive. 

 

I find it shameful that the members opposite and the Premier 

carry on this way. The Premier, who can claim to have helped 

patriate our constitution, somehow forgets that he cannot 

undermine Canadian values on a daily basis just like the 

separatists, without undermining the country and the programs 

which are built on those values. 

 

Somehow between being defeated by a gas attendant turned 

hon. member, he’s forgotten what it is that drives this country. 

He knows full well that governing a country divided by 

regional, ethnic, linguistic, and social differences requires 

compromise, patience, and understanding. 

 

Exactly the things that he and his House Leader are having the 

members opposite undermine here on a daily basis in this 

debate. The Premier and his House Leader, Mr. Speaker, sadly  



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

have designed a strategy to attack Canadian values here in this 

House, and elsewhere in this province, on a daily basis. 

 

The Minister of Finance, who also undermines those same 

values on a daily basis, should know from her private career as 

a history professor, with background in Canadian-American 

relations, that governing such a diverse country is made more 

difficult when you live next to a superpower. 

 

Both the Premier and the Minister of Finance know better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask myself why these people consistently, in an 

un-Canadian fashion, undermine Canadian values. Why do they 

undermine the virtues of compromise, patience, and 

understanding in their daily attacks on the federal government? 

They do so for political gain. 

 

We all know this is a federal election year, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite, I imagine, continue to attack the federal 

government and undermine our treasured Canadian values 

because they want to elect a few more Democrats in Ottawa. 

They’re willing to do anything, even undermine what we hold 

dear, for personal gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might also add that their hatred for Liberals 

surely plays a part. I say to the members opposite and to the 

Premier, who as a first minister has a special responsibility to 

defend this country, do you want this to be your legacy? Do you 

want to continue these often senseless attacks and continue to 

undermine the values which this country was built on, or do you 

want to join us and give Canadians resident in this province the 

more optimistic and hopeful future that you promise? 

 

Just some short months ago, as the members well recall, 

Canadians went to the brink. Separatists came some 50,000 

votes from hurling Canada into social, economic, and political 

turmoil. In the aftermath of this scenario, we see the 

Government of Quebec commit itself to holding yet another 

referendum. 

 

This country has enough things tearing it apart and we all 

accept that the federal government must continue to move 

toward getting our national affairs in order. The Premier and the 

members understand it’s not possible to get these affairs in 

order without compromise, patience, and understanding from 

Canadians, particularly provincial governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite appeal to these same values 

to get support for their attack on the deficit, but they’re not 

willing to reciprocate the favour in this, our country’s hour of 

need. Worse yet, these members know full well that every 

Canadian, including every resident of this province, will benefit 

tremendously from ridding the federal deficit and putting to rest 

many of our national problems. Instead of offering compromise, 

patience, and understanding, these members are willing to 

recklessly fan the flames of regionalism for the benefit of the 

New Democratic Party and jeopardize Canada’s future. 

 

Is that optimism, Mr. Speaker? Is that hope? I think not. 

 

Surely we all admit some mistakes are made at the federal level. 

Those mistakes are hopefully honest mistakes, but they’re no 

worse than some of the silliness that goes on here. If the 

government members need reminding, need I point to a few of 

the numerous examples: the Jack Messer, the Carole Bryant 

raises; patronage jobs, hotel rooms at the Drake in New York. 

While Sheila Copps gives away flags to erect on buildings, this 

government gives away erect wooden penises. The list goes on 

and it’s silliness at either level. All governments err and do 

things that we disagree with. The important factor is how one 

chooses, how one chooses to criticize. 

 

(1115) 

 

Canada can be compared to a maple leaf. Each lobe on the leaf 

represents a part of this diversity we know as Canada. The 

shameful things I’ve seen in this debate is that the members 

opposite have chosen to attack in such a way as to eat away at 

the very peduncle or stock of that leaf. If the leaf falls to the 

ground, every lobe on the leaf will perish with it. Clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, their personal political gain comes before any concern 

for Canada as a whole. 

 

All members of this House will admit that many of the things 

we value would not be possible without Canada. This country 

has prospered and created a just and tolerant society. We are the 

envy of the world. Yet the members opposite continue to treat 

this success story with little respect, through their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the coming months we can all foresee this 

country coming to the brink again. Saskatchewan can ill afford 

the economic chaos, rising interest rates, and political 

uncertainty that could result from a direct hit on Confederation. 

I love this country, my constituents love this country, but we 

realize that all is not always well. We must change those things 

we disagree with by using positive means. 

 

I ask the members opposite, the Premier, to show they love this 

country too. Stop using the same tactics the separatists use 

every day, of blaming everything on Ottawa. Stop letting your 

members cling to personal self-interest and political gain. Those 

are American values, not Canadian values. Join with us in this 

debate and give Saskatchewan residents the future of optimism 

and hope that can only come from defending the values of 

compromise, patience, and understanding that make us all 

proud to call ourselves Canadians. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 

of pleasure to take part in this debate. I want to begin by saying 

that in my many years of political life in the province of 

Saskatchewan — some in opposition and some in government 

and some in semi-retirement — I have been called many, many, 

many things. But I have to admit that this is the very first time 

that I have ever been called a separatist, as the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek has indicated that I am. 

 

I do say, with the greatest of respect to the hon. member from  



500  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

Thunder Creek, that if — and rather immodestly if I may say so 

— that if he has a record and can stand up in this Legislative 

Assembly, or anywhere for that matter, some day, somewhere 

down the future and say that, even in a fraction, his 

commitment to a strong, unified Canada, not in words but in 

deed. comes up even in a fraction to the contribution, if I say 

immodestly that I have made, then I’ll be very pleased to say 

so. 

 

But I see no evidence of this. And I don’t see any evidence of 

this because the hon. member talks about values — Canadian 

values — of caring and compromise. We all share those 

Canadian values. We support those Canadian values. That’s not 

our concern. Our concern with the federal Liberal government 

is that words come very, very cheaply. 

 

But caring and sharing and community values have got to be 

translated into programs. They’ve got to be translated into 

programs which mean something to Canadians and define 

Canadians to each other, define Canadians to the world. 

 

Social programs in Canada, which by the way we invented in 

Saskatchewan, which I might add, over the opposition of the 

Liberal Party and the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan in 

1962 — social programs like medicare, which we invented in 

Canada and is our gift to Canada, are now being attacked by the 

federal Liberal government to the extent of $7 billion 

nationally. 

 

Words are fine; it’s the programs that count. It is fleshing out 

the words with actual programs which mean something to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, to the people of the 

province of Alberta, to the people of Canada. 

 

And I want to tell you that almost every premier — not almost 

every premier — every premier, without reservation, in varying 

degrees, has objected to the federal Liberal government 

dismantlement of the social programs which define us on the 

block transfer payment reductions; has objected to the CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) dismantlement; has 

objected to the railway deregulation and the destruction of rural 

Saskatchewan; has objected to the abandonment of the Crow 

rate; has objected to the lack of vision; has objected to the lack 

of consultation on tackling a national deficit and a debt. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member opposite that if he says he is 

such a strong defender of Canada, don’t give us the words, give 

us the actions and the deeds and tell your federal cousins to give 

us the words, actions, and deeds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And I take no second place and I will 

not give one quarter at all for criticizing any federal government 

of any political ideology when they dismantle those things 

which unify this great country. Whether it is the CBC or 

whether it’s medicare and hospitalization, I will criticize and 

attack any federal government when I see those values that you 

talk about being destroyed, right at the street level. 

 

And you may call that negative. I don’t. In fact if you call that 

negative I’m reminded of what old Harry Truman once was 

told. Harry Truman was told once by his advisers, “Harry, why 

don’t you get in there against those Republicans and give ‘em 

hell.” And Harry said, “No, sir, I’m not going to give those 

Republicans hell, I’m just going to tell them the truth.” 

 

I’m not going to give the Liberals and the Conservatives hell. 

What this caucus, and what this Premier and this government is 

doing is just telling you folks the truth, the simple, bald truth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And sometimes, Mr. Leader of the 

Third Party, when the Liberals get in the kitchen and it gets a 

little bit hot, obviously they simply can’t stand the truth. Well 

the hon. member opposite has got to understand that if he can’t 

stand this heat on a vision of Canada, if he can’t stand this heat 

based on this budget, it’s going to get a lot hotter. And as the 

old saying goes, if you can’t stand the heat you better get out of 

the kitchen. And if you’re not going to get out of the kitchen 

voluntarily, come next provincial election time, the people of 

Thunder Creek will kick you out of the kitchen, that’s for sure, 

because you can’t stand the truth and the heat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say . . . let 

me say, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m going to say a word about the 

Tories in a moment, but let me say, Mr. Speaker, lest anyone 

have any doubt about this at all — any doubt — I want to say at 

the outset I’m going to vote for this budget, described by almost 

every independent observer in Saskatchewan including, if I dare 

say so, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, as the best 

provincial budget in Saskatchewan in over 15 years . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And who, Mr. Speaker, would vote 

against a budget which has a 2 per cent reduction in the sales 

tax — $180 million? Who, Mr. Speaker, would vote against $57 

million more, permanently, for health care? Who would vote 

against $8 million on K to 12? Who would vote for more 

money for the universities and post-secondary systems? Who 

would vote for $25 million to help kids in poverty and reform 

our welfare system? Who would vote against $2.5 billion for 

roads for the province of Saskatchewan? Who would vote for 

doing all of this while still balancing the budget, reducing the 

debt, and turning the corner on the prosperity? Who would vote 

against this kind of a budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you who will 

not vote against the budget, and that is the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Regina Health Board people say it’s 

going to be a big boost for the Regina district, that we deserve. 

 

Dan Kelly of the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business) says, 60 per cent of our members told us cutting the 

PST would help improve the bottom line of the company, and  



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

we support it. 

 

Don Anderson of the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) 

says, it’s probably the best budget we’ve had in 15 years. 

 

Don Wells, university president: for universities this is by far 

the best budget we’ve had in a decade. 

 

The students at the University of Saskatchewan, President 

Natasha says: it’s really encouraging to see the government is 

reinvesting back in students. 

 

Lloyd Boutilier of the chamber of commerce says: this is a very 

good budget for business. Casey Davis of the chamber of 

commerce says: any reduction in taxes is welcome relief, not 

only for business but for the residents of Saskatchewan. Kelly 

Hague of the Regina Chamber of Commerce says: it’s a good 

thing, not just for consumers, but businesses making purchases 

and paying the PST. 

 

And down the line one can go. Cory Exner, president of the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Here’s one quote that I like. David Perry, senior research 

associate for the Canadian Tax Foundation, taking a look at our 

budget and comparing it with other provinces, says it’s so good, 

you know, the following, Mr. Perry says, “Sometimes I wished 

I lived in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, David Perry wants 

to come to Saskatchewan; the hon. member from Thunder 

Creek and all the Liberals want to leave Saskatchewan. I don’t 

understand what the logic here is. 

 

And then you can go through editorial and editorial. Here’s the 

Toronto Globe and Mail. I want to give you a little quotation 

about the headline in Saskatchewan five years later. It’s a very 

laudatory editorial by The Globe and Mail. Get this. This is 

what The Globe and Mail says — not exactly a socialist 

newspaper, that’s for sure: 

 

So Mr. Romanow and his government — those 

high-spending, irresponsible, weak-kneed, bleeding-heart 

socialists resolve to clean up the financial mess left by 

Grant Devine and his Conservatives. Last week, five years 

later, we were reminded of their success. 

 

. . . is what The Globe and Mail editorial said. 

 

And in this morning’s Globe and Mail, Jeffrey Simpson, 

nationally, in The Globe and Mail says: 

 

Saskatchewan’s NDP government knocked down the sales 

tax from 9 to 7 per cent in its fourth consecutive balanced 

budget. Those impressive social democrats intend to chop 

$4 billion from the provincial . . . 

 

Impressive social democrats. They’re not going to vote against 

the budget. No, they’re not going to vote against the budget. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  So who in the world is going to vote 

against the budget? Well, for awhile I thought, before he got up 

on his feet today and spoke, I even thought the member from 

Thunder Creek was going to vote for the budget. But he wasn’t 

going to take the chance of voting against the budget and 

having this being reminded over the next two, three years to his 

constituents. 

 

Because I note that in his area newspaper, the Moose Jaw Times 

Herald of a few days ago, he says this: 

 

“Certainly I think the people of the province were 

expecting a good news budget, and it did have its fair share 

of good news,” says Gerard Aldridge, MLA for Thunder 

Creek. 

 

That’s what the member from Thunder Creek said, end of 

quotation, in this particular operation. 

 

This is what I thought the hon. member from Thunder Creek 

was going to do today when it came to voting for this budget. I 

didn’t think that he would vote against this budget. Who in the 

world would vote against a budget in the face of all of the 

evidence in the province and outside of the province. 

 

But now the member from Thunder Creek . . . And maybe it’s a 

free vote in the Liberal Party, so maybe he’s all by himself. He 

was all by himself in the Liberal leadership race. Maybe he’ll be 

all by himself in the vote here. Who knows? Maybe it’s a free 

vote by the Liberals in this context, but I still would ask the 

hon. member to consider my remarks and ask yourself, do you 

really want to vote against this budget? 

 

Well I’ll tell you. I asked the question, who is going to vote 

against this budget? Well maybe the member from Thunder 

Creek will, but the Leader of the Progressive Conservative 

Party, he will not. His quotation is clear, Mr. Speaker: 

“Although I have some very, very serious reservations about 

some of the aspects of this budget, I will be voting in favour of 

it,” is what the Leader of the Third Party said in Hansard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  He’s too smart, he’s too smart to vote 

against this budget. Not only is he too smart politically and in 

substance terms, a man of substance in voting for this budget, 

his statement is also very, very important. I’m going to say a 

word about this when it comes to the Liberals, when I return 

back to them. And remember these words by the Leader of the 

Progressive Conservatives. He says, I have some very serious, 

very serious reservations about some aspects of this budget, but 

I am voting in favour of it. 

 

I’ll just pick up on it now for the moment to say some of us 

have reservations about this budget. If people say, is it 

everything that we would want to achieve, the answer is no. Is it 

everything that we want to achieve in tax reduction? The  



502  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

answer is no. Is it everything that we want to achieve in terms 

of more for education and more for health care and more for 

roads? Although I think these are tremendous commitments of 

funds and projects, the answer is no. Do we want to do more for 

kids in poverty? Do we want to do more to aid social assistance 

and reforms? The answer is yes. 

 

So the budget is not perfect. And like the Leader of the PC 

Party says, he uses the word, reservations. I don’t have 

reservations. The Liberals say it’s not enough. They don’t say, 

reservations. They may say reservations, but basically they say, 

not enough. But unlike the Conservative leader, who’s figured it 

out, you may have reservations but you’ve got to look at the 

heart and the soul and the substance of the budget. He says, I 

am going to override those reservations to make a public and 

political statement to vote yes for the budget, in effect putting 

the Liberals in the unenviable position of saying, great budget 

but not enough and I’m going to vote against it — yes, a good 

budget and I’m going to vote against it. In effect saying that the 

budget may have come seven-tenths of the way or eight-tenths 

of the way and I am going to vote against it and I am going to 

vote against coming eight-tenths of the way. 

 

I say that is an incredible political position and it’s a false 

position and you people will pay in your constituencies day in 

and day after for voting against this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And when I say that this does not 

make logic, this is not logical, this is why the Leader of the 

Conservative Party is logical. You can say you have 

reservations and then you’ve got to make a fundamental 

decision. It’s not logical, the Liberal position is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Okay, enough already. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I know, it’s enough already. You 

know something? I agree also. I’m getting embarrassed a little 

bit too much about quoting you, so let’s both agree to get off it. 

 

But while he’s got some logic, here’s where the Liberals are at, 

in addition to what the member from Thunder Creek says. Now 

I see the member from Arm River in his report, Monday, March 

24, 1997, in the Davidson Leader, Arm River MLA report, he 

said this: “A 2 per cent decrease in the provincial sales tax. This 

will be . . .” What is he saying, Mr. Speaker? “This will be great 

for small business.” And yet I’m going to vote against the 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Great, great. Not reservations, but 

great. The Leader of the PCs, to come back to him for one last 

time on this issue, he has reservations. Your colleague, the 

member from Arm River, he doesn’t have reservations. He says 

its great and he says he’s going to vote against the budget. 

 

Well he’s . . . maybe he won’t vote against the budget. Who in 

the world, in logic and in politics, is going to have the courage 

to get up and to say no to this budget? I could continue on. 

I know that the member from Moosomin is not going to say no 

to this budget. The Moosomin editorial in the World Spectator 

says: 

 

“MacKinnon deserves A plus for her latest budget.” 

 

Saskatchewan’s Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon, 

deserves top marks for her latest provincial budget 

delivered to the Saskatchewan legislature. She seems to be 

doing everything right with the 1997 budget. 

 

Says the Moosomin World Spectator. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Everything right. So I know the 

member for Moosomin is not going to be voting no for this 

budget, even on a free vote. Who in the world would logically, 

politically, substantively, analytically, even with the 

deficiencies, even with the criticisms, weighing the pros and the 

cons of this budget, on a turnaround budget, fighting our way 

through a deficit, fighting our way through a debt, fighting our 

way through a morass which was left on our hands by the 

Conservatives, who in the world would say that this budget — 

which is a turnaround budget, this budget which represents the 

people of Saskatchewan standing up and standing tall and 

saying to the rest of the province, from here on in, it’s going to 

get better and better — who in the world would vote against 

this budget? Who in the world would vote against this budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, we don’t need . . . and I 

don’t say this in this House now. I’m saying it in the House but 

not saying it for House purposes. I tell you, the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan don’t want the member from 

Thunder Creek to be saying no. The people of Saskatchewan 

want us to say yes, because the people of Saskatchewan know 

that they have sacrificed. They’ve rolled up their sleeves. 

They’ve tightened up their belts. They knew that we had a goal, 

we had a vision, and they want us to say yes to this budget 

because we are rewarding them for their cooperation and 

support. 

 

They want to say yes. Who else wants to say yes? How about 

all the nurturers? How about all the teachers? How about all 

those volunteers who have also had to make do with a little bit 

of less as we’ve got ourselves in this difficult financial mess. 

They say it’s a turnaround budget. They want us to say yes. 

 

What about our civil service, Mr. Speaker? Our civil service, 

fighting under difficult circumstances. And we’ve had to 

reshape and to refashion and to downsize. And they rolled up 

their sleeves and they met their challenges — the Department of 

Finance. But every civil servant here showed a dedication and 

professionalism; a dedication not only to the civil service but a 

dedication to the higher calling of the true meanings of the 

word, civil service — being civil and being servant to the 

public. They rolled up their sleeves. They want us to say yes to 

this budget as well. 

 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And I say to the Liberal member from 

Thunder Creek opposite, rethink what you’re going to say 

because somebody else wants us to say yes. The public at large 

is hungering for us to put aside our partisan bickering on areas 

where clearly the majority of the issues indicate support. The 

public of Saskatchewan wants us all to say unanimously, yes to 

this budget. They say we can lay aside the Liberal ideology and 

the Tory ideology and the NDP ideology in a wonderful 

celebration, and after six years we’ve turned the corner and 

we’re standing on our feet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Yes, that’s what Saskatchewan wants 

us to say — yes, yes, yes. And I want everybody in this House 

to say yes the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  There’s another reason. There’s 

another reason for saying yes, Mr. Speaker, and that is because 

this budget reflects a vision for the 21st century. This budget 

invests in people. This budget is a turnaround budget, but it’s a 

turnaround budget to do what? Not just words, but to do what? 

To invest in people, to create jobs, and to create a climate for 

investing in people. Education reform — the best possible 

education that we can give and that we can afford. Kids in 

poverty, and social welfare reform. Making sure our health 

renewal — I’ll say a word about health renewal — is 

maintained and improved. And we’ve done much here. In fact 

we lead the country in health renewal. Roads. And doing it all 

in a properly balanced situation. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek talks about caring and 

sharing. Those are words. Our budget puts the meat onto the 

bones. Our budget gives tangible, concrete programs like the 

children’s action plan. They’re going to vote against $25 

million for kids in poverty. They’re going to vote against 2 per 

cent decrease in the sales tax. They’re going to vote against a 

job creation climate which is going to boost jobs and the 

employment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

They’re going to vote against additional funding for K to 12. 

The teachers of Saskatchewan are going to be told that, that 

they’re voting against the grant for . . . They’re going to be 

saying no to the university students; they’re going to be saying 

no to the SIAST students. 

 

They’re going to be saying no to all the contractors and to the 

member up there from Wood River who gets up last couple of 

days and talks about the potholes in the province of 

Saskatchewan, all the while pretending to care for the people 

for Saskatchewan and the roads. He’s going to be saying no to 

highway improvement of $2.5 billion. Maybe. 

 

I’m still urging them to say yes in this whole situation because 

this budget has more than words about the soul of Canada. This 

has more than words about the vision of what it means to be a 

Canadian. This budget has a vision about investing in people —  

a vision, a dream, and practical programs. And it is a budget, I 

repeat again, that all of Saskatchewan, like all of Canada, is 

urging us, and I urge every member in this House, to say in a 

few moments, yes. Yes to Saskatchewan. Yes to the future. Yes 

to hope and to optimism. We’re on the march again, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re building again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an 

interesting debate. I want to congratulate all members who’ve 

partaken in this debate. They’ve all participated and contributed 

something. Although I may have disagreed with many of the 

speeches made by the members opposite, none the less it’s part 

of the contribution made. 

 

But I want to contrast this vision that I’ve talked about, 

investing in people. That’s our vision. Investing in 

Saskatchewan people, preparing for the 21st century — jobs, 

education, social reform, highways, health reform, and doing it 

while we’ve captured this dry ground from an ocean of red ink. 

That’s our vision — investing in people. 

 

Contrast that with the “visions” I use — I won’t say vision — 

the statements made by the opposition parties in this debate. 

Let’s take a look at it in the broad. Let’s take a look at it in 

philosophical terms. Contrast this by the Liberals. First the 

official opposition, the Liberals, who supposedly have a new 

look, a new-look leader. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, they may 

have a new leader but they have the same old Liberal look. 

 

They are the same old Liberal Party that has been the same old 

Liberal Party since goodness knows when. The same old 

Liberal Party, when in opposition, tries to talk progressively but 

when in government destroys social programs like the federal 

Liberal government has done — same old Liberal Party. 

 

You know it’s the same old Liberal Party in one significant 

feature, Mr. Speaker. They’re the only political party, I think 

anywhere in the world, that can sit on the fence and keep one 

ear to the ground. And that is an anatomical miracle, Mr. 

Speaker. The same old party. The same old party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Let me just tell you what I mean by 

this anatomical miracle of sitting on the fence and keeping one 

ground to the ear. Today in question period is a classic example 

of this. 

 

The member from Kelvington got up . . . And by the way, the 

member from Kelvington has written to a couple of rural 

newspapers. The headline that I have here from the Tisdale 

Recorder says: “Need PST exemption.” I’m quoting. 

“Sincerely, June Draude, MLA, Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency” — the Liberal member — and she says hear, 

hear. 

 

And her issue was, and she raised it today in question period, 

the very same issue which she has written about. She says, 

exempt from those matters which are taxed by the PST,  



504  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

questions of fire-fighting equipment. That’s what she says in 

the letter. That’s what she says in the House. 

 

Now here’s my example about sitting on the fence and keeping 

one ear to the ground. As I tried to say in question period today, 

I’m going to say it in my remarks: what does the official Liberal 

Party of Saskatchewan say? Right here, November 26, right 

after the Liberal leader was elected in his convention. “Grit 

wants tax harmonization.” Now let’s be absolutely clear what 

tax harmonization means. 

 

The GST (goods and services tax) taxes — pretend if you will, 

Mr. Speaker, just for demonstration purposes — it taxes all of 

the items listed on this piece of paper, like that. And in order for 

harmonization to take place, what you’d have to do is you’d 

have to add — according to law of Canada — the PST and all 

of the things that are taxed here, listed here, you’d have to come 

in just like that identically and cover the GST and PST. That’s 

harmonization. 

 

Not lowering the tax base; not squeezing the accordion of taxes, 

but through harmonization, expanding the level of taxation. 

That’s what harmonization is. And the evidence is everywhere. 

That’s why in Atlantic Canada — which your new Liberal 

leader cites by the way, with such great affection — the taxation 

level on the PST is, on average, double of what it is in 

Saskatchewan. And what we did in this budget was two things. 

Not only did we lower the rate from 9 to 7, but we reduced 

those taxable items. It’s not good enough for the member — by 

the way, forget about the major, fundamental contradiction . . . 

in the result, we have the lowest sales tax in Canada next to 

Alberta, which has no sales tax. 

 

Now which is it, Liberals? Which is it, official Leader of the 

Opposition? Which is it, new Liberal leader? Which is it, 

Liberal member from Thunder Creek? Do you support 

harmonization and the expanding of the tax base, and by the 

way, the taxes to be increased for the consumers, or do you 

support the letter taken by the member from Kelvington? Which 

is it? That is a fundamental contradiction. There’s an example 

of sitting on the fence and keeping one ear to the ground. 

 

(1145) 

 

But I want to tell you something else about taxation, Mr. 

Speaker. In the same article, the new Liberal leader said the 

following, quote: 

 

When asked about a shift in the tax burden from business 

to families . . . 

 

Which is what harmonization does. The Liberals laugh about 

this, because they have no other defence. 

 

When asked about a shift in the tax burden from business 

to families, Melenchuk (I would say Dr. Melenchuk; he’s 

the new Liberal leader) said he believed the impact can be 

negated by further reductions in the PST over time. 

 

But I’ve said enough about the PST and harmonization. Here’s  

the part that I want to read. Quote: 

 

He also sees the potential to generate . . . 

 

Get this, Mr. Speaker, and you should know this, the member 

from Shaunavon or Wood River and anybody in the area of the 

oil patch. 

 

He . . . sees the potential to generate large sums of money 

by selling 10- and 15-year development leases 

(development leases) to oil and gas companies and getting 

them to pay up front. The money could then be used to pay 

down the debt and free up money to help cover future 

reductions in the blended tax. 

 

So you see he’s looking to reduce the blended tax; so even he 

recognizes that the accordion for taxation is going to be wide 

open and we’re all going to be taxed to death under 

harmonization. He’s looking for ways to mitigate it. And what’s 

his great idea? What’s his great idea? He’s going to go to the oil 

companies and he’s going to say this: on developmental leases, 

we want you to pay up front, in cash, for 10 to 15 years, up 

front. 

 

Now let’s just figure out the common sense of that. Let’s forget 

about the oil companies, what we think about them. That’s like 

me saying to the Official Leader of the Opposition, it’s like me 

saying to Dr. Melenchuk, you know what, I’ve got a great idea. 

You pay up your personal and corporate taxes for 10 to 15 years 

up front in cash. You may go bankrupt in your business. I don’t 

care. You may not be able to find one single barrel of oil. You 

may spend millions in drilling, but I’m going to force you to 

pump into the provincial treasury millions of dollars up front. 

And then they say at the same time, not only are we going to 

pump millions of dollars up front; we are going to be open for 

business. I tell you, every oil and natural gas company will take 

their rig, oil rig, and they’ll head so fast for Alberta — thanks to 

the Liberals — we won’t see them for dust. 

 

That’s the policy. Harmonization — they’re going to tax the 

consumers. Now they’re going to tax the business people and 

they’re going to say, pay up front. Well I tell you something, 

Mr. Leader of the Liberal Party — I tell you something Mr. 

Official Leader of the Opposition of the House, the Liberal 

Party — put your money where your mouth is. Pay your taxes 

15 years up front right now. Will you do that? Will you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Pay your taxes up front 15 years. Well 

we might . . . It’s such a great principle we might as well 

expand it to the potash company, we might as well expand . . . I 

got a good idea. Why don’t we expand it to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan? Pay your taxes up front for 15 years, it’s such a 

doggone good proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this a vision? What coherence is this? What 

kind of sitting on the fence and keeping to the ear to the 

ground? I cannot believe him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is the question of taxation and the  



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

Liberal Party. But what about health? I’ve been watching this 

debate with a great deal of interest, and again I want to come 

back to the health. And it’s interesting in question period. One 

member gets up and says: I want more for this; I want more for 

that; I want more for this; I want more for that; I want more. By 

the way, all the while . . . Well mind you if they get the oil 

companies to pay 15 years up front then I guess the problem is 

solved. 

 

The lower taxes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, lower taxes 

except for the oil companies. We got lower taxes, going to 

balance the budget. 

 

Now health care. Now this is something which everybody in 

Saskatchewan is going to know, if they don’t know it soon. 

They know this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Send that quote over about the taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  That tax thing I’m going to . . . Don’t 

worry about sending it over. It’ll be known province wide very, 

very shortly. 

 

Here is the interview. Here I have, here I have . . . now, now 

hush down. I know that the Liberals, a little dose of truth, 

they’re allergic to, you know, and it makes them very agitated. 

Here’s an interview that the new Liberal leader, Dr. Melenchuk, 

gave to the CBC TV Monday, Costa Maragos, November 25, 

1996. I’m quoting. This has been done by my colleague from 

Regina in that very, very excellent speech. 

 

Here’s a quotation transcript: Maragos . . . That’s in case you 

don’t know, those of you who . . . I don’t watch the CBC, but 

I’m told he’s the co-anchor of the CBC. I’m a strong supporter 

of the CBC, but I happen to like country music better. So in any 

event, Maragos is the host. So he asks the Liberal leader the 

following: 

 

What inefficiencies would you find to make up that $1.3 

billion dollars? (referring to health care). 

 

Melenchuk: Well, health care . . . 

 

Maragos: How much would you save there? Give me a 

number. 

 

Boy this Maragos asks pretty tough questions, you know. 

 

Melenchuk: I don’t know, because I haven’t seen the 

numbers. I’ll have to look at the numbers. 

 

Maragos: (Another tough question.) If you don’t know, 

then how can you say that? 

 

I think that’s a pretty tough question actually. I’ll make a 

statement. When someone says, how do you know, he says, I 

don’t know. Well if you don’t know it why do you say it? I 

don’t know why I said it. I just happened to say it. I’m a 

Liberal. I’ll say anything at all. Well, he says, if you don’t 

know, where would it come from? 

 

Melenchuk: (Get this, this is the part.) Because (here it is) 

. . . Because (here’s what it says) . . . Because I know . . . 

(I’ll stop here to say . . . and I don’t diminish the man as an 

individual. He’s a professional, a doctor, and committed to 

care and we all respect that. But I know what he means 

when he says here.) Because I know . . . (meaning 

parenthetically, my words, I’m a doctor). Because I know 

that there are inefficiencies in the system . . . 

 

That’s what the good doctor says. I know there are 

inefficiencies. By the way, I’ll stop there to say, if he knows, I 

challenge him and invite him to tell me where those 

inefficiencies are in detail. I invite the official Leader of the 

Opposition to tell me where those inefficiencies are in detail. 

 

Quote: 

 

. . . and I understand health care reform, and I understand 

health care systems. And I know that there are 

inefficiencies in the system right now. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to find the $1.3 billion of a $1.5 

billion budget in health care because he knows where the 

inefficiencies are. Don’t know what kind of a health care we’re 

going to have left with only 200 million. Not very much. It will 

be the Liberal approach to health care: here’s two aspirins and 

call me in the morning, I guess, for $200 million. That’s 

basically what it will be. 

 

I want the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan to tell me where those 

inefficiencies are going to be. I’m going to ask them questions. 

Is there an inefficiency in the way we pay our doctors fee for 

service, or should we, Dr. Melenchuk and the Liberals, start 

paying our doctors on a salary basis? Is that an inefficiency? 

What do you say about that, Mr. Official Liberal Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Is there an inefficiency that we could perhaps remedy by using 

more nurses as the gatekeeper, and put nurse practitioners . . . 

and put more emphasis on nurse practitioners? What do you say 

about that, Liberal Party? Should we be maybe closing more 

hospitals because there are too many hospitals? Is there an 

inefficiency there, Mr. Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Official 

Leader of the Opposition? 

 

Maybe we’ve got too many nurses. Maybe the Liberals should 

tell us if there are inefficiencies with nurses and they should be 

cutting back the nurses. Maybe we’ve got too many nurse 

practitioners who help out, the LPNs (licensed practical nurse) 

— the licensed practician . . . practice nurses. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Maybe home care. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Maybe we should be saying to them 

. . . maybe home care. Maybe we should be putting on, as the 

member from Arm River says, two tiers. Maybe as the member 

from Arm River says, we should be putting on premiums and 

deterrent fees as the last Liberal government in Saskatchewan 

did. Tell me where those inefficiencies are because you said 

you could identify them. 

 



506  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

And believe me, when the health budget comes up — and every 

budget, when it comes up right now to election time 

provincially in ’99 or 2000 — I am going to be asking each and 

every Liberal, as I’m asking this House, as I’m asking the 

people of Saskatchewan to write to your Liberal MLA, and 

make them tell you specifically where they’re going to cut $1.3 

billion from health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Make them tell you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Because I’ll tell you, because I tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, they can’t. And if they can, they will — like 

their kissing cousins in Ottawa — destroy the very thing that we 

in Saskatchewan invented. And so long as I’m here, and we’re 

here, that will never happen there again . . . (inaudible) . . . 

Never happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  One last comment. One last comment 

about health care. And I got a . . . I got a charge out of. But I got 

a little bit of a charge, in sense of a smile, but I was troubled by 

this. This is March 10, 1997 and this debate, the official Leader 

of the Opposition, the member from Canora, is attacking us on 

health care. “Establishing puppet district health boards to act as 

its fall guys.” 

 

Then the member from Arm River, “Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

We know full well,” this is March 20, 1997 Hansard: 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know full well, and so do the 

people of the province, that the district boards are only a 

front for the NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s 

reform model, the wellness model. 

 

Only a front. Puppets and a front. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that’s a shameful comment and a slur on all of the hard-working 

people out there who are trying to make the system work, trying 

to make, with some difficulties and . . . It’s a shameful slur on 

volunteers and others who come forward. A shameful slur, and 

all the district health boards know that already. 

 

But apart from that, here’s a fundamental contradiction. I said 

the Liberals sit on the fence with one ear to the ground. Well 

look, we’d better call a spade a shovel right now, Mr. official 

Leader of the Opposition. If they’re a puppet, or more 

importantly, as your colleague the member from Arm River 

says, that district health boards are nothing but NDP fronts 

loaded by the NDP, can you tell me please where Ms. Anita 

Bergman, member of the Regina District Health Board and 

president of the provincial Liberal Party, stands on this issue? Is 

she an NDPer? Don’t know – we should check maybe the 

membership list. Is she a puppet? Maybe the Leader of the 

Liberal Party and the official Leader of the Opposition and the 

president of the Liberal Party should get together to figure out 

whether they’re puppets and whether they’re NDP fronts. 

Because I tell you this, either Ms. Bergman agrees with the 

leader and the Liberal Party that she’s a puppet and a NDP front 

and resigns; or in the alternative the Liberal leaders agree with 

Ms. Bergman that she’s not a puppet and she’s trying her best, 

and they both resign and let’s get on with a proper leadership 

structure in the province of Saskatchewan for the Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Now, Mr. Speaker, a very brief word 

about my friends with respect to the Conservatives opposite. 

And what is their vision – what is their vision? What is their 

vision? I don’t want you to change your vote, but you know this 

is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Cut it short. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well I’m going to cut it short, but I’m 

going to say this. I categorize it as kind of a rear-view vision of 

the future. The driver of this car called PC, circa 1982 model – 

who by the way is an engaging, and I say this with genuineness, 

intelligent, political and policy person, although I disagree with 

almost everything he stands for — there he is, he’s driving the 

car and it’s loaded. He’s got four others in there — one in the 

front seat and three of the other gentlemen in the back seat. And 

do you know what? He’s keeping his eye on that rear-view 

mirror, future vision of the PCs. And the car is just careening 

from the left to the right and around, because he’s not looking 

around. And he may even hit the odd pothole because he’s not 

looking ahead into the future. 

 

It’s always back to the future. And I tell you the one thing that 

highlighted this was this issue of the bankruptcy debate which 

the member from Greystone raised the other day — and I thank 

her again. I said . . . and I’ll just give you this quote very 

briefly, before I close on this issue, what the Bank of Canada 

says. We went from AA plus under the Blakeney administration 

to BBB plus. The number of sources of funds went from 140 to 

155 down to 25. 

 

And you know when we said it was a crisis, what happens? By 

the way, Mr. Hodgins said it was a crisis when he resigned. You 

all know that, I said it in question period. Well this is nothing 

new about the Tories when I say rear-view vision of the future. 

Because in 1992 when I went on provincial television and I told 

the province about the crisis — and by the way was criticized 

by everybody for wasting the TV time and the like. I can’t 

understand it, a nice television performer like myself and all the 

like — what was the Tory response? April 9, 1992, Swenson: 

“Romanow using scare tactics.” 1992. So when the issue arose 

a few days ago on The Globe and Mail story on bankruptcy — 

rear-view vision future — what happens a few days ago? 

“Tories say Romanow exaggerated problem.” Quote: 

 

But Conservative MLA Don Toth said Tuesday the 

government was far from bankrupt, considering it had 

$130 million socked away in the Liquor (fund) . . . 

 

Back to the future, rear-view vision of tomorrow. They said it in 

1992. They’re saying it in 1997. 

 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

(1200) 

 

And when you ask about where’s the money come . . . and the 

Leader of the PCs says what does the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

editorialist say, you know what I want to tell the Leader of the 

PC Party? I don’t give a doggone what the Star-Phoenix or the 

Leader-Post says about me at any time. 

 

Because if I ever get a break from the Conrad Black 

newspapers, who are singing the alleluia chorus for you the 

Tories and the alleluia chorus for you the Liberals . . . I tell you, 

if I listened to the Tory . . . if I listened to the Star-Phoenix or 

the Leader-Post, I never would have entered politics 25 or 30 

years ago, and thank goodness I never did. 

 

And thank goodness, through my friends and colleagues and the 

support of my party and the people of Saskatchewan, today we 

have abandoned the rear-view vision of the future. We have a 

future vision of investing in people, preparing Saskatchewan for 

the 21st century. We are strong. We are tall. We are on the 

march again, thanks to this budget and thanks to this 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  No, Mr. Speaker, what I want to say 

about this comparison is back to my central theme. I am urging 

every member of this House to vote yes, because this budget is 

framed on a vision of investing in people and preparing for the 

21st century, because of the specific things it does from the tax 

reduction to the enhanced programs. 

 

Vote yes. Especially since you do not have a vision — one in 

the rear view, one all over the place, sitting on the fence with an 

ear to the ground; one with three leaders at least and very 

confused. So you don’t have a vision. Vote yes. The people of 

Saskatchewan want you to vote yes. 

 

And before I close, I want to just close on this quotation. There 

is one author, controversial in some ways, but he had one quote 

that I like. I want members to remember this. Peter Drucker is a 

controversial writer in some ways, but he writes the following, 

quote: 

 

Long-range planning does not deal with future decisions 

but with the future of present decisions. 

 

Present decisions are deciding the future in this budget — that’s 

what we’re doing — around the vision. Investing in people, 

preparing for the 21st century, shared values. 

 

You know I’ve been talking nationally everywhere that I can 

about the need for a national alternative vision. The member 

from Thunder Creek was saying I’m not committed to Canada. 

He can say anything he wants about that. I know what my 

record is and my love and my belief is. 

 

I’ve been talking to Canadians everywhere about a national 

vision which reflects the future of present decisions, a national 

vision which says, let’s commit ourselves to social programs 

and don’t cut back, including the child benefit plan. Let’s talk  

about working as a Team Canada in deficit and debt reduction. 

I’m fully prepared to work with the Liberals in Ottawa if they’d 

only pick up the phone and tell me what they’re going to do 

rather than all of a sudden announce in a press release that we 

get hit in the neck with another cut-back to health care, 

education. 

 

I’d say, let’s invest in people by building an infrastructure in 

education and health — the very thing that the Minister of 

Finance and this side of the government is doing in this budget 

— nationally. I say, let’s stop this rush to the bottom that we see 

in Canada — because of NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement) and the free trade we’ve got to compete against 

Chile, we’ve got to compete against Mexico. We’re never going 

to pay our workers $4 a day. We shouldn’t. We should be 

ashamed of thinking that. 

 

We shouldn’t be going to Alabama North and having 

right-to-work laws and attacking the occupational health and 

safety for workers and attacking minimum wage and attacking 

labour standards and attacking The Trade Union Act and 

attacking the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement). 

 

We are building a society of compassion and hope and 

opportunity. Not just words but an agenda and a budget 

provincially which is — I think I say so in modesty but I 

believe accurately — a model for all of Canada of that alternate 

national vision of investing in Canadian people to prepare us for 

the 21st century. That is our hope and our vision. That is our 

hope and our vision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And just look how far we’ve come. 

Look in Saskatchewan — no deficit. Look federally — deficit. 

Look in Saskatchewan — attacking the debt. Haven’t even 

touched the debt. Look in Saskatchewan — 57 million more for 

health care. Look federally — 2.5 billion this year alone loss in 

health care. Look in Saskatchewan — 2.5 billion for highways. 

Look nationally — nothing for highways. Look in 

Saskatchewan — a tax break of 2 percentage points. Look 

nationally — no tax break and no tax relief in sight and no 

vision. 

 

Is it un-Canadian to talk about those values? It is Canadian to 

fight for those values and programs. And I’m urging everybody 

to make a political statement — to vote yes for this budget, to 

vote for this vision. And if you do, we’ll all be the better for it. 

Saskatchewan wants you to vote yes. Canada wants you to vote 

yes. I urge all members to vote yes and from here we can build 

a greater and better Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 12:10 p.m. until 12:11 p.m. 

 

Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 



508  Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1997 

Yeas — 13 

 

Krawetz Gantefoer Draude 

Osika Bjornerud Hillson 

Julé Boyd D’Autremont 

Toth Heppner Goohsen 

Haverstock   

 

Nays — 39 

 

Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Trew 

Bradley Lorje Scott 

Teichrob Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

 

The division bells rang from 12:12 p.m. until 12:13 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas - 15 

 

Krawetz McLane Gantefoer 

Draude Osika Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner Goohsen Haverstock 

 

Nays - 39 

 

Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Trew 

Bradley Lorje Scott 

Teichrob Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

 

The division bells rang from 12:16 p.m. until 12:17 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 42 

 

Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 

 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Trew 

Bradley Lorje Scott 

Teichrob Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

Boyd Heppner Goohsen 

 

Nays — 12 

 

Krawetz McLane Gantefoer 

Draude Osika Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

D’Autremont Toth Haverstock 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve been able to wrest 

away the authority from the whip here to make this motion, but 

I want to take the occasion, before moving that the committee 

rise and report progress, to wish everybody in the Assembly — 

the Leader of the Opposition, the Third Party leader, all the 

members of the caucus, the member from Greystone, all the 

staff — a very, very happy, religious, wonderful Easter 

weekend, and to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. It 

is the time of hope and inspiration for all of us and I really want 

us to capture that spirit. And I think we deserve also, a few days 

break. So happy Easter to everybody. 

 

And I move the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 

leave to sit again. But I think the Leader of the Opposition may 

want to say a word, if you’ll permit. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, adding to the words of the Premier, 

we want to wish everyone — Mr. Premier, Leader of the Third 

Party, all other colleagues — just a great Easter break. I know 

it’s very important to get back and share some time with family. 

 

And I wish everyone a safe holiday and we’ll be back in a very, 

very short time. So enjoy the break. Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the PC 

caucus we as well would like to wish all of the members of the 

legislature and the staff in the legislative building all the very 

best on the Easter weekend. It’s an important time to share with 

friends and family and I’m hoping that everyone will have 

opportunity to do exactly that over the course of this weekend. 

It’s a little bit of a break for all of us and it’s certainly welcome. 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Premier, have a good weekend, 

and certainly to all members of the legislature. 



March 27, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Before I ask the question I also want to wish 

everyone a very best Easter. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure now to move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker:  The Government Whip has moved this House 

do now adjourn. Before putting the question if I may just take a 

moment to — on behalf of the Chair and all of the staff of the 

Legislative Assembly — to acknowledge that the House has 

passed a motion to extend the return until Wednesday to permit 

members to spend a bit of time with their families as well as in 

their constituencies, and to wish all members, on behalf of the 

Legislative Assembly staff, a very happy Easter weekend with 

your families and in your constituencies. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:24 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 487 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 487 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 487 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 487 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 487 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 487 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 487 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 487 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Easter Greetings 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 488 

 Teenage Inventor 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 488 

 Northwest Health District Accreditation 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 488 

 Congratulations to Regional Drama Festival Participants 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 488 

 Weyburn Kentucky Fried Chicken Outlet Wins National Recognition 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 

 Bridgepoint Centre for Eating Disorders at Milden 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 

 Congratulations to the Regina Pats 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 

 Spring has Arrived 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 489 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Fire Prevention Levies 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 490 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 490 

 Establishment of Youth Justice Committee 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 490 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 491 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 491 

 Municipal Roads Funding 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 491 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 491 

 Free Votes 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

 Public Prosecutions Review 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 492 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

 Canadian Wheat Board Contracts 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 493 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 493 

 Highway Maintenance 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 493 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 493 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 495 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 495 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 499 

 Recorded Divisions ....................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 



 

 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 

 


