



















































Hansard: April 17, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 921 

 April 17, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of citizens from Kamsack and Veregin this afternoon. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

signed by citizens of Saskatchewan, mostly from the city of 

Melville. I’ll read the prayer for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and to immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition and 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a 

hospital in La Loche that will provide adequate health care 

to northern residents. 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Saltcoats, from North Battleford, from Bruno, and from all 

throughout the land. 

 

And I so present. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, but 

more particularly the people from Eastend, Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately amend The 

Non-Profit Corporations Act and other legislation in order 

to protect volunteers from frivolous legal action, and 

prohibiting any legal action against any volunteer unless a 

court of competent jurisdiction first grants permission. 

 

We have these petitions, Mr. Speaker, from 105 other people 

this morning. They are from all over the province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 

to present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, and the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately amend The 

Non-Profit Corporations Act and other legislation in order 

to protect volunteers from frivolous legal actions, by 

prohibiting any legal action against any volunteer unless a 

court of competent jurisdiction first grants permission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the south-west of 

Saskatchewan, from the Frontier-Claydon areas of the province, 

and I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately amend The 

Non-Profit Corporations Act and other legislation in order 

to protect volunteers from frivolous legal actions, by 

prohibiting any legal action against any volunteer unless a 

court of competent jurisdiction first grant permission. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These petitions come from the Coronach area of the province in 

support of Eastend. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

  



922  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

Of citizens urging the government to commission an 

independent study to review the social impact of gambling; 

and 

 

Of citizens urging the Assembly to cause the construction 

of a new hospital in La Loche. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 

SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Clerk Assistant:  Ms. Lorje, Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations, presents its second report 

which is hereby tabled. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege today 

to present the second report of the Crown Corporations 

Committee for this session. In it we note that we have 

concluded our review of the 1994 and 1995 Crowns. 

 

It is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that this morning in the library 

we had a modest little celebration of a quiet little legislative 

committee with a remarkably active history. I want to give my 

report on today’s Crown matters in the context of that history. It 

is a history which in many ways mirrors the development of 

both the Saskatchewan government as an instrument of the 

people, and of the Saskatchewan economy for the past 50 years. 

 

Yesterday I was pleased to pay tribute to the first 50 years of 

the Crown Investments Corporation. Today as I report on the 

work of the current Crown Corporations Committee, I am proud 

to recognize in the public record that we are carrying on a 

system begun by men — and one woman — of a visionary 

government that believed in public enterprise and public 

accountability of those enterprises. 

 

Committees of the legislature are, like any other entity, 

creatures of their mandate. They take their significance from the 

magnitude of their subject. In Saskatchewan, Crown 

corporations are very significant to our government, to our 

economy, to our social fabric. They always have been and they 

currently are now. 

 

As the chairperson of a legislative committee celebrating the 

history of an all-party tool of the legislature, I should point out 

that over time Crown corporations have been created by all 

parties. We’ve all had a go at creating new ones, and we’ve all 

performed our share of executions of old Crown corporations. 

One would never deny that ideology played a role in these 

decisions, but for all of us, representing all parties, Crowns are 

in the economic lifeblood of Saskatchewan. 

 

But as with so many other accomplishments, I’m proud to note 

that it was the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 

government of Douglas, Brockelbank, Sturdy, Stone, and 

Beatrice Trew that created this standing committee to make 

those Crowns accountable to the legislature. In the 50 

intervening years some things have changed, some things have 

not. For instance, Beatrice Trew, the member from Maple 

Creek and the grandmother of our own MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) for Regina Coronation Park, was the first 

woman member of the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

In the minutes of the first meetings of the committee in 1947, 

the list of those present goes like this, present: Messieurs 

Darling, Hanson, Feeley, Patterson, and so on until the end 

where the minutes always say: and Mrs. Trew. The Crowns that 

that first committee oversaw included the Saskatchewan Power 

Commission, which was established in 1929, Saskatchewan 

Clay Products, Saskatchewan Wool Products, Saskatchewan 

Lake and Forest Products, SGIO (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Office), and Saskatchewan Airways. Some are still 

here, modified to the times; most are not. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m not mentioning this anniversary 

celebration just to be sentimental, although there was quite a 

touching moment at our ceremony this morning when we paid 

tribute to Mrs. Beatrice Trew. She was 50 years old when she 

was appointed to that first Crown Corporations Committee. 

Today the committee itself is 50 years old. In 1997, it is 100 

years since she was born and I am pleased to report to the 

Assembly that her grandson is Vice-Chair of the Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  He is carrying on a proud Trew tradition. 

 

There is something very valuable, Mr. Speaker, and very 

instructive in taking a moment to go back to the beginning of 

the Crown Corporations Committee. It is instructive particularly 

for current members of all political persuasions, and it is simply 

this: the people who established this committee in 1947, the 

MLAs from the CCF and the Liberals, took their 

responsibilities very seriously. 

 

If there were to be Crowns — and that was a given — they 

were going to be managed and directed in a twofold manner: 

one, they were going to work; and two, they were going to work 

for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan who owned them. 

They would be operated in a businesslike fashion and they 

would contribute to the social well-being of the province. 

 

This is the double burden and the double duty of Crown 

corporations, and I would suggest, it is still their single defining 

virtue. 

 

Those MLAs 50 years ago made sure that they would be 

involved in these Crowns, the people’s business. They argued 

and fought and challenged each other to make sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan knew what was going on with their 

public enterprises — not unlike members of today’s committee, 

I might add. 

 

Members from all parties fought with executive government 

over how much they would be involved in the policy direction 

of the Crowns. And there were spirited arguments even then, on 

the value of public enterprise. 

 

In the minutes of that first committee, I note that even back 

then, former premier Patterson, representing the Liberals of the   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

day, argued for privatization for some Crowns. 

 

Moving now to 1997, today’s committee members have some 

pretty big shoes to fill. We have some passionate, wise, 

committed committee standards to meet. We have historical 

precedents to honour. And you know, I don’t think we’re doing 

that bad a job. We, like former members, take our duties 

seriously. And we, like they, believe in the significance of our 

work and the value of the subject we cover. 

 

In 50 years there have been good men and women serving the 

Crowns and overseeing the Crowns. I am happy, on behalf of 

the committee, to be able to pay tribute today to those who 

began the process 50 years ago. 

 

Today’s Crown Corporations Committee carries on their work 

in the service of the people of Saskatchewan. I am proud of the 

work the committee does and I thank all committee members on 

all sides of the House. 

 

And in honour of those pioneers from all parties, I submit my 

report today. I do now move, seconded by the member from 

Saltcoats: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: how many applications for the 

farm fuel rebate were received in 1996; how many of these 

applications were approved; how many of these 

applications were rejected; how many of those applications 

which were refused were so refused because they came in 

after the deadline; what was the total cost to the 

government for the farm fuel rebate in 1996; and what was 

the total dollar amount applied for in those farm fuel rebate 

applications which were rejected because they came in 

after the deadline? 

 

I have an additional question, Mr. Speaker, if I may. 

 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Health: which health facility capital 

projects have been approved by the Department of Health 

since April 1, 1996; which health facility capital projects 

have been submitted to the Department of Health for 

approval and are currently awaiting such approval from the 

department; and of those health facility capital projects 

currently awaiting approval by the Department of Health, 

please give the dates that they were submitted to the 

department for such approval. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the legislature, Mr. 

Charles Harnick, the Attorney General of Ontario, along with 

his ministerial assistant, David Gordon. Please stand. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Harnick and I had the distinct 

pleasure of chairing the ministers of Justice’s meeting on the 

first occasion that either one of us had attended the meeting. 

And since that meeting in May of 1996 in Ottawa, we’ve had a 

special bond in how to deal with certain of the issues. So I very 

much appreciate welcoming him here to Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m also welcoming him here on behalf of the minister for 

SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) as 

he is here to meet with other ministers related to aboriginal 

affairs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you in 

your gallery, Mr. Andrew Waller. Mr. Waller is a librarian with 

the Lloydminster Public Library. And I would ask all members 

of the House to welcome not only him, but all librarians in the 

province and members of our library boards who are in Regina 

this weekend for the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan 

Library Association. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today, 

Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, a fine-looking group of students 

from Eastend, Saskatchewan. They are sitting in your galley, 

Mr. Speaker — 12 students from Eastend, Saskatchewan — and 

are accompanied by Marie Hanson and their bus driver, Randy 

Morris, whom I passed in the hallway and didn’t recognize. 

Sorry, Randy. There you are. 

 

And we’re happy, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Environment from Indian Head-Wolseley has very graciously 

volunteered to join us after the question period in room 218 

where we will discuss matters of importance about how the 

legislature works. We will also I’m sure talk about Eastend and 

its contribution to the environment, and things like Scotty and 

museums and flood waters and all kinds of great stuff. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of myself and the Assembly, I 

would like to have all members please welcome this illustrious 

group. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you a group of students 

from my constituency from the community of St.   



924  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

Isadore-de-Bellevue. We have with us 10 grade 11 and 12 

students from that community and they are accompanied by 

their teachers, Terence Gaudet and Marie Anne de Larminat, 

and the chaperon Thérèse Gareau. 

 

These students are enjoying an educational tour of the 

legislature and many of the sights in the city of Regina. So I 

look forward to meeting with you later on after question period, 

and I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please join me in 

welcoming the group from Bellevue. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

member from Cypress Hills in welcoming the grade 12 students 

from Eastend along with their teacher, Ms. Hanson, and bus 

driver, Randy. I have a particular interest in this group of 

students because my daughter is in grade 11 in Eastend and I 

would like to meet with them to see how my daughter is doing. 

And thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with my colleague from Cypress Hills and my colleague 

from Indian Head-Milestone in welcoming the group from 

Eastend. The teacher, Marie Hanson, taught in my own 

constituency of Manor for a few years and I’d like to welcome 

her to the Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Special Librarian’s Day 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year at this 

time I stood up and used words in this legislature that my 

mother would never have had in her vocabulary. Words like 

“cyberjob,” “cybrarian,” and the almost colloquial “cyberheap.” 

I almost grasped then the meaning of this new language, but I 

clearly understood why I was speaking — as I do now. 

 

I’m happy to report that today is International Special 

Librarians Day, the one day in the year when we recognize the 

year-round work of the Legislative Library staff, the staff that 

keeps us informed, up to date, and sometimes even literate. 

 

A special librarian, as the term suggests, is one who provides 

special information to a special clientele. This includes 

legislative librarians. 

 

As the Chair of the Crown Corporations Committee said this 

morning, we have today in the legislature a very visible 

reminder of the special, valuable, and quick work the librarians 

perform. The 50th anniversary celebration was in large part 

made possible because they did much of the footwork. 

 

The theme for this year is “Putting knowledge to work,” and 

that in a nutshell, or as we would say today, that in a CD-ROM 

(compact disc read-only memory), is exactly what they do. 

There is a veritable Noah’s flood of knowledge available to us, 

so much so that the volume can interfere with practical use. 

 

It is Marian Powell and her staff of factual magicians that help 

us day to day, fact by fact, report by report. I ask all members to 

join me in congratulating them and giving them a sincere 

thank-you for the work that they do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Express 16th Anniversary Tour 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

members of this Assembly will be familiar with Saskatchewan 

Express, a touring musical revue renowned in the province for 

its fun and heart-warming performances. 

 

Auditions this year were very tough, but I am happy to 

announce that Jeremy Elder, a very talented member of my 

constituency, was chosen from among 86 performers. I would 

like to congratulate Jeremy on such an outstanding 

achievement. He was one of 11 vocalists chosen for the 16th 

anniversary summer tour. 

 

Saskatchewan Express will be travelling to all corners of the 

province this summer and I would encourage all the members 

present and the people of Saskatchewan to take in an 

outstanding performance by Jeremy and the other members of 

the troupe. Congratulations once again, Jeremy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Award for Prince Albert Television Station 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t have any new words to use today, but I do have 

very positive congratulations to make to Prince Albert 

television station, CIPA-CKBI, on receiving a gold Can Pro 

award in the category of drama special for its production of The 

Missing Bell of Batoche. The Can Pro awards of excellence 

recognize superior achievement in Canadian local or speciality 

programing. 

 

The Missing Bell of Batoche was indeed a worthy candidate for 

this award as it tells a story that belongs to the Metis 

community in the Prince Albert area, to be shared with the 

people of Saskatchewan. I hope the recognition received by 

CIPA-CKBI will encourage all local stations in Saskatchewan 

to keep telling our community stories and to assist in keeping 

our vibrant history alive. 

 

This award is a tribute to the professional and hard-working 

staff involved in the production of The Missing Bell of Batoche. 

 

I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 

congratulating everyone who was involved in this production. 

They truly do deserve this recognition. And again, 

congratulations, CKBI-CIPA TV. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

Agrologists Recognize Journalist Ron Walter 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently Ron 

Walter, a reporter with the Moose Jaw Times-Herald was given 

some well-deserved recognition. In addition to his regular 

journalistic duties, Mr. Walter has worked diligently throughout 

his career reporting local agricultural stories through the Moose 

Jaw Times-Herald and the Moose Jaw This Week. 

 

The Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists has recognized Ron 

for his contributions to agriculture by admitting him to the 

institute as an honorary member. As a member agrologist since 

1984, I’d like to offer my congratulations to Ron and thank him 

for his insightful reporting on agriculture issues, and his 

continuing effort to raise awareness about this very important 

industry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Condominium Project In Manitou Beach 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

most of us are aware that tourism is the fastest growing industry 

in our province. In 1995 it employed over 40,000 people and 

contributed $1.1 billion to our provincial economy. Of that $1.1 

billion, 518 million was in rural Saskatchewan. Without a doubt 

our tourism industry has significant impact on our rural areas. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity 

to congratulate Mayor Arnold Strueby in the village of Manitou 

Beach for the announcement of a new condo project that is 

scheduled to begin construction later this year. 

 

As many members realize, Mr. Speaker, Manitou Beach is 

famous for its healing waters of the mineral spa, the best in 

Canada. Thousands of tourists from across North America visit 

the community yearly. This new condo project will enhance 

Manitou Beach’s reputation as a desired tourist destination. 

 

This project is the second of its type in the village in the past 

few years, as an individual entrepreneur built one a couple of 

years ago. 

 

Much of the credit for this initiative must go to the local 

economic development committee, who researched the viability 

of these projects. These condos are aimed at attracting retired 

individuals and are constructed to be fully wheelchair accessible 

and will in all likelihood make a significant economic 

contribution to the community. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the individuals involved in the 

planning of this project. It is the initiative and the desire of 

individuals to build their communities that make Saskatchewan 

such a great province. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Internet Web Site on Dinosaurs 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to be able to give a members’ statement, particularly with 

guests here from Eastend and some of the other statements on 

tourism and Internet. 

 

As you’ll know, a few years ago Saskatchewan became a 

hotbed for palaeontologists searching for dinosaur remains in 

the Eastend area. Discovery of the now famous T-Rex named 

Scotty not only stimulated further searches, but also inspired 

Jim Fold of Minds Eye new media of Regina to construct a web 

site dedicated to dinosaurs generally, but in particular to 

dinosaurs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you might think that that would include the 

home page for the member from Maple Creek, but in fact this 

web site is named “Fun Finds, Hidden Treasures in 

Saskatchewan” and is geared towards everyone. It is both 

educational and entertaining, unlike the member from Maple 

Creek. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new web site will allow Internet users 

worldwide, access to information on Saskatchewan and our 

dinosaur discoveries. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Oh Cypress Hills. My goodness. I’ve got to 

get this straight sooner or later here. But it will also promote 

another part of our province’s culture and history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tourism industry in the province will benefit 

from this new web site as more and more people become aware 

of and interested in the fascinating and intriguing places in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to conclude by congratulating the Royal Saskatchewan 

Museum, the many people and organizations in Eastend, and 

the Saskatchewan Economic Development Internet access 

application development fund, which is responsible for helping 

put this program forward. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sports Memorabilia Auction in Rosthern 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many times 

communities in this province demonstrate their spirit, pride, and 

cohesiveness as communities through special events. Although 

these events are a regular occurrence in our province, we should 

not become accustomed to them and overlook their importance. 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to 

acknowledge a community event that has taken place recently 

in the town of Rosthern. 

 

As a measure to help raise funds for the new multi-purpose 

centre for the elementary school, the residents of Rosthern 

organized a sports memorabilia auction that was held on April 

10. 

 

Included in the auction were items such as autographed hockey 

sticks, jerseys, and shirts from well-known stars such as Wayne 

Gretzky, Eric Lindros, Wendel Clark, Donovan Bailey and 

tennis star, Pete Sampras. The centrepiece item in the auction,   



926  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, was a one-of-a-kind signed portrait of Ken 

Dryden, which was painted by local artist, Elaine 

Unrau-Schellenberg. 

 

Special guests taking part in the auction included Ken Dryden 

as keynote speaker, Roughriders Robert Mimbs and Aaron 

Ruffin, U of S (University of Saskatchewan) football coach 

Brian Towriss, and a multitude of radio and TV personalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auction was a success as the community raised 

over $15,000 that will be directed towards the new centre. 

 

I would personally like to congratulate the residents of Rosthern 

and area for the success of the auction and their efforts to 

enhance their community. Events like this, Mr. Speaker, should 

not be left unrecognized. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vital Role of Community Planning 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to recognize the important, indeed vital, role of 

community planning. Nothing is more fundamental to the 

physical, social and economic growth of a community than a 

development plan resulting from community planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community planners are concerned with the 

promotion of health, safety and welfare of the public, the 

prevention of overcrowding, the securing of adequate light, air 

and access, the value of land and the conservation of property 

values, the character of physical development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community planning — and especially urban 

planning — also involves the efficient and economical 

utilization of Saskatchewan’s greatest physical resource, the 

land. That is why, Mr. Speaker, all members of the legislature 

know . . . Let me rephrase that — most members of the 

legislature know that we try to park our vehicles between, and 

not on, the yellow lines in our parking area. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When this 

government proposed construction of a transmission line across 

the South Saskatchewan River near Saskatoon as part of the 

Condie power line project, the Meewasin Valley Authority 

raised its objections. The group claimed the overhead line 

would be a hazard to birds flying through the river valley and 

called on the government to bury the line. 

 

The Court of Queen’s Bench ruled in February that The 

Meewasin Valley Authority Act has no application to a public 

land which is used or occupied by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In other words, the court ruled SaskPower is not required to 

apply to the Authority for permission to construct this portion 

of the line. However, this group is appealing the decision to a 

higher court, Mr. Speaker, and in spite of the fact that this 

appeal is still making its way through the courts, SaskPower 

began construction of the overhead transmission line spanning 

the river about two weeks ago, and has now completed this 

aspect of the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister in charge of SaskPower explain 

why this work has proceeded while the matter is still before the 

courts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to take the member sort of through, if I could, 

the chronology of events. And he is accurate that on February 

19 the court approved the procedure with the project. The 

appeal has been scheduled for May 7. I want to point out to the 

member that the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority) was 

notified of the corporation’s intention to proceed, and they had 

the opportunity, but didn’t apply for an injunction pending the 

outcome of the appeal. 

 

SaskPower has completed the project. It was done between, as I 

understand it, March 17 and April 4. I want to point out to the 

member that the importance of supplying a sustainable source 

of energy to people in northern Saskatchewan is very much 

dependent on the completion of the Condie-QE line. That 

consumption level will be required for the winter, for the 

coming winter. 

 

If the Court of Appeal would make the decision that it was 

inappropriate and SaskPower did not have the authority to put 

an overhead line, there would be opportunity to construct an 

underground line, which would take some time; which would 

require in all likelihood some environmental due diligence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And at what costs to 

the taxpayer would it be if you have to redo the line, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have seen on many 

occasions this government demonstrate its arrogance and 

contempt. And the GRIP(gross revenue insurance program) 

would be . . . the GRIP fiasco has laid a good example of that 

last year. Now it would appear they have reached new heights, 

Mr. Speaker. It seems awful strange that this work was started 

and completed in such a short time frame before the May 7 

appeal date in the courts. 

 

Will the minister explain again if it is merely a coincidence that 

the work was completed before the court date, or did he 

fast-track this project to ensure it was completed before 

judgement might possibly impact his plans? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, there are number of 

issues surrounding this. First let me describe to the member the 

cost of that overhead line is in the neighbourhood of $300,000. 

Whether it be a temporary line or whether it be a permanent 

line, it has to be constructed in such a fashion that public safety 

is in fact a part of the decision. It wouldn’t be appropriate to put 

. . . a temporary line would cause the risk of public life. So quite 

clearly that is an appropriate expenditure, and it’s been built up 

to the appropriate standards. 

 

I want to say to the member that with all major construction 

projects such as the Condie-QE line, there will be an imposition 

on people’s lands as the lines have to go somewhere. But I think 

the member will agree with me, as the member from Athabasca 

will agree, that we need to strive to ensure a sustainable and a 

safe and a reasonable cost supply of energy for northern 

Saskatchewan, and that’s part of what the Condie-QE line will 

allow to happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Reconstruction Charges 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 

when the people of Saskatchewan think they have seen this 

government demonstrate all of the arrogance and contempt it 

possibly can, it has been taken to a new level. 

 

Today in the Crown Corporations Committee meeting questions 

were raised about this government’s decision to not include 

SaskPower’s new construction charge as part of its revenues 

and net income. The Provincial Auditor remarked that it should 

be the practice of SaskPower to disclose all monies collected 

from its customers as revenues, a suggestion this government 

has apparently ruled out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, surely the people of Saskatchewan deserve to 

know whether or not the Crowns are hiding money from the 

people, or just starting another slush fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge — and for that matter, the 

Provincial Auditor’s — we are the only province that utility rate 

increases are approved by cabinet. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskPower tell us why his 

government refuses to include these funds as revenue, given the 

fact they were received through the corporation’s customers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to answer 

this in this way: if the member would open the annual report, he 

would see that it is very clearly identified and accounted for — 

both the revenue flow that came from it and the expenditures. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well that the member from the 

Crown Corporations Committee review this morning will be 

well aware of the fact that the industry does not support the 

Provincial Auditor’s position with respect to this. 

 

So let me, Mr. Speaker, quote from Hansard from this morning. 

We have had major accounting firm . . . we’ve had opinion 

from three major accounting firms in this country, Ernst & 

Young, Deloitte Touche, and KPMG, who all say that the 

approach the Provincial Auditor took on this issue is wrong. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that . . . and I’m going to quote: 

 

The money is going to be used to construct assets in future 

years which will generate the electricity, the service that 

you receive in future years. And therefore it’s entirely 

appropriate under the accounting rules to defer the item 

and record it as an element of profit and loss in those future 

years. It’s not appropriate to record it in the current year. 

And the Provincial Auditor is wrong in his opinion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, what I would presume that the 

minister’s answer is saying, that this province with them in 

power does not need a Provincial Auditor — we might as well 

just get rid of him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Provincial Auditor raised his concerns 

about this issue today, the minister in charge of SaskPower 

indicated that the Provincial Auditor is trying to interfere in 

public policy. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is entrusted 

with the task of holding government accountable. It is his 

responsibility to ensure this government manages its finances in 

a proper fashion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Provincial Auditor’s job is 

that if he finds any irregularities or concerns with the 

accountability to do with the province’s finances, he brings it to 

our attention — the public and the opposition. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskPower tell us why he is 

trying to undermine the mandate of our Provincial Auditor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, there is not an attempt 

to undermine the mandate of anyone or any individual. This 

corporation has publicly accounted for funds that it is 

responsible for — that has been confirmed by three major 

accounting firms in this province, all of whom have said that it 

is accounted for in the appropriate fashion. 

 

I want to say what the member . . . Mr. Ellis from Ernst & 

Young had to say about the approach that SaskPower took, and 

I’m quoting from Hansard: 

 

In this case, we have a Provincial Auditor who has his own 

views on the accounting. On the other side, what has the 

corporation done? It has researched the area, formed its 

own opinions as to how it should be accounted for. It has 

obtained the support of Rupert James, its auditor. Rupert 

James in turn has done the right professional thing and 

consulted with the experts in his firm — me. I have 

prepared an opinion in support of that. We have in turn . . . 

The company has in turn consulted with two other major 

firms. The three largest firms in this country have stated   



928  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

that this accounting is appropriate. That’s six — six strikes 

— six views. The Provincial Auditor has not obtained . . . 

(one) independent opinion . . . (to) support . . . his position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that Ernst & 

Young are hired by SaskPower, so why wouldn’t they side with 

SaskPower? The Provincial Auditor is for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to change directions now and I would 

like to once again ring up Lily. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this 

House three members of the Liberal opposition questioned the 

government about its $29 million cut in revenue sharing to 

municipal governments. 

 

The minister in charge of Municipal Government responded by 

saying, and I quote: “There is no such thing as savage cuts . . . 

except in the member’s imagination.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I met with dozens of municipal government 

officials recently, and they provided me with figures which 

underline these savage cuts. As an example, the conditional 

grant for the RM (rural municipality) of Shellbrook has been 

cut from $160,000 to $63,000 — a reduction of 61 per cent. 

 

Will the minister explain how she can sit back and explain how 

these cuts are anything but savage? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

will know from his experience in local government that there 

are two sides to the grants; one is the conditional, one is the 

unconditional. 

 

The unconditional revenue-sharing pool has been reduced, and 

we acknowledge that. We gave municipalities a year’s notice to 

prepare for that and we devised a new distribution formula 

which ensured that although the size of the pool reduced by 42 

per cent, no municipality would receive a cut of more than 50 

per cent. 

 

He also knows that in the conditional side of the grant, the 

money has to be spent in order to receive the cost-sharing part 

of the revenue-sharing formula. So if a municipality’s activity 

in road building, or whatever the shared project was, was 

reduced, well then the grant would be reduced. The member 

knows this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated 

yesterday that our municipal governments have adequate 

resources and that their future is secure. However, the local 

government leaders I’m speaking with maintain their future is 

anything but secure, given the government’s continual 

downloading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipal governments are providing me with 

figures showing drastic cuts to their unconditional grants also. 

An example: the RM of Meota has seen its funding cut from 

$53,000 to 18,000 — 66 per cent reduction. RM of Meadow 

Lake has seen its funding cut from $65,000 to $6,000 — 91 per 

cent cut. RM of Golden West has been cut from $37,000 to 

$2,000, a reduction of 95 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I then have RMs saying they’re going to have to 

raise their mill rates six times, four times. 

 

Madam Minister, what are you prepared to do to address this 

financial crisis that you are forcing onto the backs of our local 

governments? Will you re-examine this recent slashing of funds 

to those same municipal governments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the municipalities were 

given a year’s notice on the extent of their revenue-sharing cuts. 

I think in addition to that, last fall in September we announced 

the offset of the levies. 

 

We have cleaned up the municipal tax base, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of taking the responsibility for social assistance 

payments, public health levies, and the hospital levy from the 

municipal tax base; so that they now have that room reserved 

for themselves, which makes up in part, Mr. Speaker, for the 

reduction in revenue sharing. They no longer have to remit 

funding for social services, public health, or hospitals to the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to The Police Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 

Minister, this morning you met with the Estevan mayor, John 

Len. Mayor Len is very concerned about The Police Act due to 

the recent incident in Estevan where a police officer was 

charged, and pleaded guilty, for assaulting his daughter. 

 

The community is outraged that the officer received an absolute 

discharge, and that the officer has not yet been removed from 

the force. Unfortunately the community’s hands are tied under 

The Police Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know you can’t comment on the specifics of this 

particular case, but what changes are you considering to The 

Police Act to speed up and streamline disciplinary actions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question. What has happened in this particular situation is that 

it’s still in the process, and we’ll allow the process to proceed. 

What I have been doing and what the department has been 

doing, has been meeting with the police commissioners, who 

usually are the mayors, as well as the chiefs of police on one 

side, if you can put it that way. And we’ve also been meeting 

with the police associations who have other concerns about job 

security and other things. 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

This process has been ongoing for at least two years and 

possibly longer on some of these issues. And I’ve met regularly 

with them; people in my department have met with them; and 

we are working on achieving the balance so that we can deal 

with this matter in the way this government always does, a fair 

and even-handed way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, both the 

justice system and your government are sending out some pretty 

conflicting messages these days. Mayor Len points out that a 

farmer was recently fined $800 for starving his pigs, but the 

police officer who assaulted his daughter got an absolute 

discharge. 

 

The member from Estevan recently said, the community should 

be lenient as this was his first offence. The member from 

Estevan seems to be saying it’s okay to hit a woman, so long as 

you’ve only done it once. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s time for this legislature to send a message 

loud and clear — it’s never okay to hit a woman, not once, not 

now, not ever. Mr. Minister, will you send that message by 

changing The Police Act to ensure officers who commit this 

kind of assault are removed from the force? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s absolutely clear 

that this government has a very firm policy on violence in 

family situations; violence in any place in the community. And 

it’s unfortunate that the member asks a question that I can’t 

respond to on the specific situation, but what I would say is that 

we in this government have been working very carefully on the 

issue of domestic violence because we believe that is a very 

insidious problem that causes all kinds of other problems in our 

community. 

 

We passed The Victims of Domestic Violence Act which now 

we’ve just received notice that the Government of Prince 

Edward Island has now passed this Act, basically copying what 

we’ve done. We know other jurisdictions are interested in this. 

We think and we know that we, as a social democratic 

government, have been working very hard with, primarily 

women, but all parts of the community, to make sure that we do 

everything we can to rid our society of domestic violence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Power Line Contract 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

for the minister responsible for SaskPower. The Liberals have 

found out in the paper that the Condie project is proceeding. 

Well, Mr. Minister, we found out that the Condie project — a 

$5 million contract — has been awarded to a company by the 

name of Remcon from Prince Albert. And, Mr. Minister, last 

year Remcon walked off the Coteau Hills pipeline project 

supervised by the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) office in Rosetown. 

I understand the Coteau Hills and the PFRA are currently in 

litigation with Remcon over this matter. We have now learned 

that the Condie power line contract is being given to Remcon 

without a bond. 

 

Mr. Minister, why would you award a $5 million contract to 

anyone without a bond, let alone to a company with a troubled 

track record like Remcon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 

member opposite that due diligence was done, that this award 

was in fact . . . part of it was tendered to Remcon who were the 

low bidder. I can also say that the management of the 

corporation has gone through this process on numerous 

occasions with numerous different contacts and Remcon, as I 

said, was successful. 

 

With respect to due diligence and Remcon’s ability to do the 

work, you . . . the member opposite can be assured that they 

will in fact do due diligence and scrutiny has been done by the 

corporation and they will in fact complete that portion of the 

Condie-QE line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, will you give us the 

assurance that the company who gets the Condie job will be 

required to have a bond? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 

member that the corporation will have the ability, that all due 

diligence was done, and that the corporation’s interests have 

been served. 

 

With respect to a bond, I am not aware that that corporation has 

not received . . . got a bond to cover this. I will be checking this 

with my officials to ensure that all measure of due diligence has 

been done. I’ll be reporting to the member very shortly after 

question period, as soon as I hear from my officials. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Reconstruction Charge 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

this morning you and Jack Messer got an accounting lesson 

from the Provincial Auditor. And as previous members said, it 

turns out SaskPower is gouging consumers even more than it is 

currently admitting, because you’re not including the so-called 

reconstruction charge in the bottom line of SaskPower’s profits. 

According to the Provincial Auditor, that means SaskPower’s 

profits last year were actually 153 million, not 139 million as 

reported. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you trying to hide this $14 million tax 

grab? No one else in the province can receive income and not 

count it. Are you simply trying to cover up the fact that you are 

gouging consumers? Either count it or allow everyone else to 

set aside non-taxable income for the replacement of equipment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the   



930  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

member opposite that what he has just done and what members 

of the Liberal Party have just done is attack the credibility of 

three major accounting firms in this country: Ernst & Young, 

Deloitte & Touche, and KPMG. And what they also have done 

is attack the credibility of Mr. Ron Ellis and Mr. Rupert James, 

who happen to disagree with the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me give you a little bit of Mr. Ellis’s 

credentials. And this is a quote from Hansard this morning. 

And what I do is I challenge both of you to go outside of this 

House, make these statements outside of this House before Mr. 

Ellis and Mr. James, who are in this legislature waiting to 

respond. Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from Mr. Ellis, who 

says: 

 

I act as an adviser to the Auditor General of Canada, to the 

Provincial Auditor of Newfoundland, and to the Provincial 

Auditor in Alberta. To my knowledge, and certainly in all 

the cases they have discussed with me, where they find an 

accounting issue — and they disagree with the accounting 

followed by the corporation — before going public and 

criticizing that accounting, they obtain a second 

professional opinion, independent opinion, from another 

firm, my firm, or another one of the big six firms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor will not get an opinion that 

is in keeping with his position from any one of those six. And if 

he can, he should get that opinion and table it in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High-risk Youth 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Manitoba has clearly recognized the importance of 

identifying high-risk young people. Our neighbour to the east 

has recently finished conducting a study which reveals it has 

4,500 high-risk kids with a cost attached to that province of 

$1.4 million a day for treatment and other services. This review 

was conducted to look at how to improve services to troubled 

kids. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba realizes the importance 

of reaching out to these troubled young people early enough to 

make a difference. I wish I could say the same thing about this 

government, Mr. Speaker, but I can’t 

 

My question to the government is: when will the province 

identify how many young people in Saskatchewan are at risk so 

that we can determine the cost and the best way to help them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I want to first indicate that in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have a very comprehensive 

treatment, assessment, and observation program that we have to 

ensure that we closely monitor the number of individuals that 

are affected by addiction gaming in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just recently, within the last month, Mr. 

Speaker, within the last six weeks I’ve been to Manitoba, have 

had a discussion with the minister responsible for gaming in 

Manitoba, who told me that prior to them implementing their 

study, they wanted to ensure that they had a complete review of 

all of the gaming that was being done in their province. They 

wanted an assurance that all of the gaming that they were going 

to initiate in their province has been stabilized and then prepare 

to do the review. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we are just completing this 

process and are making that kind of an examination as we speak 

in this House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

challenge that member simply by telling him that your 

government has not even done an impact study on gaming in 

this province yet to determine the high level of addiction that 

we have. 

 

This government has not done a lot of things. It has not set up a 

task face to identify youth at risk, as we have suggested. It has 

not done a study . . . allowed the Children’s Advocate an 

all-party committee to review and conduct studies on 

everything surrounding youth at risk. And you have not done a 

great deal of things that we have suggested, including adopt my 

measures to combat child prostitution Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is maintaining it’s meeting the 

needs of children, but how can this government be doing that if 

they don’t even know how many children fall into a high-risk 

category? The Manitoba report concluded, and I quote: 

 

These kids may be costing that much because we didn’t 

even start early enough. Early intervention is what makes 

the difference. 

 

And I am asking now the Justice minister again: please commit 

to a task force comprised of all stakeholders to work on 

solutions to the problems plaguing our young people, who are 

the very future of our province. Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question on behalf of the government very briefly. And I want 

to say two things, if I may, to the hon. member opposite, who 

brings to the question period an obvious sincerity — one can 

see that — but obviously an unfortunate tendency to politicize a 

problem which is very, very complex. It involves social, 

economic, cultural, and educational considerations. And she 

continues to politicize it, and in so doing, diminishes the 

sincerity that she brings to this particular issue — without any 

recognition of our children’s action plan; without any 

recognition the children’s action plan has been recognized 

internationally and nationally. 

 

We acknowledge that more needs to be done. We understand 

that the problem is not only a Manitoba problem or a 

Saskatchewan problem; it’s a kids-at-risk problem right across 

the country. That’s why we’re fighting for a child national tax 

credit program; the dental program. 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

Why in the world do you insist on some form of simplistic 

solutions, in a partisan way, about this issue? What you should 

be doing is raising the consciousness of this matter in a sincere 

and positive way and not in a shamelessly political, and if I may 

say so, almost blatantly inaccurate way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to table 

pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, the 

Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan on Executive Council and SaskPower. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 1 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few remarks 

about the Bill that we’re speaking about today in terms of Bill 

No. 1, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act. While the 

Act is generally a housekeeping Act in terms of the 

reassessment and security. On the whole issue of the role of The 

Northern Municipalities Act, I wish to elaborate. First of all, 

give a brief of what the northern municipalities are currently 

encountering in their duties as northern municipal governments. 

 

Again being a former mayor of my town of Ile-a-la Crosse, it 

does give me somewhat of an insight as to some of the 

problems associated with The Northern Municipalities Act. And 

that’s why any amendment, no matter how large or how small 

or how insignificant, especially when it comes to housekeeping 

to a very important issue of reassessment . . . we must make 

sure that we first of all get the Assembly here to understand 

what the northern municipal government is all about. 

 

On many occasions most of the northern municipalities in 

northern Saskatchewan are local aboriginal people. On many 

occasions there are also people of non-aboriginal ancestry on 

these committees, and it’s really a cohesive team. 

 

The municipal structure in the North consists of the mayor, on 

some occasions six councillors, and other occasions five, and 

still on other occasions even a smaller number than that. 

 

(1430) 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the role of northern municipal 

governments is quite different, significantly different, than that 

of southern mayors and councillors — the small amount of tax 

base in northern Saskatchewan that we currently enjoy, and also 

the fact that we’re isolated communities. We don’t have no RM 

structure. We have very little work being done in the regional 

economic development authority concept. It’s in its infancy 

stages. 

 

There is a huge tract of land which is being administered by the 

current provincial government in terms of royalties and 

revenues and leases from mining companies, forestry 

companies, tourism outfits, and the list goes on and on. 

 

So any time we speak about reassessment, what you’re dealing 

with here is a group of northern communities administered by 

local people and really have very little influence in terms of 

what happens on the lands in and around each of their 

municipal structures. 

 

As well, it’s also complemented by the fact that many 

communities in the North are also governed by band and band 

council — a chief and the band councillors. 

 

So there are two sides of the coin in northern Saskatchewan and 

we want to make sure that we get to understand that. 

 

What does reassessment really mean for northern 

Saskatchewan? The impacts are yet to be felt. Most 

administrators that we spoke to still don’t see a significant shift 

in terms of the amount of income they’re going to receive at a 

local level. And any amendments that talk about some of these 

things, they certainly want more information on. 

 

And in essence, how does the amendment affect assessment to 

the mining sector, Mr. Speaker? There’s a lot of questions that 

the municipal governments have in terms of, is this assessment 

going to diminish the royalty structure, is it going to diminish 

the lease payments that are paid to the northern revenue-sharing 

trust account? 

 

These are questions that they have. And to understand what 

northern municipal government is all about, you have to really 

be in . . . to live there and to see that the mayor and council play 

a larger role than what they do in southern communities. 

They’re dealing with housing problems; they’re dealing with 

welfare case problems. They’re dealing with economic 

development; they’re dealing with social development. They’re 

dealing with everything from garbage collection, tax collection, 

to even patrolling the community for stray dogs. And the list 

goes on and on. 

 

So in that sense they’re . . . practically, mayors and councillors 

play a significantly different role than that of southern 

Saskatchewan. So I think it’s very important . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

  



932  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great deal of 

pleasure for me to introduce the Member of Parliament for 

Regina-Lumsden and the past Chair of the Crown Corporations 

Committee, Mr. John Solomon. 

 

He came to Saskatchewan in response to the invitation to attend 

the 50th anniversary celebration of the Crown Corporations 

Committee. Unfortunately, because of the vagaries of airline 

schedules, instead of getting here at 10:30, he arrived at 2:30. 

Nevertheless, he retains a keen interest in the affairs of Crown 

corporations as well as a very well-developed sense of injustice 

for the automobile gas prices and the drug prices that are 

current in this country. 

 

I would ask all members to welcome Mr. John Solomon to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess one of the 

big problems that we have in northern Saskatchewan 

communities is that there is very little financial compensation in 

support for some of the work that is required in these northern 

communities. And most of the grief and the problems are 

generally assumed and generally beared upon by local mayors 

and council. 

 

So the role of the mayors and councils in many of these 

communities is a very, very significant role. The mayors and 

councils don’t move in terms of any planning they have for the 

community. The community generally stays the same. So local 

leadership is very, very vital to these northern communities. 

 

On the same token, when you talk about reassessment and the 

impacts of some of these changes, there’s a great pile of 

questions that need to be answered. And as you’re aware, Mr. 

Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan they have what they call a 

northern revenue-sharing trust account in which the proceeds of 

leased lands from the Crown — Crown land — in northern 

Saskatchewan all get collected by governments, and then they 

use a portion of those dollars to grant to these northern 

municipalities for some of their capital works needs. 

 

A lot of these communities are in severe problems in terms of 

some of their local infrastructure needs, and this small fund is 

what they use to compensate for extra costs of supplying the 

community with either extra equipment or expansion or other 

examples of community needs. So when the northern 

revenue-sharing trust account dollars are concerned, and 

certainly are being impacted by reassessment, a whole pile of 

questions begin to get asked by northern leaders. 

 

So in the northern community of . . . northern communities in 

general, when you have reassessment in any way, shape or 

form, there are questions. It’s much like myself being a 

landowner, having somebody else represent me at a hearing in 

terms of the assessment. 

 

In general that’s what’s happening in northern Saskatchewan. 

The communities are living on the land but a lot of the fees and 

the taxes are being considered and being discussed by the 

provincial government. Now with the mining sector, and again 

that really concerns a lot of people in terms of what’s going on 

here. 

 

To appreciate what the northern communities are doing, they’re 

doing a significant amount of work for the meagre amount of 

dollars that they’re getting. And many people consider the 

northern municipalities rich. They figure there’s a lot of money 

going into them. But, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is there 

is very little money going into these communities. And any time 

you begin to impact and affect the meagre amount of monies 

going into these communities to the northern revenue-sharing 

trust account, questions get asked. 

 

So in reference to the municipality . . . or Bill No. 1, we want to 

make sure and encourage the Minister of Northern Affairs, or 

the Minister of Municipal Government, to sit down with the 

northern communities and explain to them what reassessment 

— the impact of reassessment — really is. And until, unless, 

they do that we cannot have good dialogue; we cannot have 

thoughtful discussion on how we can really come on with new 

legislation in reference to reassessment. 

 

So at this point in time the questions remain, and I therefore 

move we adjourn the motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member’s motion to adjourn is out 

of order. He has previously moved to adjourn debate, and 

debate will continue. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a very few points. 

These Bills are virtually identical and largely housekeeping. 

They bring the affected legislation into line with the new 

division of duties between municipalities and health boards 

under The Public Health Act. They also implement the 

additional delays for reassessment. Some other minor changes 

are also made to rather obsolete clauses. 

 

We don’t have a great deal of difficulty, and we think it . . . we 

will further examine in detail in the Committee of the Whole, 

but no general comment is needed any further I don’t think, at 

this point. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is of 

concern to me is that we have the additional phase-in period 

provided, but so far as we are aware, there isn’t a single 

northern municipality which is going to avail itself of the 

increased phase-in period. I think this calls for some answers 

from the Minister of Municipal Government as to what the 

purpose is. 

 

As I see it, there are at least two separate problems here. One,   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

of course, that the six-year phase-in was only announced after 

the year for reassessment had already commenced. It was 

announced of course the end of January of this year at the 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

convention. Reassessment was to commence effective January 

1, 1997. 

 

Well if our municipalities require tax tools in order to deal with 

the tax shifts that are going on this year as a result of 

reassessment, then as I said yesterday, these tax tools should’ve 

been in place at least a year ahead of time. The reassessment 

figures and the valuation figures from our assessment agency 

should have been in place at least one year ahead of time. 

 

It is my submission that if these had been in place last spring, 

instead of they’re still not fully in place now, our municipalities 

could much better have dealt with the problems of the tax shifts 

created in reassessment and would have been in a far better 

position to set their policy and decide how to deal with the 

various items and tax shifts. 

 

Instead we have some so-called tax tools such as the six-year 

phase-in which we are bringing to legislation in this province 

this year, that appears to amount to a big zero, Mr. Speaker. As 

far as we’re aware, not one rural municipal government is using 

the six-year phase-in, not one northern municipal government is 

using the six-year phase-in, and I believe maybe one urban. 

 

Whether or not the six-year phase-in would have been a 

valuable tool had it been brought in a year ago, when it should 

have, I’m not able to say. But at least the tax tools, the powers 

given to municipalities, would have had more meaning if they 

had had a proper amount of time to look at assessed values, to 

look at taxation policy, and then decide on the appropriate mix. 

 

I frankly wonder why the minister is proceeding with the 

six-year phase-in Bill when in point of fact the indications she 

has are that not one municipality is interested in using the 

six-year phase-in. So what’s the purpose of this Bill at all? 

 

The other point in terms of the six-year phase-in that needs to 

be said is that of course our problems in reassessment in 

Saskatchewan are created because we last had a full-scale 

reassessment in 1965. That is far too long to leave this difficult 

process. And because it is so out of date, we have tremendous 

tax shifts created. 

 

Now the province tells us that in order to avoid a similar 

problem in the future, the intention is to have six-year . . . a 

three-year rolling reassessment. Now three-year rolling 

reassessment, Mr. Speaker, would mean that we will have a 

new reassessment in the year 2000 — three years from today — 

and yet a six-year phase-in. 

 

I simply fail to understand how you can have a six-year 

phase-in of an assessment that is going to be out of date within 

three years. If you reassess within three years, but you’re still 

phasing in the old assessment, it seems to me that the whole 

system starts to look pretty chaotic. 

 

So I think that our government, our provincial government, has 

simply not aided municipalities to deal with the problems of 

reassessment. They should have ensured that the assessment 

agency had the assessment figures to our municipal 

governments a year ago. They should have had taxation policy 

and the tax tools in the hands of our municipal governments a 

year ago. 

 

And if they had done that, then I predict that reassessment could 

have proceeded far smoother with far more predictability and 

far more acceptance and understanding by ratepayers than what 

has been the case; that the reason for the dislocation caused this 

year has been because municipal governments and ratepayers 

simply have not been informed of what the score is; and an 

eleventh hour decision to move from three-year phase-in to 

six-year phase-in is simply not a solution at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 3 — The Urban 

Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because the 

ongoing dialogue continues daily with our municipalities in 

light of what this government has done in terms of the 

downloading to both our urban and rural municipalities, we’d 

like to not proceed with this Bill. So I would once again move 

adjournment of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1445) 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No 2 — The Rural 

Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the comments I have just made 

about the northern municipal amendments also apply of course 

to the rural municipal amendments. Those comments I think 

bear repetition but perhaps I will spare members opposite the 

full repetition, if I may. 

 

However I do think that before we proceed with this Bill, that it 

really . . . we really should hear from the Minister of Municipal 

Government as to why she’s proceeding with the six-year 

phase-in when, as I understand it, not one rural municipal 

government is going to employ the six-year phase-in. What 

point, what purpose, does this amendment have? 

 

If rural councils were telling us that the six-year phase-in was 

valuable to them and would assist them to deal with the 

problems of reassessment, I would certainly be pleased to 

support it. The indications however, are that not one municipal 

council will be using the six-year phase-in, so I guess, as the   



934  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

kids say nowadays, what’s your point? And how can you have a 

six-year phase-in when there’s a three-year reassessment in the 

year 2000? 

 

So the whole thing is 11th hour. It’s desperate; it’s confusing; 

it’s chaotic. It does nothing to address the situation and I really 

think that before we proceed to second reading, we should hear 

from the minister as to why the six-year phase-in is of benefit 

here when not one rural municipal government appears 

interested in using it. 

 

And for that reason, until we can hear from the minister on her 

reasons as to what possible value or purpose this Bill is, I would 

move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 4 — The 

Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 39 — The 

Multiculturalism Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 25 — The Gas 

Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to bring a point 

of order before you retire. 

 

The Speaker:  Leave is not required in order to present a 

point of order. What is the hon. member’s point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, on April 15 while you were not in 

the chair, certain comments were made by the hon. member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland which are of great concern to me and to 

my colleagues. 

 

And if I may refer, Mr. Speaker, to page 875 of the proceedings 

of that date, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland made a 

number of statements directly attacking the integrity of the hon. 

member for Humboldt, and to a somewhat more limited extent, 

the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena, including words like 

shameful, dishonest, deliberate twisting of the truth, and 

referring to the hon. member as a discredit to this institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this is a violation both of the 

principles of unparliamentary language and is also offensive to 

rule 32. And I would ask Mr. Speaker to review the statements 

that I have directed to the . . . directed Your Honour to. And it is 

my respectful submission that the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland should be asked to withdraw and apologize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that these statements would be 

objectionable when made against any hon. member of this 

House, but particularly to a member who has clearly shown a 

long commitment to the issue of child poverty, to which she 

was speaking at the time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I recall the remarks made by 

the member from Saskatoon Sutherland that the hon. member 

from North Battleford refers. I recall at that time also that the 

Speaker was in the chair, and that the Speaker was quite . . . 

was listening to the statements made by the member and that 

there were . . . all of the comments made by the member were 

quite in order. 

 

And I would also refer to Beauchesne’s, the section on content 

of speeches. Had the member made remarks in his debate that 

were not sanctioned by use as a member, I’m certain that the 

Speaker at that time would have raised it and brought it to the 

member’s attention. 

 

Therefore I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this point is clearly out of 

order. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ve listened to the remarks made, and I want 

to thank the hon. member for North Battleford for bringing the 

point of order and the Government Whip for his remarks on the 

point of order raised by the hon. member for North Battleford. 

 

It, first of all, is permissible for members to raise a point of 

order related to comments made by members in debate. That’s 

not an uncommon occurrence and it is not improper for that to 

be done. 

 

It should also be noted that in the course of debate, members 

clearly have the right to express views, and differences of views 

are not grounds for finding debate to be out of order. 

 

I do want to remind all hon. members that in bringing debate to 

this Chamber, that we are all bound by the rule 28 which does 

require that debate take place through the Chair. 

 

And also rule 32, which does require that debate take place with 

an environment and confines of respect that are befitting debate 

in this Assembly by members who are elected to represent the 

citizens of our province. 

 

I recognize as well that passionate debate belongs in this   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

Assembly. 

 

Having made those remarks, I want to remind all hon. members 

that in bringing debate to this Assembly, that it is always in the 

best interest of the institution that the debate reflect the tone of 

respect that citizens, I think, have come to expect and recognize 

as appropriate in these chambers. 

 

Having heard the remarks of both hon. members and brought 

these matters to the attention of the House, I must also remind 

hon. members and point out that it is a practice of this House 

that in bringing a point of order, that the point of order must be 

brought at the earliest possible time in which it is possible to do 

that. 

 

And that will be . . . Order. That will mean under some 

circumstances that a point of order may be brought which has to 

do with debate which occurred on the previous day after the 

opportunity’s been there to review the content of Hansard. 

 

However, as the hon. member for North Battleford has pointed 

out, the remarks that he raises and brings in his point of order 

were . . . he makes reference to Hansard of two days ago, April 

15, and for that reason I must find that the point of order is not 

well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Speaker, in as much as I am the subject 

of the point of order, I’d just like to say that if I have given 

offence to members opposite, I sincerely apologize. The 

remarks weren’t intended in that spirit. And if offence has been 

taken, I apologize for that. It wasn’t intended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The Chair wishes to acknowledge the remarks 

that the hon. member for Saskatoon Sutherland who, as he 

correctly points out, although not required to do so by ruling of 

the Chair, has voluntarily expressed his apology. And that is 

acknowledged and appreciated by the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 24  The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act/Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le 

renvoi des instances 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his official, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to have 

with me today, Darcy McGovern from legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, if I may ask the hon. 

minister . . . of course the question of jurisdiction and transfer 

of proceedings is one which has been largely covered by the 

common law and the rules of court, and ordinarily when 

parliament legislates in an area of the law, a technical area of 

the law such as this, which has been handled hitherto by the 

common law, it is usually because there is some problem that 

the common law has not addressed. 

 

And if I may ask the minister, what are the problems with 

common law procedure that has caused the government to think 

that it is now necessary to intervene? How does this Act change 

the common law? How will the procedure be different than the 

common law? What are the difficulties and the problems which 

have given rise to the necessity for this legislation? 

 

If I may continue — I see the minister is consulting, and that’s 

fine. I wish to thank his officials. I see that, for instance, one of 

the definitions contained in the Act is a real and substantial 

connection with Saskatchewan and with the facts on which the 

proceedings are based. And I’m just wondering like, how does 

that alter the common law? What is the problem with the 

common law? It seems to me that’s simply a restating of the 

common law. Am I missing something here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m pleased to try to answer the 

question. I think what happened is that the Morguard decision 

of the Supreme Court of Canada laid out some rules which were 

to be used right across the country. What then was recognized, 

that there were a number of different jurisdictional rules across 

the country that ended up causing problems in a number of 

different ways. 

 

So basically, you know, if you look at what the intent or what 

the purpose of this Act is, it’s to replace all of the different 

jurisdictional rules currently used in Canadian courts with a 

uniform set of standards that would be the same right across the 

country for determining jurisdiction. And it would basically . . . 

redoing these rules would coordinate all of the rules across the 

country to follow the principles set out in the common law by 

the Supreme Court of Canada and the Morguard decision. And 

also we would use this to complement The Enforcement of 

Canadian Judgments Act. 

 

And also — and this is an important point — that we would 

provide a mechanism — and I think this goes maybe even more 

to the heart of your question — a mechanism whereby superior 

courts in Canada would be able to transfer litigation to a more 

appropriate forum. 

 

And this is a power that’s increasingly identified as a need 

because of the fact that often litigation relates to a number of 

jurisdictions. And the numbers of applications and the . . . also 

basically multiplicity of actions that may arise, means that for 

the common . . . or for the courts to sort it all out, ends up with 

quite a number of difficulties. 

 

What we’re doing here is trying to set out some rules which 

have been developed by extensive consultation with the federal 

government and all of the provincial and territorial 

governments, is you know, rules that will . . . we can all use to 

deal with these particular problems. 

 

I think another example that you may recall, I think, from some 

of your legal studies way back a long time ago, like mine were, 

you know, relates to airplane traffic and exactly where is an   



936  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

airplane when a lawsuit arises. If it’s flying over Saskatchewan 

and there’s a lawsuit that results from something happening on 

that airplane, does the Saskatchewan court have jurisdiction? 

Those kinds of questions. 

 

What the legislation does do is set out rules which will 

eliminate a number of these strange little problems. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that we have 

intergovernmental cooperation in the form of a uniform 

legislation commission. I seem to interpret the minister’s 

comments as saying that this is the fruits of that cooperation and 

that parallel legislation will be introduced in other legislatures 

and parliaments of this country. 

 

I wonder if he could just explain if I’m correct on that and if in 

fact he anticipates say, parallel legislation being introduced in 

other legislatures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to confirm this Bill 

comes out of the work of the Uniform Law Conference of 

Canada which, as you know, works all year round but meets 

every August usually to gather together the best information 

and ideas from all of the jurisdictions in Canada. And so this is 

legislation that has come forth from the Uniform Law 

Conference of Canada. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’m satisfied with that 

preamble, and I’m prepared to move into the clause-by-clause 

study unless my colleague from the third party has any opening 

comments. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, not being a lawyer, I am not perhaps quite as familiar 

with some of the contexts and terms that are used in this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

But I’m wondering if . . . Under clause 8 of the Bill, it 

establishes residency requirements for unincorporated 

associations. Could you clarify this by giving us some example 

of such associations and how this clause would affect them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the examples are unincorporated 

groups within a community, and sometimes it could be you end 

up with a group of people coming together for a task that 

doesn’t end up requiring them to incorporate a non-profit 

corporation, for example. I suppose it could be something like 

working towards a short-term building of a community hall or 

something like that. Normally, people would set up a non-profit 

corporation to do that, but sometimes they don’t. And if that 

arises and those people are involved in litigation, then you 

would — and you were attempting to go after that group or 

they’re in court in some way — then what you would do is you 

try to figure out, okay, where are the people who are involved 

in doing that particular work. 

 

I think practically, if you would look at the legislation it would 

be 6 and 7 would be used much more often than 8, because any 

time there is litigation it usually involves individuals or 

corporations or partnerships and not unincorporated 

associations. But we end up having to have this in the 

legislation in case there is a situation like that. 

 

The way the definition goes here is that you would then look at 

who are the officers of this group or the people who are running 

the group, where do they live. Do they live in Saskatchewan? If 

it was a group that across the country . . . and all their activity 

was in Manitoba, for example, then practically the court here 

would use this legislation and say it makes more sense that the 

court in Brandon handle this, and if the court in Brandon agreed 

that made sense, well then the whole thing would be 

transferred. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So if someone like a local branch of, 

say, the 4-H, the Nottingham 4-H Club, which is 

unincorporated — simply a group of children and some leaders 

. . . this is the kind of people that you would be talking about as 

unincorporated associations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you. In clause 9(e)(i), it 

states that contractual obligations fall under Saskatchewan’s 

jurisdiction if, and I quote: 

 

“. . . obligations were to be performed, to a substantial 

extent, in Saskatchewan;” 

 

Well what does that mean — what is a substantial extent and 

how broad or how narrow is that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that’s a question that a judge 

would decide in each particular case. But an example could be 

if there was a contract that was entered into which involved 

perhaps transporting — just using an example off the top of my 

head here — but transporting some people from Manitoba to 

British Columbia and they went through Saskatchewan. 

 

Well the contract itself about that transportation probably would 

have as its place where it would be disputed, in Manitoba or 

Vancouver, if that’s where the parties were — not 

Saskatchewan. Even though some things that have been done in 

the contract, like driving through on the Trans-Canada 

Highway, are done in Saskatchewan, you wouldn’t fight over 

that contract in a Saskatchewan court. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Under section 12, I’m not clear on 

where it spells out the terms under which another court can 

transfer cases to Saskatchewan or vice versa. My concern here 

is, is there any danger of another jurisdiction unloading a 

number of its cases on Saskatchewan’s courts to clear backlogs 

within their own province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is in 

section 15 which sets out our court’s discretion to accept or 

refuse a transfer. And practically, this transfer of a proceeding 

would not take place unless our court in Saskatchewan would 

agree to accept it. And then it sets out in section 15 what are the 

requirements before the court would accept it. 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

And first off obviously is that the court here thinks that they 

have the appropriate territorial competence in this proceeding 

and they also have the subject matter competence; they’re able 

to deal with the subject matter. Also there is the clear power in 

here for our court to refuse to accept the transfer if it considers 

it just that the matter should not come here. 

 

So I think that’s quite a few protections to protect us from 

dumping of cases from another jurisdiction. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I think this spills over to clause 10 too, but I 

think it’s the same point I would like to put to the minister, if I 

may, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I throw this out as a question rather 

than a comment, but is there any concern in the Department of 

Justice that when we have large national cases that have 

particular ramifications for our province, that we may be faced 

with large corporations and large law firms who are more 

interested in having their cases heard in say, Toronto or Ottawa 

or Vancouver or Calgary? 

 

And if I may just put this to the minister, my recollection is that 

over potash prorationing, that there was such a situation of a 

very large litigation involving national and international 

companies and national law firms who frankly may have 

preferred to have heard it somewhere other than Saskatoon, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And is there any concern that this legislation may lead to a 

situation where there is a very major litigation involving large 

international corporations, that even though it has particular 

relevance to Saskatchewan, that they might prefer to have this 

matter heard in Toronto rather than in the courts of rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well what I would say is that this 

question has been discussed and raised and I think discussed at 

great length in the uniform law conference itself. But 

practically, we know that when there’s a real and substantial 

connection with Saskatchewan, our courts are very keen on 

having the matter dealt with here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think part of your question maybe relates to some of those 

kinds of litigation which involve quite a number of provinces. 

And it could be something that relates to, perhaps, industries 

right across the country — every province has an industry. And 

would this in fact then allow for decisions to be made in another 

province or another place? 

 

(1515) 

 

I think there are two sides to that. One of them is the actual 

organization of the case, which may make sense, such as we 

sometimes do now in the large class action suits. And one that 

we dealt with quite extensively in last session of this legislature 

related to the breast implants, where most of our Saskatchewan 

litigants were working through a case in the British Columbia 

court because that made sense practically and jurisdictionally. 

 

We think that this legislation allows the tools for the courts and 

for the litigants to make the most appropriate decision about 

where a case would be. We do not see it as, in any way, 

eliminating the possibility that a matter set in Saskatchewan, 

like the potash case that you talked about related to 

Saskatchewan assets and to Saskatchewan policies, we don’t 

see how that would ever be dealt with in another province. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank the minister for those comments. And I 

can see that perhaps in the case of potash prorationing there was 

obviously a particular connection to this province. But is there 

any concern, as you said with the breast implant case, that 

where in effect the case could go to any province in Canada 

when you have a lot of international corporations and national 

law firms? It’s kind of hard to imagine that they are likely to 

pick Saskatchewan as their venue of choice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I guess all I would say is that I know 

very many able and good counsel in Saskatchewan who I think 

firms would actually come here to have cases dealt with if they 

could choose jurisdiction. 

 

I think the key point to remember is, as you said on section 10, 

where you look at the . . . Sort of one of the main objects of this 

legislation is to look at the comparative convenience and 

expense for all of the parties in a proceeding. And I think 

practically, we have much faith in our judges to be able to 

discern this and make sure that the appropriate jurisdiction is 

selected in dealing with that. 

 

But I think also there are questions like you raise where we 

can’t predict every case that would show up. 

 

But practically, if we end up being able to deal with litigation 

and all the parties agree that the contract could be dealt with 

here, because we can get a matter to court in six months as 

opposed to three or four years in some other part of Canada, 

who knows, it may be a place where our lawyers can provide 

some leadership in the country and solve problems that way. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — It does strike me though, Mr. Minister, that in 

class actions or quasi-class actions, and I suppose perhaps 

tainted blood would be another current example, we in 

Saskatchewan surely will always be caught by the factor that 

there will be more people affected in say Toronto than in 

Saskatchewan. And from what you have said and from my 

reading of the Bill, that alone would be a strong argument for 

saying that Toronto should be preferred over, say Regina, 

because obviously the number of affected litigants will be much 

higher in central Canada than here. 

 

Well you have to accept the fairness of the argument that, say 

again in the case of tainted blood, there would simply be more 

people resident near Toronto than near Regina. On the other 

hand, that will presumably impose some additional cost and 

burden on the Saskatchewan litigants who in most cases will be 

the ones to have to travel because they will be in the minority. 

 

  



938  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

And I’m wondering if the minister could indicate, in hardship 

cases such as these where our people will probably have to go 

out of province, would the department consider any form of 

assistance for those hardship cases who, because of this 

legislation, would probably not have their case heard in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I can answer the first 

question and say that we wouldn’t have any plans at this point 

to set up a budget of that kind. 

 

I think what I would also say is that under the present system, 

without this legislation, probably the kind of things that we talk 

about would be involved in litigation both in Saskatchewan and 

in the other province. And so instead of . . . you’d end up with 

two lawsuits that the person would participate in. And so that’s 

one of the issues that we’re getting at here, is to have . . . and I 

guess that basically the other piece of legislation, the Canadian 

judgments Act, relates to the transportability of judgements that 

one gets in another province. 

 

But I think practically, what we’re attempting to do here is look 

at the comparative convenience and expense of the parties. And 

there may be some situations like you identify where they may 

require somebody to go some . . . another place for the 

litigation. But I think at the present time, we have a system 

where they probably would end up having to litigate and be 

involved in litigation in both places. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the 

members for allowing me to take this time. I want to introduce 

to the members of the Legislative Assembly someone that I 

didn’t recognize the name when I see the card. He was a 

constituency president for my riding of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood when I was a candidate, before I was 

elected; Moved from there to Unity, to be a teacher in Unity, 

Saskatchewan; and moved from there to the Yukon to become a 

member of the Yukon Legislative Assembly and won the 

government, on the government’s side. 

 

I want to introduce to you, Doug Livingston, the member of the 

Legislative Assembly from the Yukon, and I want to, while I’m 

on my feet, ask him to say a big welcome and a hello to his wife 

Lou, and Jonathon, Ken, Andrea, and Greg. 

 

And we look forward to seeing them back in Saskatchewan 

when your job is completed up there, if it’s ever completed. But 

best wishes on your term as a legislator in the Yukon and 

congratulations and welcome to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Pringle:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair:  I recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Yes, can I have leave? 

 

The Chair:  Actually the Chair reports to committee 

members. My confusion is the hon. member is sitting on the 

opposition side, which doesn’t pose a problem, but I neglected 

to ask if the member has leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 

thanks to the members. I would like to also say hi to Doug. 

 

I don’t know Doug, but we spent two years in the Yukon in 

Mayo, which you would know well. And so to me that seems 

like . . . in many ways the Yukon seems like home. Our hearts 

are still there in many ways, although we love Saskatchewan. 

 

But when you’re back there, say hi to people in Mayo, and we 

still keep in touch with many of them. So, good to see you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member for Unity on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murrell: — For leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you. I too would like to welcome 

Doug. He was also involved very heavily with the Wilkie 

constituency in the 1990s and we miss him a lot and his 

leadership. And we hope that he and Lou are enjoying their new 

home. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 24 

(continued) 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  Committee members, in the interest of time, part 

III, which contains clauses 12 through 23, if there are no 

objections, I’ll . . . 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I have no objection dealing with the part as a 

whole but I do have an amendment relating to clause 12, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. 

 

The Chair:  Since there are amendments, or at least one 

amendment, we’ll deal clause by clause. 

 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Relative to 

my previous comments, it does seem to me that, as I say, in 

class or quasi-class actions, the reality is that just because of our 

lower numbers compared to say central Canada or Vancouver, 

that more often our litigants will have to go out of the province 

than the other way around. And the breast implant case referred 

to by the Minister of Justice, the tainted blood case referred to 

by myself, are examples where we may well have hardship 

cases who will have to go out of Saskatchewan and this will 

create extra burdens on them and extra expense for them. 

 

And while I accept that the sheer weight of numbers and 

inconvenience would dictate that they would go out of 

province, I say we have to accept that’s probably what’s going 

to happen in the majority of cases. And I would ask if the 

Minister of Justice would consider sub-clause (5) to be added, 

to read as follows, that: 

 

(5) The minister may make provision for payment of 

expenses for hardship cases whose litigation is transferred 

to another jurisdiction. 

 

In the wording I have suggested here, discretionary and not 

mandatory, as I don’t think it’s something that should maybe be 

done automatically in all cases. But I think there should be 

some discretionary cases to look after hardship litigants in 

Saskatchewan who will find that their litigation, their case, has 

been sent to, say Toronto or Vancouver. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the Government Whip on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of members 

of the Assembly, in the interest of doing business in a manner a 

little more comfortable in the House because it is rather stuffy 

in here at this moment, whether we members would provide 

leave to go to a more casual form of dress until Mr. Speaker 

arrives. And that way it would be a little easier for us to get 

through the business without sweating quite as much. 

 

(1530) 

 

The Chair:  The Government Whip has requested leave to 

entertain a more casual, i.e. jacketless, method of conducting 

business, it being as stuffy as it is today in this Chamber, until 

Mr. Speaker returns. Does the Government Whip have leave? 

That being agreed . . . that not being agreed. 

 

Why is the member for Regina Victoria on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, I just speak 

to the point of order. I would have some concerns that although 

this is something that would be of direct benefit to the male 

members of the Legislative Assembly, the female members of 

the Legislative Assembly will not be benefited by this action 

any way whatsoever. 

 

The Chair:  There not having been a point of order, 

members of the committee having agreed to a more casual 

attire; that is understood until the return of Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why is the member for North Battleford on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I was going to speak, just 

briefly, to the amendment that I had just proposed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I was going to say regarding the amendment 

I have just proposed, that I would take no objection to 

proceeding on to consideration of other clauses, to come back to 

this one, if the Minister of Justice wishes some time to review 

my amendment to see if it is acceptable to the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of 

problems with the motion. The first problem is that there 

already is a subclause (5) in existence, so that causes some 

problem with the motion. The second one, I think our position 

. . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Perhaps we’re getting ahead of 

ourselves, committee members. I thank the hon. member for 

North Battleford for the motion which we are currently 

reviewing to make certain said motion is in order. 

 

And we have the minister starting to respond to the motion, 

which has not been ruled in or out of order at this stage. So I 

apologize to the minister for cutting him off at that stage, but 

we’re just prematurely dealing with something. 

 

The next order is for the Chair to decide whether this motion is 

in order in its entirety or in some part. That will take some 

moments. 

 

Order. I again thank the member for North Battleford for the 

amendment. On reviewing the amendment to clause 12, the 

amendment is out of order. And I refer members to the rule 

book, section 36: “Money” motion: message to precede. And I 

read in part from rule 36: 

 

Any vote, resolution, address or bill introduced in the 

Assembly for the appropriation of any part of the public 

revenue . . . (later) . . . or to impose any new or additional 

charge upon the public revenue or upon the people, or to 

release or compound any sum of money due to the Crown, 

or to grant any property of the Crown, or to authorize any 

loan or any charge upon the credit of the Province, shall be 

recommended to the Assembly by Message of the 

Lieutenant Governor before it is considered by the 

Assembly. 

 

Therefore, this amendment is out of order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I of course 

accept the ruling of the Chair, but I none the less rise to invite 

the Minister of Justice none the less to consider my proposed 

amendment. 

 

We know that on the federal level we have the special 

assistance program for needy litigants, which is outside of the 

legal aid provision, in order that people bringing special legal   



940  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

actions that would require resources beyond the means of the 

litigants, through LEAF (women’s legal and education action 

fund) and organizations such as that, receive special funding. 

 

My concern is that quasi-class actions that have national interest 

will rarely come into this province. They will typically leave 

this province because we will almost of necessity have a lower 

number of litigants involved than will the other more populace 

provinces. 

 

And I would ask the minister to consider whether in cases such 

as breast implant, tainted blood, and other such situations as 

that where we have very needy people involved in serious 

litigation, if the government would not consider some special 

assistance to those people who will in all likelihood find that 

their jurisdiction moves to, say Toronto. 

 

And I would invite the minister to consider the possibility of 

that amendment, and I would point out again that my proposed 

amendment was discretionary rather than mandatory. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well my response on the discussion is that 

this is uniform legislation which is intended to be introduced 

right across Canada, and so I would not be in favour of that 

particular amendment. That’s not to count out the possibility 

that there are some other places, or some other times, where that 

particular issue may be dealt with. 

 

I think practically, we also know from the second reading 

speech that I gave on this legislation that we will not be 

proclaiming this legislation until a number of other jurisdictions 

have also enacted the legislation. And that may be a number of 

years down the road. 

 

So practically, I guess what I would say is that we do not wish 

to proceed with that type of proposal that you’ve made and we 

wish to proceed with the uniform legislation that’s come from 

the uniform law conference. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I accept again the 

minister’s comments in good faith. And I would however still 

ask that the suggestion not be totally lost sight of, but I would 

request that it be made note of as being an appropriate 

suggestion that may in some other form, in some other venue, 

be acted upon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I can say with all honesty that we 

listen carefully to all of the things that the member from . . . or 

all of the members in the opposition raise because there often 

are good ideas. And we will include this question about funding 

litigants that are in some way disadvantaged. And when an 

appropriate situation arises, we can see if we can include some 

provision for that. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 13 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. There are two things I 

note here as I read this. First of all, if a case is transferred into 

this province from another jurisdiction, then even if it is beyond 

the limitation period in this province, it would still go ahead and 

be determined in Saskatchewan if it is still within the limitation 

period of the transferring province. And I do have some 

comments on that. I would just ask the Minister of Justice to 

confirm if that is a correct interpretation of the effect of this 

clause. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think if you have the condition 

which is set out in section 21(1)(b) which says that: 

 

. . . the transferring court had both territorial and 

subject-matter competence in the proceeding. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — My problem here that I would like to put to the 

minister is that if litigation transferred into Saskatchewan then 

is successful that would be statute barred in Saskatchewan, this 

would be a rather anomalous position if the litigation 

commenced here and the plaintiff was told, I’m sorry, you’re 

out of time, therefore you’re out of court. And yet if the 

litigation started in another province, say in Alberta where it’s 

not barred by a limitation period, it’s then transferred in and 

proceeds and the plaintiff is successful, that strikes me as quite 

an anomaly and something that would strike the average person 

as somewhat peculiar. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to your question 

is that there may be circumstances where the litigation could 

have continued in the jurisdiction where it started. And as you 

will note, as I set out the condition, it has both territorial and 

subject matter competence in the transferring court; so 

practically, the litigation could have continued in Alberta, for 

example, and been completed there. 

 

What may happen though, if you use section 10, is that it may 

make more sense for the convenience of the parties who may be 

Saskatchewan litigants, for example, that the whole case be 

dealt with in Saskatchewan. And obviously the litigants would 

have applied to do that and it would be at the request of some of 

the litigants. 

 

So practically, if the matter wasn’t transferred to Saskatchewan, 

the whole case would just be held in the other province or 

territory where it was being transferred from. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the minister still 

appears to be saying that there may be cases over a car accident, 

medical malpractice, libel and slander, where people could be 

. . . litigants could be outside of limitation periods in our 

legislation, could still be successful in the courts of 

Saskatchewan if they had been transferred in. 

 

I find that an anomaly if that could in fact happen under this 

Act. And I must say, I think most citizens would consider that 

to be a peculiar outcome. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m not quite certain what kind of an 

example that you could use that would fit with your   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

hypothetical case. Practically, if a matter is for example in 

Alberta and those courts have both the territorial and the subject 

matter competence to proceed with the matter, and then they 

transfer it to a Saskatchewan court and the Saskatchewan court 

thinks it’s appropriate to proceed with the matter, then you’re 

dealing with a matter that’s continuing anyway. And as I said 

before, it could be just completed in Alberta if there was a 

problem. 

 

Now I know one of the other issues that’s being dealt with at 

the uniform law conference, and this may be more what your 

question is, is if there are differences in limitation periods 

between provinces as it relates to specific issues, and somebody 

gets an ability to start a lawsuit in another province even after 

it’s been stopped in Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess I’m having a little bit of a hard time figuring out a kind 

of case where a Saskatchewan court has the territorial and 

subject matter competence and the Alberta court also has both 

of those things, or some other province or territory has both of 

those things, which would then create the problem that you’re 

talking about. 

 

But I think the answer to your other question is that there is a 

willingness to discuss and attempt to set common limitation 

periods across the country. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, that was my next 

question. Will the uniform law conference then try and do some 

work so that we will have standard limitation of actions 

throughout Canada, of course depending obviously on their 

adoption by our various legislatures. 

 

But it does strike me, and again if we go back to the cases we 

were talking about a few minutes ago, cases in which there are 

probably some Canadians affected in every province . . . So 

basically from a legal standpoint, you could probably go to any 

jurisdiction in Canada and hear them. Then it becomes, I think, 

somewhat of a problem that the action might be statute-barred 

in one province and not in another. 

 

And that’s what I see in section 22; that because of various 

limitation periods, one of the factors then in litigants looking 

around would be exactly where they’re still within the 

limitation period and where they would be out. But as I said, 

we’ve already been discussing this afternoon some cases which, 

as I understand it, could basically be brought in any province of 

Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question would 

be what we had talked about previously where our courts in 

Saskatchewan have the ability to identify a particular litigant 

that may be forum shopping, and that may be, for example, a 

just reason to refuse a transfer of a case from another province 

to Saskatchewan. And so then practically, if it could be dealt 

with in Alberta under their rules, even if it was more convenient 

and for many other reasons, the court may say, well no, we’re 

not going to let that matter be dealt with in Saskatchewan 

because it’s offensive to Saskatchewan residents for just the 

reasons that you’ve stated. 

 

Clause 22 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 23 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would like to thank the officials . . . or 

my official today, Darcy McGovern from legislative services. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member for Cannington on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 

would just like to thank the minister and his official for coming 

in today and for answering our questions. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I too would like to thank the minister and his 

assistant this afternoon for their assistance in answering 

questions and presenting the legislation. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24  The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings 

Transfer Act/ Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le 

renvoi des instances 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much. To my left is 

Craig Dotson, deputy minister. To my right is Michael 

Littlewood, director of third party funding and legislative 

services. Directly behind me is Ken Horsman, assistant deputy 

minister, and to Mr. Horsman’s left is Mae Boa, executive 

director of finance and operations. Also in attendance is Karen 

Lautsch, manager of school grants; John McLaughlin, executive 

director of the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission; and Cal 

Kirby, the director of facilities planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. To the 

minister welcome, of course, and to the officials . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Ask for her resignation now and save 

you doing it later. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  We’ll start again. We appreciate the fact that   



942  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

we have an opportunity to, I think, bring to the attention of not 

only the Assembly and the opposition, the various changes that 

have occurred in the K to 12 system, the kinds of new ideas and 

new things that have been developed over the year. Those are 

very important, those are very important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to understand. 

 

So I think we’d like to use the opportunity that we have today, 

in terms of the time that has been allotted to us, to clarify some 

things about the K to 12 system, in terms of where we have 

been over the last couple of years, in terms of the fact that we 

had two departments together and now we’re working under 

one department with this minister. And of course we want to get 

some understanding about some of the things that as an 

opposition member I require in terms of getting a better 

understanding of the kinds of changes that we have made. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I guess the first request that I would ask 

of you is if you could have . . . and maybe your officials have 

that material with them today. What I’d like to have in terms of 

some of the latest announcements — we’ve had a lot of 

discussion around assessment and reassessment and those kinds 

of things — whether or not there is a printout available that 

would indicate the assessments of each school division in total 

and that we could then establish what the total provincial 

assessment would be? If that’s available, I would appreciate 

that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can get that information to the 

member. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. The second thing I 

guess, in terms of saving some time later on as well, is to ask 

that the employees that are employed by the Department of 

Education, if I could have a printout in terms of the people that 

are employed. Okay. 

 

And the third thing that I would request, if you could make a 

comment on that as well, would be the latest undertaking by 

your department, of course, is in the area of grant distributions 

and the new grant formula. I’ve been hearing by way of 

telephone calls and by way of some mail-outs . . . mail-ins to 

me, that boards of education have received their information. 

What I’d like to know, if you could supply the entire provincial 

picture. And what I’m asking for, not only is, you know, the 

final total in terms of saying that we have a grant formula that 

distributes a certain amount of money, but also in terms of what 

changes and what amounts of money were distributed in each of 

the areas of recognition of students, in the area of special ed, in 

the area of transportation, those kinds of things. Are those 

figures available? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We can send the member the grant for 

each school board. I’m not sure that it would be possible for us 

to send him all of the different information for each of the 

school divisions by various factors. But certainly we can give 

him the information in terms of the grant. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m actually 

just looking for the provincial picture for those areas. Okay? 

 

As I began my remarks this afternoon, Madam Minister, I 

indicated that we’ve had a chance to look at two departments in 

action, and I’m referring to Post-Secondary and Education. 

 

And I think you’ve had an opportunity to look at one complete 

year with just K to 12 actually working out of the department. 

And I’d ask you to make comments in terms of how you see the 

K to 12 system functioning now in terms of some of the new 

ventures that you’re undertaking, and how it has changed over 

the last year, if indeed it has. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think what’s fair to say is that given 

all of the changes that were coming federally, particularly in the 

training piece that the Minister for Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training released yesterday, the division of the 

department and the creation of two ministers — one responsible 

for K to 12; one responsible for Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training — has meant that one minister, Post-Secondary 

and Skills Training, could focus on the training piece, 

particularly when we have seen a significant reduction of 

federal funding as it pertains to skills training in the province 

over the next three years. So the minister has been able to focus 

on that piece. 

 

I have been able to focus on the K to 12 system and some of the 

issues that we’re facing in K to 12, particularly assessment and 

the implications for school boards across the province; 

particularly the implementation or the continued 

implementation of our core curriculum; particularly the 

discussion that went on in this province for over six months 

regarding restructuring of school divisions. And now we will be 

having a further discussion this spring in terms of the notion of 

what school councils might mean for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think it’s fair to say that when I was the minister 

responsible for both envelopes, it was . . . we had a wide array 

of issues, and issues that were on the burner, so to speak. They 

were there in front of us. And with the division of the ministry 

into K to 12 and post-secondary, we have two ministers that can 

focus in on the issues that are before the public in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister. 

Madam Minister, last year at this time you indicated to me the 

structures that you have in place in terms of the executive 

directors of the various departments. Has there been significant 

changes in the area of executive director? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There have been no changes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In terms of the departmental officials, I note 

that there are different people here representing, for instance, 

the grant areas. I note last year that Mr. Sing Chin was here and 

now you have some . . . And I apologize for missing the name. 

Have there been some changes in the area of grants? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Sing Chin is on leave; he has been 

on leave of absence since the beginning of September. I believe 

he’s on a one-year leave of absence. And Ms. Lautsch is in an 

acting position. 

  



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for providing that name again to 

me. In terms of the administration costs, and we’ve had some 

discussion last year when we were nearing . . . or taking a look 

at how creation of a post-secondary department would alleviate 

some of the financial pressures on the system that was 

operating, can you indicate . . . will you be able to supply the 

figures, in terms of the administrative costs of the Department 

of Ed for last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, we’ll send that information to the 

member. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I note that in terms of looking at the number 

of employees — and you have indicated that you will be 

supplying of course the names of those employees — that the 

number of employees within what was Education, Training and 

Employment, the old department that was responsible for both, 

and the Education portion, now responsible for K to 12, hasn’t 

changed significantly. Are you still sharing employees? Are 

there people that will be doing a lot more than just the K to 12 

work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, we’re still sharing admin services, 

capital, multi-media, and human resources. So we’re still 

sharing those four areas. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Into which category, as far as the estimates, 

do the costs of regional offices fall, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The regional directors come under 

regional services as contained on page 43 of the budget 

Estimates book. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Let’s just not deal with the numbers in the 

Estimates book but let’s just look at the regional services that 

are provided by the regional offices. I recall in Education then, 

of course we’ve had a time when I was involved, there were 

fewer regional offices, then there were more, and now there are 

fewer. 

 

What role do the regional offices play in terms of delivering 

education in the province? And I guess your comments about 

whether or not you are satisfied with the role, and whether you 

see some changes that may be necessary in terms of the role. I 

know you made some comments about restructuring and how 

the regional directors have played a role. What stand do you 

have on the regional offices? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well the regional offices in this 

province provide support to school divisions across the 

province. They really are the department’s eyes and ears in 

terms of the field and what is happening in the field. The 

regional directors and the support people in the regional offices 

are able to give feedback on various public policy issues. They 

certainly provide input into policy direction in this province. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that as minister, I’m extremely 

appreciative of the work that the regional directors provide to 

the system. I’m extremely appreciative of the fact that they are 

located in the regions. And they certainly bring a regional 

perspective to public policy, which I think is extremely 

important. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ve never 

known how or what procedure is followed in terms of the 

selecting of a regional director. Is it an open competition or are 

their appointments strictly by the minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, we have a process where people 

apply for the job through public advertising. And the decisions 

are made in consultation with the human resource people in the 

department, along with Ernie Cychmistruk, who is in charge of 

the regional services operation in the province, along with the 

deputy and the ADM (assistant deputy minister). 

 

I think it’s fair to say that as minister I have never — and I want 

to repeat, never — involved myself in who should be hired in 

the Department of Education, and I have taken that position 

because I was a former civil servant and did not like the 

politicization of the civil service when I worked for the civil 

service. I thought people should be there based on skill and 

competence and I’ve made it my priority not to interfere in who 

is hired in terms of the Department of Education. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  It is warm in here, Madam Minister. 

 

When you talk about the role of regional directors in the 

restructuring plan — and you have indicated before in this 

House that regional directors were directly involved in terms of 

the process and meetings — do you think that the role that they 

played in terms of the consultative process that was followed 

throughout the meetings has jeopardized their position in terms 

of what may happen in the future? And I’m talking about the 

immediate future, maybe a year or two. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ll turn that 

one in a short while. 

 

Could you bring to the attention of, of course the House and all 

the people that will be interested in that — and I know you’ve 

made some comments here about the consultative process — 

the number of meetings, the cost of those meetings, the fact that 

you had presented a discussion paper that included four options; 

are you satisfied with that whole process and the outcome that 

you have described? Where are we at now with that whole 

process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We had 95 public consultation 

meetings between May and October 1996. Over 5,500 people 

attended. We had over 1,100 written responses. We had over 

500 people visit our web site. I can tell you that I met with 

dozens of stakeholder groups and other key organizations. 

 

In terms of the process, I think it was, from the government’s 

point of view, the most outstanding consultation process that 

we’ve had in terms of public participation. People did come to 

the meetings. From the government’s point of view, it was led 

by the regional directors out in the regions who know the 

trustees, the teachers, the parents, the support staff. They 

certainly were there as the eyes and ears of the department. 

  



944  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

As well, each regional director presented a report at the end of 

each meeting, so I knew as minister exactly what was 

happening at those meetings. I knew how many people 

attended, whether they were trustees, parents, teachers, support 

staff, and so on. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now I would say in terms of the paper . . . the initial 

consultation paper, it was short because we wanted to make 

sure that people read it. One of my disappointments I think, if 

we want to call it that, is I don’t think that we put enough 

information into the notion of school councils. And that created 

some concern certainly for teachers and also for district boards 

of education at the local school level. They didn’t know what it 

meant. And at the end of the day we decided that we needed to 

have more discussion on the notion of school councils. 

 

And it’s our intention to release a public discussion paper 

outlining the department’s view of what school councils should 

look like in the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s our 

intention to do that later this spring so that we can have further 

consultations with parents and community members and 

trustees and teachers to sort of really examine this concept that 

seems to be sweeping the nation, with the whole idea of getting 

more parent involvement in our schools, along with community 

involvement. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  You indicated, Madam Minister, that at each 

of the meetings there was a tally kept of the numbers attending 

and of course what sector they represented. 

 

I’d be interested to know if you have a number of the 

non-teachers, the non-board members, you know, the 

non-departmental officials. When you use a number of nearly 

6,000 people that attended — and I know I was at a few of the 

meetings and there were numbers of teachers and there were a 

number of board members, etc. — what number can you look at 

in terms of a percentage of the total that might have been that 

group that we would call the parent or the outsider, out of the 

system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t have the number here, but it 

was over half — over half the people that attended. The largest 

public consultation in the province since we came to 

government were people who were not, quote, “the 

stakeholders, the partner groups.” They were people who were 

interested in the future of public education in the province. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When you proposed the four options, did you 

expect a different outcome from the public? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I wasn’t sure. I wasn’t sure what 

the outcome was going to be. I mean, it’s no secret that I have 

my own preferred option. I like the notion of a K to 12 system 

in the province. I think some day we’ll get there, but I may be 

old and very grey. 

 

What did I think was going to happen? I wasn’t sure. I had 

some thinking in terms of what would happen in different 

regions of the province. I thought that there were certain 

regions of the province that would just say, leave us alone. I 

thought that there were other regions of the province that are 

ready for change and would call for change. So it was an 

interesting discussion. 

 

And what I found most interesting about the whole process is 

that people are prepared for change. They want change, they 

understand change, but they want to be in control of it — but 

they also want some government leadership. And I guess I 

wasn’t quite sure how that was going to work out. But at the 

end of the day it was pretty clear people aren’t opposed to 

change. They realize that change is inevitable. They want to 

determine that change. But they also want some direction and 

leadership from the province so that we don’t have a mishmash 

public education system. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for those 

comments. And I guess your position taken was that there will 

be change, it will be voluntary. And we’ve had well basically 

nearly a half a year go by already. Are you satisfied with the 

reaction of boards of education, with the reaction of the public? 

And I know we’ve discussed in this House where you’ve made 

mention of the Blaine Lake School Division, but yet there are 

others that I’m hearing about. 

 

So I’m wondering, are you pleased, are you satisfied? Or are 

there going to be some other directions that you’ll be taking in 

your department, officials will be taking? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I’m extremely pleased and 

somewhat surprised actually at the level of discussion and 

activity that’s going on in the province. Yes we have the Blaine 

Lake restructuring that happened, but there are many, many 

school divisions across the province that are in the process of 

restructuring. And it’s possible that by next fall we may have 

some larger boards that will elect trustees on their larger 

boundaries. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I think I would support your comment there 

that we’re going to have larger boards. My concern — and I’ve 

had a couple of concerns raised to me by telephone — is that 

where there seemed to be a desire to move forward, there was a 

desire to start to talk to a neighbour, that indeed there has been 

a reaction by, in one instance, teachers who have said no, we’re 

not looking at that. 

 

And another reaction where there was some discussion by both 

boards, and it was ongoing already and it’s been ongoing for a 

long period of time, where we’ve had reactions now by 

communities — if not necessarily the entire division, but 

communities within a division — who said, well just a minute 

here now, we may be losing the perceived autonomy that they 

have at that community level or the fact that the 

decision-making capacity that is occurring at that school 

division may be shifting now to another community of course, 

that is not in that existing school division. And there seems to 

be some, there seems to be a tidal wave that I’m just seeing the 

very beginnings of. 

 

And I wonder if you’ve had those same comments and those 

same letters to ensure that indeed that we’re not, as a   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

department and as a thought that you’ve had in terms of 

voluntary amalgamations, so we don’t suddenly have a tidal 

wave that knocks everything over in two months time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, I don’t feel, in any sense of the 

word, a tidal wave of anti-discussion reaction. I really don’t. 

What I do see is a concern on the part of some people as you 

say that they may not have as much representation as they had 

in the past. And that’s why we’re going to have to be very 

careful in terms of the subdivision boundaries, particularly in 

rural areas. 

 

But I should share with you that there are parts of the province 

where people within that school division are asking for 

subdivision boundary changes based on population, where the 

population may be in one area and they only have one 

representative, and there’s not very much population in another 

area and they have the same representation even though they 

have fewer students. And so there are more . . . I hear more 

concerns about the latter point I make than the point that you 

make. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I’m hearing the same concerns, Madam 

Minister. But the concerns that I have had raised to me about 

people wanting to redesign a school division are not necessarily 

. . . the fact is that maybe they see it as a way of keeping a 

school open. 

 

And what we’re looking at is now the larger community which 

does have more population. And I wonder about assessment 

now that we’ve had some changes in terms of rural assessment 

and urban assessment. Population does have control of that in 

terms of how we distribute the voters in a school division. The 

concern that I’m hearing is yes, they want to refocus and they 

want to look at the division and maybe realign it. 

 

The people that are objecting to that of course are the trustees or 

the ratepayers of a subdivision where there is a small school 

that they fear will be closed. So you know it relates, I think, one 

to the other. 

 

The other concern that I have is — and I’ve had this one raised 

many a time — as two school divisions or maybe even three as 

in the case of Prince Albert area, as they move together and 

become an amalgamated school division, if that happens, what 

procedure will you have in place to address those . . . and I refer 

to them as sort of fringe areas on the outside of a school 

division where the boundary was struck, I believe, 1944 or 

whenever it was, and trading patterns, demographics have 

changed, and in fact school divisions have released students 

from an existing school division, how will you address that new 

boundary if it’s done in isolated areas in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It will be done on a case-by-case basis. 

And we know of, you know, some people that are requesting 

that their assessment, their land mass, go with a particular 

school division should something take place. And obviously in 

the past what we've tried to do is have agreement between the 

various school divisions. And I anticipate that we will continue 

to have school divisions working out a process where 

assessment may go one way and assessment the other way, but 

it will be through mutual consent. And if that doesn’t work, 

obviously we have the Jack Lloyd Boundaries Commission that 

deals with boundary issues if school boards can’t work things 

out on their own. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  If we’re moving forward with voluntary 

amalgamations, what will happen to the poor school division 

that nobody wants and in a couple of years, due to declining 

enrolments, they have a problem? How will your department 

handle that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well all of the restructuring initiatives 

require ministerial approval. And I can assure the minister of 

this, that I am not going to allow doughnut hole-ing or people 

getting together and not wanting to join with the poor country 

cousin. We’re not going to allow that to happen. 

 

So we want to ensure the principles behind public education in 

the province and that is, you know, equity in education — that 

regardless of where you live you have access to a similar type 

of education in the province, similar quality of education. And 

we’re not going to allow restructuring to undermine those 

fundamental principles, I think, which are the principles of the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I refer you to last year’s 

budget. And just a quick quote here from the statement made by 

the Finance minister, who said: “We will work with our 

partners in education to achieve savings of $7 million annually 

in 1998-99.” That’s a quotation. Okay. Could you tell me and 

the people in Saskatchewan what was intended with that 

remark? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think one of the things that we 

were facing last year was federal funding reductions in terms of 

transfer payments, CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer), 

as well as changes to training. I believe $37 million was coming 

out of the province in terms of money that was going in to train 

individuals. 

 

And we were facing a position last year, given the information 

we had from Ottawa and given prospects for the future, that the 

two universities would be facing funding reductions of some $5 

million for this year and the year after; and that school divisions 

at the end of the day, given teacher salary increases, would be 

facing a $900,000 increase. But in essence, that was a funding 

reduction with a further funding reduction in ’98-99. 

 

Now things have gotten a little better for the province. In this 

budget we were able to announce a funding increase for K to 

12, $8 million. We announced that the universities would not 

receive a funding reduction in ’97 or ’98. We announced a 

training strategy which puts many millions of dollars more into 

the system — money that the federal government withdrew. 

 

And we’ve also announced a training strategy yesterday that 

shows that at the end of the century, we’ll have 10,000 more 

people that are trained than had the federal government left their 

system in place. 

 

So I guess what’s changed is the economy has improved. We   



946  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

have access to more revenue. And at the end of the day we were 

able to announce what I consider to be a pretty good budget, 

and so do the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I guess I’d like to make two points, Madam 

Minister. While you’ve described the post-secondary situation, 

I’m sure I’ll hear the exact same comments about the changes 

made to the post-secondary areas from the Post-Secondary 

minister. 

 

Secondly, the monies that the province receives federally do not 

come for the K to 12 system, okay. So what we have to look at 

is the K to 12 system, and I wonder about the comments of 

having to have savings of 7 to $8 million. Was there an 

intention that indeed there were going to be amalgamations and 

that’s the kind of money that would have been saved? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, it was basically an announcement 

of the budget — funding reduction to K to 12. 

 

And I just want to make this point that it’s true that the federal 

government does not have constitutional jurisdiction over K to 

12. That’s under the auspices of the province. The federal 

government, though, does have some involvement in health and 

post-secondary education in this country. 

 

When they decide to reduce transfer payments to the province, a 

province like ours that was facing some pretty grim financial 

outlooks, and when the province decides that we need to 

back-fill our heath system, which we did last year and which we 

were intending to do this year, and that we were going to 

back-fill the post-secondary education cuts last year, which we 

did, but we couldn’t back-fill them in 1998, then as the 

government you go looking for money to back-fill health, 

which I think your party was raising a lot of concern about, 

even though there were cuts from Ottawa to the province to pay 

for health. And so at the end of the day we said some things in 

the budget document, the budget speech last year based on the 

information that we had — the financial outlook for the 

province. 

 

But it’s a year later. One year has passed. This province I think 

is no longer on equalization payments. We’re no longer on 

social assistance from Ottawa. Things are getting a lot better. 

People are actually feeling a lot more optimistic about the 

future; we agree with them. And our budget was able to contain 

some more debt reduction, some tax reduction, and some 

funding increases to our most important areas — health, 

education, and social programs. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. While we know 

that everyone in this province, not only your department and all 

the people connected to your department, but I think all the 

residents of Saskatchewan look forward to the day when we’ll 

be called a have-province and not a have-not. And we are now. 

 

And as a result of the fact that we have additional revenues 

coming into our coffers, and those were anticipated in 1996 as 

well as this year, we knew that we have done much better. In 

fact we have nearly a billion dollars more in terms of tax 

revenue now than what we had in 1991. So those kinds of 

things were known by the Finance minister. 

 

When the initial discussion began on reorganization and the 

thought that there would be a certain number of school 

divisions . . . and I recall the minister making comments 

throughout the province that a system of maybe 35 or 40. And I 

think, if I recall, you said that it really wouldn’t matter on the 

number, but if there was a need to amalgamate and there was a 

need to derive a new system, that there would be some savings. 

Some significant savings, I think were the words. Okay. 

 

What kind of numbers then would you view as savings? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just with all due respect to my 

colleague, I have never said that there were savings that would 

go to the provincial treasury. What I have said is that there 

could be redirects to go to students. 

 

So just so we’re very clear. At no time has this government ever 

said that reorganization of school divisions would lead to more 

money for the provincial treasury. What we have said is that 

restructuring could lead, would lead to more services for kids. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I agree with you, Madam Minister. And I 

recall the comment that you said that if there were savings to be 

achieved that those would remain in the hands of boards of 

education. 

 

However, when I look at the comments of the Finance minister 

that says we need to attain $7 million worth of savings, and on 

the other side there are amalgamations that take place, would 

you not be just balancing the ledger? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No. No. No. No. And no means no. 

Last year, as I’ve said, we had some difficult circumstances. We 

had federal funding reductions to health and post-secondary 

education, the CHST, Canada Health and Social Transfer, of 

$106 million. Our government last year back-filled every dime 

— $106 million. 

 

We couldn’t, given what we knew last year, back-fill the further 

$90 million that was coming in ’97-98, so we had to go looking 

for some money. What we said in last year’s budget was that we 

would work with our school partners to deal with that $7 

million funding reduction. And there were several ways to deal 

with it. 

 

One of the ways to deal with it was maybe school boards don’t 

get as much capital. That’s one way to deal with it. Maybe 

school boards look at other ways of getting at that $7 million 

funding reduction — not reorganization, but maybe there were 

some other things they could do. 

 

What we said was we would work with our partners. Well at the 

end of the day we didn’t have to work with our partners because 

we knew that the economy was starting to get better. 

 

You’ll remember, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairperson, I think 

we put an extra $40 million into the health system last summer   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

because the economy was getting better, the province was 

generating more revenue, and so on and so forth. So we didn’t 

work with our partners because we knew that we would be in a 

position in this year’s budget to announce, not a $7 million 

funding reduction in 1997-98 but an $8 million increase in 

1997-98. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Revenue sources for the province, Madam 

Minister, come from various different avenues. And as you’ve 

indicated, the source from the federal government of course was 

declining due to the changes in the equalization payments. And 

we’re happy to report that indeed equalization payments are 

going to be down to almost nil and we’ll not be relying on the 

federal government. 

 

But there is a balance. There is a balance in terms of how well 

Saskatchewan does. If Saskatchewan as a province has other 

sources of revenue, in fact we do better and we achieve 

different sources of revenue. As a result, the federal government 

does not compensate us as well because we’re now a have 

province. 

 

So in terms of the monies that were spent on education last year 

and what were expected to be spent on education this year, if 

. . . Let’s look at the scenario, Madam Minister, that would say 

what if you were right, what if you were right and had to 

implement last year’s budget? How do you think you would 

have achieved $7 million worth of savings? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well first of all what I want to explain 

to the member, there is a difference between equalization and 

CHST. Equalization is for provinces that are have-not 

provinces. 

 

And what the federal government . . . As part of Canada, as part 

of being Canadians, not unlike our foundation operating grant, 

equalization means that if you are a have-not province, your 

economy is not doing well, you’re are not able to raise as much 

revenue. But as a country we say that regardless of where you 

live in this country, you should have access to a similar health 

system or a similar education system or a similar 

post-secondary education system or a similar highway system 

or a similar you name it; that as Canadians we are all entitled 

regardless of where we live to have access to similar services — 

that’s the notion of being Canadian. 

 

And for provinces like Newfoundland, New Brunswick, at 

times Saskatchewan, at times Manitoba, at times P.E.I. (Prince 

Edward Island), at times Nova Scotia, certainly the Yukon and 

the Northwest Territories, the federal government gives money 

in the form of equalization payments so that we don’t get into 

the notion of regionalism. Okay, that’s equalization. 

 

Then there is what used to be called the established program 

financing: CAP (Canada Assistance Plan), EPF (established 

programs financing) cost-shared with the province’s 

post-secondary education and health care; the Canada 

Assistance Plan cost-shared with the province’s social 

assistance or social programs. 

 

What the federal government did was they rolled into the 

CHST, the Canada Assistance Plan, and established program 

financing for health and education. So they roll it into one 

envelope. But they don’t leave the money intact — they cut the 

money. And every province regardless of whether you are rich 

or poor had access to CAP and EPF or CHST. Not every 

province, regardless of whether you’re rich or poor, has access 

to equalization — only lower income, poorer provinces have 

access to equalization. 

 

So the point I’m trying to make here, Member, is that the 

province was receiving a reduction in our CHST that had 

implications for health and post-secondary education and 

certainly social assistance, because you will recall the federal 

government had offloaded on-reserve Indians onto the province. 

We now pay for them. We pay for them as soon as they come 

off reserve as provincial taxpayers. It used to be the federal 

government paid for them for the first year. 

 

So all of this stuff . . . And they changed Unemployment 

Insurance which means we have more people who aren’t getting 

EI, or Employment Insurance, for as long or soon enough so 

that meant more people onto the social assistance rolls which 

had impacts on the province and our ability to pay. 

 

I mean here was a province that had a $15 billion debt, we had 

huge deficits, and we had a four-year plan. But we didn’t know 

that Paul Martin was going to do this CHST thing which meant 

that we had to make some decisions last year, which we did. 

And in order . . . We said we’re going to back-fill health 

because it’s important to the people of this province and we’re 

going to back-fill post-secondary. 

 

But the federal government also changed its training strategy — 

took money out of training. For the most part, the feds paid for 

training in this province. We’re a have-not province; they paid 

for it. That’s not the case in Alberta or British Columbia, but in 

this province that was the case. 

 

So at the end of the day — and you have to go looking for 

money because we’re committed to a balanced budget — and at 

the end of the day, school divisions, we said to school divisions, 

we’re going to increase you $2 million this year to pay for 

salary increases; next year, there’s a $900,000 increase, but 

there are further salary increases coming, there’ll be a $7 

million funding reduction. 

 

Now by the time next . . . by the time summer rolled around, oil 

and gas was doing pretty good. You know that the crops looked 

pretty good. I mean there was revenue. People were spending 

money. The provincial sales tax was generating some revenue 

and so on and so forth. 

 

So we knew that we were probably coming out of equalization 

from Ottawa and we knew that we had the capacity to back-fill 

the federal cuts in terms of CHST that were coming in this 

fiscal year, 1997-98. 

 

So we didn’t work with our partners to figure out a strategy on 

this because we were in a position where we knew we could 

probably increase funding for K to 12; we knew that we could 

increase funding for highways; we knew we could increase   



948  Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1997 

funding for health care, which we did. 

 

We knew we had to put money into skills training because the 

future of this province rests on our ability to train people and 

educate people and to have economic development in this 

province. And it’s ludicrous to have jobs that are there for 

people but they don’t have the skills to get to those jobs. So we 

developed a training strategy made here in Saskatchewan that 

would link individuals to those jobs. 

 

My point of view, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairperson, what we 

did made eminent sense. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  It may have made sense to you, Madam 

Minister, but in terms of school boards and in terms of the kinds 

of fears that they had as to what you would be doing this year 

when you talk about the — not this year, but the ’97-98 — I 

look at last year’s statement of revenue and I note that you’ve 

commented about the CHST, the reductions, and that it affected 

all three areas. And it did. 

 

Indeed we see that the estimates for ’95-96 were in the 

neighbourhood of 621,000 and indeed your estimates for last 

year were 508. So we’ve heard you tell us before that there was 

$113 million worth of reduction. 

 

On the revenue side, which you also have in your estimates, 

you’re showing that the change in revenue anticipated from fuel 

tax and sales tax and corporate tax and income tax, all of the tax 

side, the revenue is up $230 million. 

 

So while you say you back-filled it — granted there were 

additional monies that you were now putting into Health, into 

Social Services, into Post-Secondary Education to make up that 

$113 million — but you had an additional $117 million in the 

sources of revenue, which are there in the books. 

 

So when school boards look at these numbers and the fact that, 

while they knew for ’96-97 you were going to get at least $125 

million more after the federal reductions have been balanced 

and back-filled and paid — whatever words you want to use — 

while those things are done, there was still in excess of a 

hundred million dollars of additional revenues. And on the 

other side, you were telling boards of education, we’re going to 

have to find $7 million worth of savings. Why? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I don’t know if we need to give 

the member a briefing on how this system works; I know it’s 

taken me 10 years to figure it out and he’s only been here 2 and 

I acknowledge that. 

 

But nevertheless we knew — I’ll just reiterate, repeat this — we 

knew that EPF (established programs financing) and Canada 

Assistance Plan was being folded into the health and social . . . 

Canadian Health and Social Transfer, CHST. We knew that the 

province was going to receive $106 million in less revenue for 

that CHST. 

 

We also, if you look at the budget book, we estimated our 

equalization payments would be worth about $314 million — 

just about $315 million — from Ottawa, based on what we 

knew at the time. When you put together a budget it’s what you 

think might happen, and maybe someday you’ll have the 

opportunity to do this. And it’s . . . maybe someday you will, 

but I’m sure that we’ll be all gone. 

 

Anyway, so the point I’m trying to make here is that by last 

summer we knew that the economy was doing better. Oil and 

gas sales. We knew that people were spending more money. 

They were very optimistic about the future. We knew from 

information we were receiving from Finance in terms of 

revenue generation, corporate capital tax, corporate income tax, 

fuel tax, individual income tax, sales tax, tobacco tax, all of 

those, all of those things . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

precisely. Lower interest rates. But we knew we weren’t going 

to get as much money from Ottawa in the form of equalization 

because this province was starting to recover. 

 

But that didn’t . . . that did not affect the CHST. That did not 

affect the CHST. CHST is . . . We knew about the CHST. What 

we weren’t sure about was equalization. 

 

We also knew that we had some money there to start dealing 

. . . to deal with the issues in health care — $40 million. I think 

that sent a good signal because certainly school boards were 

asking me, what does that mean for us in terms of ’97-98? 

 

I was saying, because I couldn’t say until budget day, I was 

saying, well I’m pretty optimistic. You know, and the Premier 

laid out his priorities: health, education, jobs, social programs, 

debt reduction — continuation of debt reduction — and 

highways. 

 

We had this six-point program and I think that we delivered on 

it, plus a tax increase . . . or a tax decrease. Tax decrease. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  We will acknowledge it was a tax decrease, 

Madam Minister. The point though, Madam Minister . . . I 

know what you’re telling me about the 1997-98 budget. What I 

am looking at, in terms of the numbers that I was giving to you, 

were last year’s numbers. And there was additional revenues, 

and I believe that you could have indicated to boards of 

education that there was indeed a light at the end of the tunnel, 

as was there. And I’ve heard you say that, I’ve heard the 

Premier say that, and I’ve heard the Minister of Finance say 

that. 

 

Before . . . I’m just going to leave that area for now if I might, 

because I want to talk about bargaining if I could, because 

that’s a very current topic. I understand that you’ve had a 

change in terms of the bargaining structure. Could you inform 

me as to whether you’re working with the nine-member team 

and is there . . . have there been changes within the 

nine-member team? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, all I have to say is . . . I 

just want to get back to this, what we did last summer. One of 

the things you might someday learn, if you ever get here, is that 

as a cabinet, as Executive Council, as members of the 

government, you think you know some things and you think   



April 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

you might be able to do some things. But until that budget is 

delivered in the House, you can’t really indicate what’s going to 

happen. You can’t because it’s not final until the minister really 

stands up — the Minister of Finance stands up and delivers her 

budget. 

 

I understand your point. I understand your point, but I think 

what the Premier . . . The Premier sent a nice signal, I thought: 

here are our priorities. And I think he laid those priorities out in 

November — November, December. So that was a pretty good 

hint that something was coming in the way of jobs, social 

programs, health, education, continuation of debt reduction, and 

highways. So I think we sent a nice message. 

 

Because I know that school boards were saying to me, well 

does that mean we’re going to get more money? I said, I don’t 

know. We haven’t completed the budget process yet. We won’t 

know until the minister delivers her budget. But the Premier has 

said — and I listed the six things he said. So I thought that those 

were pretty good hints in a way. 

 

In terms of the bargaining structure, nothing’s changed. We still 

have nine members. We have a jointly agreed to Chair. We’re at 

the bargaining table. And I’m not going to get into the specifics 

of bargaining because, as you know, bargaining should take 

place at the bargaining table. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Is it confidential, the names of the 

government appointees? Is there not a change from the five 

members that were on last year’s team versus the five members 

that are this year’s team? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’ll send the names. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. In terms of the 

bargaining process, contract for the Teachers’ Federation 

expired I believe, on December 31 of 1996, and we’re into 

1997. There are a number of meetings, I understand, that have 

taken place. How is the cost of bargaining incurred — is it a 

complete government cost? Is it shared with the trustees 

association? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association) pays for their four members, the 

government pays for our four members, and we jointly share the 

cost of the Chair. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Based on fairly long negotiations that took 

place last year, what is the combined share of the government 

for their four and their half of the person last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t have that here, but as you 

probably know, the four people that come from government 

tend to be civil servants. They have . . . They receive a wage 

from the government department that they come from. This 

year’s team, all four members come from the Department of 

Education; so it’s part of their monthly salary. 

 

And I believe that we can send you the information in terms of 

what it cost us, because I think that’s public information, for 

last year’s Chair. 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. While you 

don’t want to discuss the current bargaining procedure in terms 

of items, and I’ve heard you say that at the recent teacher’s 

spring council, I want to ask you though, in terms of the budget 

that has been put forward . . . as I’ve indicated, the agreement 

with the Teachers’ Federation has expired on December 31. If 

there is a new contract put in place, be it June, be it sooner, 

later, there may be costs for 1997. Is there any plan in place in 

terms of how the government will handle the increased costs of 

a new agreement retroactive to January 1 of 1997? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We would deal with that at the time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Let’s talk about a couple of other areas, 

Madam Minister, since it’s nearly 5 o’clock. There is some 

concern, there’s some concern expressed by some individuals, 

teachers especially, about the role that Media House has played 

in terms of delivering educational materials to schools. Is there 

a change in the contract with Media House? And indeed, how 

will schools and teachers be able to access those materials that 

they once did through Media House? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you may know, we had a contract 

with Media House for five years. The contract runs out at the 

end of June of 1997. The contract for the video and audio 

duplication service and the 16 millimetre loan service was 

tendered, and a new group was able to receive the tender. And 

they take over the contract, I believe July 1. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In terms of also one of the other 

responsibilities within your department, is in the area of 

curriculum development and curriculum, and we know the 

changes that have occurred in the credits . . . or for music 

credits, etc. Could you tell me whether or not you’re pleased 

with curriculum development and the implementation of new 

curriculum? Are we on target with the game plan that was 

established awhile back? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think that the department has 

done a really good job, in consultation with our various partners 

in education, given some of the financial circumstances that this 

province has had to face. 

 

We continue to implement core curriculum. I can share with 

you that one of the concerns that I have is that core is not being 

implemented everywhere across the province. And one of the 

things that we’ve moved to do in this budget is to introduce 17 

resource-based people that will be in the shared-service regions 

to assist teachers in implementing core and assist school 

divisions in ensuring that we have some of the resources that 

are required in order to implement the resource-based learning 

that we’ve developed through the core curriculum. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 921 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 921 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

  Clerk Assistant .......................................................................................................................................................................... 922 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 923 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 923 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 923 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 924 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 924 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 932 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 938 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 938 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 938 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Special Librarian’s Day 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 924 

 Saskatchewan Express 16th Anniversary Tour 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 924 

 Award for Prince Albert Television Station 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 924 

 Agrologists Recognize Journalist Ron Walter 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 925 

 New Condominium Project In Manitou Beach 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 925 

 New Internet Web Site on Dinosaurs 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 925 

 Sports Memorabilia Auction in Rosthern 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 925 

 Vital Role of Community Planning 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 926 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 926 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 926 

 SaskPower Reconstruction Charges 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 927 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 927 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 928 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 

 Changes to The Police Act 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 

 SaskPower Power Line Contract 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 929 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 929 

 SaskPower Reconstruction Charge 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 929 



 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 929 

 High-risk Youth 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 930 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 930 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 930 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 931 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 931 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 932 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 932 

 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 

 Bill No 2 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 933 

 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 ....................................................................................................... 934 

 Bill No. 39 — The Multiculturalism Act ..................................................................................................................................... 934 

 Bill No. 25 — The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 .......................................................................................................... 934 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 934 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 934 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 934 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 24  The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings Transfer Act/Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le renvoi des 

instances 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 935 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 936 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 939 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 939 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 24  The Court Jurisdiction and Proceedings Transfer Act/ Loi sur la compétence des tribunaux et le renvoi des 

instances 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 941 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Education  Vote 5 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 941 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 941 

 

 


