



















































Hansard: May 05, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1335 

 May 5, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of the good citizens of Yarbo, Gerald, Churchbridge, and 

Esterhazy. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

petitions, Mr. Speaker, to do with the creation of regional 

telephone exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Choiceland, 

Tisdale, Smeaton, and Nipawin. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today, at the 

beginning of Ombudsman’s Week, to introduce a number of 

special guests in your gallery to the legislature. 

 

First I’d like to introduce the present Ombudsman, Barbara 

Tomkins, and her husband, Kirk Rondeau. They’re in the front. 

Please stand when you’re introduced. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  And seated beside her is the Children’s 

Advocate, Deborah Parker-Loewen. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Then I have the staff. And I’ll introduce 

all of the staff and they can all stand as their names are called. 

Gord Mayer, who is the general counsel; Roy Hodsman, 

investigator; Arlene Harris, an investigator; Brian Calder, 

investigator; Andrea Kawa, secretary; Debra Zick, executive 

secretary — those are the Regina staff. 

 

And then from Saskatoon: Glenda Cooney, the assistant 

ombudsman; Joni Sereda, investigator; Laura Pun, investigator; 

Barbara Schindel, complaints investigator; and Joyce Strate, 

secretary. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, also 

on behalf of the opposition, I too would like to welcome our 

current Ombudsman, Ms. Tomkins, and our Children’s 

Advocate, Ms. Parker-Loewen, and all of the staff to the 

legislature. I know this is the start of a very special week in the 

eyes of many people in Saskatchewan and we welcome the 

people to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery I’d like to introduce someone who may be familiar to 

you, a previous page from the session last year who many will 

remember, Jocelyn Arthur, and she is with her friend, Jennifer 

Beaton, who has just finished her degree in political science. So 

now they’re putting their knowledge to the test here. But also 

leaving no stone unturned in their search for summer 

employment has led them to the legislature. So would you 

please join me in welcoming Jocelyn and Jennifer here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce to the members of the Assembly today, 

a very special group of school kids that come many, many miles 

from the small community with a big heart of Garson Lake, 

Saskatchewan. They’re here today to visit the Assembly, and 

they’re being accompanied by Carrine Cann, who is a teacher in 

that community, with the chaperon, Dora Laprise. 

 

And these students are here from grade 1 and up, and they’re 

here to see the Assembly work. And I know it took a lot of 

effort and hard work to bring them to this big, beautiful 

building, and we certainly hope that they watch the proceedings 

today and learn a lot. 

 

So I would ask the Assembly members to please welcome this 

very special group of people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



1336  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the third party we would also like to welcome the Ombudsman 

and staff to the Assembly today, and wish them well in their 

endeavours in the future. 

 

Also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

welcome Jocelyn Arthur and her friend Jennifer. Jocelyn just 

lives a few miles north of my place. And I’m sure her dad 

wishes she was at home seeding rather than sitting in the 

legislature. But I’d still like to welcome them here today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to introduce through you to the House, seven students 

from F.W. Johnson Collegiate in Regina. They are transitional 

learning centre students who are here to observe the 

proceedings of the legislature. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Parr, and assistants Mr. Dennis and Susan Borys. 

And I would like to ask the members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming these young people 

here today and I will be meeting with them for a short time at 

the conclusion of question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Holocaust Remembrance Day 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Yom Ha Shoah is Holocaust Remembrance Day. 

Yom Ha Shoah literally means “the day of annihilation by fire”, 

a brutally appropriate name for a day in which we remember 

one of the sorry chapters of an often dismal century, the 

slagheap of intolerance which led to the murder of 6 million 

Jews. 

 

During the ’50s and ’60s there was kind of a big chill on 

remembering the Holocaust — an attempt to put it behind us, so 

to speak. This silence led to the Keegstras and the Zundels of 

the world who denied the Holocaust. 

 

And so in the ’90s we witness a bloody replay of the ’40s: 

Bosnia, Hercegovina, Rwanda, and East Timor. The cancer of 

intolerance has not disappeared, just mutated. That is why we 

need once more to speak out publicly, to bear witness against 

atrocity everywhere. 

 

This summer I attended the war crimes tribunal for the former 

Yugoslavia in The Hague, and what I saw and heard both 

sickened me and made me determined to speak out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report that new people are 

speaking out as well. Our page, Daniel Abramson, has just won 

a national award for his essay on the lessons of the Holocaust 

— giving hope that he and his generation will never be silent 

witnesses to the intolerable events of the past and giving hope 

to the future for all of us. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

25th Anniversary of the Provincial Ombudsman 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

recognize the important contribution made by the office of the 

Provincial Ombudsman to the Legislative Assembly and to the 

democratic process in Saskatchewan. I was also honoured to be 

part of the luncheon this morning recognizing the office of the 

people who have brought added dignity and accountability of 

the government for 25 years. 

 

The Provincial Ombudsman receives, investigates, and resolves 

complaints of unfairness against the provincial government. 

Where there is a finding of unfairness, the Ombudsman makes 

recommendations to redress the problem. 

 

The Ombudsman is an essential player in modern democracy. 

In the 20th century, I think it fair to say, there is a growing 

sense of alienation within our society about government. People 

sometimes feel, rightfully, that it is impossible to win against 

government, let alone work through the hierarchy to the people 

at the top. 

 

Without a doubt, the services provided by the Ombudsman are 

valuable and essential. However despite the fact the 

Ombudsman has served the people for 25 years, the reality is 

that many people do not know they have this office to turn to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people need to know that when they feel they are 

treated unfairly by government that there is an avenue of 

redress. The Ombudsman has informed me that the services 

provided by the office are too little known both by government 

and the public. If the Ombudsman is to remain an independent 

officer of the Legislative Assembly and play an effective role in 

our democracy, it is crucial that the office receive full support 

from both the Assembly and the government. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, we congratulate you on 

your 25th anniversary and commit to raising the profile and the 

importance of the office to the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Hospital for La Loche 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The opposition 

agrees with us that Saskatchewan has the best health care 

system in the world. The member from Arm River finally 

admitted that last week. Since the opposition has finally come 

to terms with our first-rate health care system, they must also 

realize that we are maintaining the system despite the millions 

of dollars in cut-backs by federal Liberals to the health care 

system. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, even in the face of federal Liberal cut-backs, 

the opposition members agree that we have the best health care 

system in the world. This is a true and well-deserved 

compliment to this government and it is a commitment to our 

health care system. 

 

Our continued support and commitment to our health care 

system is moving forward, Mr. Speaker. Northern residents in  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

the community of La Loche recently received the good news 

that they will be getting a new hospital. The announcement is 

the third major health project undertaken in northern 

Saskatchewan recently. The new facility will replace the 

existing hospital and enable the Keewatin-Yathe District Health 

Board to further develop its health services to the area residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that this and other announced projects are 

well-received amongst opposition members as it again 

demonstrates the government’s dedication to our health care 

system — a health care system they say is the best in the world. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Aid to Manitoba Flood Victims 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

thank and recognize the efforts of CBC (Canada Broadcasting 

Corporation) radio, Bell Canada, and the many artists who sang 

and read their works on Friday’s Morningside with Peter 

Gzowksi. 

 

This wasn’t the usual Morningside, although I enjoy the 

program on the occasions I get to listen to it. This show was 

very different; entitled “Red River Rally,” this show was 

dedicated to the thousands of families in Manitoba currently 

inundated by the flood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thousands of Canadians from every corner of our 

nation joined hands to show support with their generous 

contributions. I am pleased to hear this effort to date has raised 

over $800,000 to help Manitoba families to rebuild their homes, 

their businesses, and their lives. 

 

The telephones are still being manned. So for those who still 

wish to contribute, the number is 1 888 285 3051. I encourage 

each member here today and those listening, watching on the 

TV, to do their part in supporting Manitoba by calling this 

number and helping our neighbours. 

 

For those interested in volunteering, Pastor Danielson in Oxbow 

is collecting the names of individuals to go to Manitoba to help 

rebuild in whatever ways possible. This is in response to the 

many volunteers from Manitoba who helped to clean up Oxbow 

after the plough wind devastated our area two years ago. 

 

In closing, a big thank-you to Peter Gzowski and CBC radio for 

organizing this event, and for Bell Canada for providing free 

long distance for those who donated to the cause. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join with 

the member from the third party in commending CBC 

Morningside for their “rally in the valley” program. 

 

As we know, last Thursday the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton announced the two fund-raising efforts for the victims  

of the Manitoba flood. One was the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool’s pledge of money and its challenge to other organizations. 

The other was Peter Gzowski’s CBC Radio program, 

Morningside, and its four-hour Friday morning rally for the 

valley. 

 

I am happy to report that as of yesterday, as the member said, 

the rally for the valley has raised more than 800,000 in pledges. 

It is my understanding that the number 1 888 285 3051 will be 

open all week for those who wish to still join and help the 

nationwide effort for those homes who have been lost or 

damaged — those who wish to do something other than toss 

one symbolic sandbag towards the camera. 

 

Neighbourliness works in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and I 

congratulate Morningside and the CBC for proving it. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tragic Accident in Thunder Creek Constituency 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday a tragic 

truck-bus accident occurred near the community of Palmer in 

my constituency, taking the lives of three residents. Three 

passengers in the truck — Jamie Desnoyers and his mother 

Vicky, along with Sarah Johnstone — were killed in the crash. 

Another, Dana Smith, was injured in the accident and is now 

recovering in the Plains Health Centre. All came from the 

Coderre area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Vicky Desnoyers and Sarah Johnstone were 

employees of the Gravelbourg Tribune weekly paper, which 

serves much of Thunder Creek. Dana Smith is also a Tribune 

employee. 

 

Our condolences go out to the families of the victims and to 

their co-workers, like Paul Boisvert, the editor of the Tribune. 

Mr. Boisvert, the only staff member of the Tribune not involved 

in the accident, tragically arrived to an empty office on Friday 

morning. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, our prayers also go out to the 

communities of Coderre and Gravelbourg and to employees at 

the Gravelbourg Auto Body shop, who have lost friends, 

neighbours, and a co-worker. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Arbor Day 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is Arbor 

Day, the first day of National Forest Week, and both of these 

observances have over the years taken on the kind of 

Disney-esque Sunday school aura in which adults put on their 

business dress and children in party clothes plant a tree in a 

park and then go about their business as usual for the rest of the 

year. 

 

That’s unfortunate — a misconception that can be corrected 

with a few facts. 

  



1338  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Forestry contributes over 600 million to the Saskatchewan 

economy every year and there are over 8,000 jobs connected to 

this industry. And that doesn’t include the jobs and the pleasure 

associated with other activities in the forest such as hiking, 

fishing, hunting, and camping. 

 

In other words, planting a tree is serious business, and planting 

a multitude of trees is crucial to our economy, to say nothing of 

our environment. 

 

And here’s another fact: for generations we have been much 

better at chopping down trees than replacing them. And so this 

Arbor Day we celebrate the importance of our trees and forests 

as a way of life, not just to ourselves but to the existence of the 

planet itself. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Interchange on Canadian Studies Conference 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  There are few things stronger than the 

power of people united around a common idea. Sir John A. 

Macdonald rallied Canadians around the idea of a rail line 

linking our nation from sea to sea. 

 

Tommy Douglas implemented medicare built on a common 

belief that every person was entitled to universal health care. 

Similarly, Nellie McClung helped rally Canadians to secure the 

right to vote for women; and first nation leaders today promote 

the idea of a better life for first nations people. 

 

This week in Prince Albert, 250 students from across our nation 

are grappling with the theme of Inclusion: The Challenge of the 

Next Millennium. This 1997 Interchange on Canadian Studies 

conference will identify what actions, structures, attitudes, 

lifestyles, and values must be confronted in order to realize the 

idea of equitable participation by people the world over in the 

21st century. 

 

Organizers have scheduled many prominent speakers for 

workshops and discussions. Among them are members of this 

Assembly: the Hon. Minister of Education, the minister 

responsible for Women’s Secretariat, the member from 

Greystone, and the Hon. Minister of Finance. 

 

Even I will have the honour of representing the Minister of 

Education on Friday next for the closing ceremony. 

 

This is an excellent opportunity for these 250 young Canadians 

to exchange their ideas on inclusion and how the challenge of 

inclusion in the next millennium will be fostered. I fully expect 

the ideas exchanged in Prince Albert to foster great 

commitment to participation in the political, economical, social 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Melfort Power Failure 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday morning at approximately 9 o’clock the power 

suddenly and absolutely went off in the whole north-east of 

Saskatchewan. It’s my understanding that a farmer in burning 

some stubble ended up letting the fire or having the fire get 

away from him and it burnt down the two poles that support the 

main grid for the whole north-east coming from the Beatty 

substation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what turned out to be a short-term inconvenience 

turned out to be a long-term power outage lasting some 11 

hours. And it ended up being a very serious circumstance for 

the community. Motorists were stranded at service stations, 

counting on the city of Melfort to be able to provide fuel for 

their vehicles. Restaurants and businesses closed all through the 

community. People at churches had to get by with opening 

doors and windows, and the ministers all had to preach a little 

more loudly. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I’d like to know is, all the costs that are 

incurred in such an outage, who is responsible for picking up 

the costs of this kind of damage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

thank the member for the question. As you will know, with the 

power grid the size and the expanse of the one that we have 

serving Saskatchewan, there are all measure of circumstances 

that can create power outages. This is in fact an unfortunate 

circumstance and I would certainly be willing to give the 

member a briefing with respect to this incident. And if he wants 

to contact my office, I’d be more than willing to brief him on it 

this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

discussing exactly the circumstances of why it took 11 hours to 

get Melfort back on line, it seems to be the situation that the 

Power Corporation was able to re-route power from the North 

in order to accommodate Tisdale and Nipawin and some of the 

north-east sections, but they have told me that what has 

happened is because the infrastructure has not been upgraded to 

meet the increased demand that’s happening in the whole 

north-east, it means that Melfort was virtually isolated and left 

alone. Now on a warm day like yesterday, this doesn’t become 

a critical event, but if something like this happened when it is 

40 below with a wind, you’re now going to have a situation 

that’s a lot more serious than somebody’s ice cubes melting in 

the fridge. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it true that the fact that you have not supported 

the infrastructure improvements in the north-east, is what 

resulted in the fact that Melfort had to be off-line that long? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

 member what is true is, because of the increased economic 

activity in this province, the Power Corporation has experienced 

some very dramatic increases in load, not only in the north-east, 

but the north-west and in the southern part of the province. 

 

The fact of the matter is, as incremental electrical energy is 

consumed because of an expanded and a growing economy, it 

does put stress on the infrastructure. With respect to the amount 

of commitment that this government and this corporation has 

given to delivering electrical energy across this province, I 

think that it can be said that there is due diligence done and we 

will ensure that there is an adequate supply of power in all areas 

of this province. 

 

I want to say that the capital construction that he may be 

referring to might be the RUD (rural underground distribution) 

program that was discontinued. That discontinuance will be 

replaced and lines will be replaced when the requirement for 

enhanced facility is necessary. 

 

Our commitment is to ensure a safe and secure source of 

electricity around the province and I think history will show 

that SaskPower has done just that over the past 50 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

SaskPower fooling around with credit cards and adventures in 

Guyana, the problem is is that the infrastructure that should be 

in place by a Crown utility who is supposed to provide service 

to rural Saskatchewan and our Saskatchewan people was 

obviously found to be lacking, and as a result the community 

was shut down for 11 hours yesterday. 

 

What you need to do, Mr. Minister, is stop fooling around with 

all these trivial exercises and get back to the basics of what the 

Crown corporation is supposed to do: is to develop a safe and 

reliable system that also looks after the possibility of backups in 

the event of emergency. Will the minister commit to doing an 

evaluation of what happened in Melfort, and to assure the 

people of Saskatchewan that there isn’t similar kinds of 

circumstances waiting to happen all across this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I would 

ask is the member not get too excited. I’ve indicated that we 

will give him a full and a detailed briefing on this particular 

issue. 

 

If the member is so concerned about the changes and the 

pressures put on the Crown corporations, perhaps he would 

want to focus on what his federal cousins are doing with respect 

to deregulation and the changes that are being imposed on these 

corporations. The member, Mr. Speaker, throws his hands up in 

the air. He doesn’t want to hear about that. But the fact is that 

deregulation is requiring these corporations to make some very 

dramatic changes. 

 

If that member is convinced and is of the belief that SaskPower  

has not been delivering good service, I would ask the member 

to come to my office, sit down with the officials, and they can 

describe to him in great detail where this corporation has come 

from, the impact of deregulation that’s been imposed by his 

federal counterparts. 

 

We’re all going to learn to live with this, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy. Deregulation is now 

something that we’re facing and we’re going to do our best to 

cope with this as times have been changing. 

 

So if the member is really concerned and if he is interested, he 

could have contacted my office. He would have had an answer 

this morning as opposed to grandstanding here in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when confronted about the devastating effect revenue-sharing 

cuts are having on Saskatchewan communities, the Minister of 

Municipal Government stated that, and I quote, “Everything is 

fine in municipal land.” If the minister believes that, then she’s 

had one too many rides on the spinning teacups. 

 

Soon after her comment, the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), Murray Westby, expressed 

his outrage to the media. Mr. Speaker, the dozens of mayors 

and reeves and administrators I have met with also can’t believe 

the minister’s remarks. 

 

Will the minister now apologize to the thousands of 

Saskatchewan people who are facing higher mill rates, 

crumbling roads, and lack of services, because of her 

revenue-sharing cuts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that we 

have reduced the amount of the revenue-sharing pool and made 

some changes in the distribution formula. Starting tomorrow, I 

will be attending all over the province a series of meetings that 

SUMA has on an annual basis throughout all the regions. And I 

will be available for all of the councillors of urban 

municipalities in Saskatchewan to put their questions to me 

directly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would suggest that the minister maybe should have an attitude 

adjustment before she meets with these people or she’s in big 

trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s statement that everything is fine in 

municipal land shows pure arrogance. I found approximately 

that four out of five municipalities are being forced to hike their 

mill rates because they have no other choice. They already cut 

services and capital projects and administration. The minister 

did not create any tax room by changing the health levy  

  



1340  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

because she took the 12 million from the revenue-sharing funds 

on the other side. 

 

When will the minister truly respond to the concerns she gets in 

letters and calls from the cities, towns, and rural areas suffering 

from her revenue-sharing cuts? Will she admit the cuts have 

finally gone too far? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, municipalities are not 

dealt with in exactly the same way percentage-wise. There are 

factors taken into account in the distribution formula such as 

population, amount spent on administration versus services, and 

so on. 

 

But municipalities are governed, as the member opposite knows 

and used to be one of those, by locally elected people who are 

highly accountable on a daily basis to the people that they 

serve. They’ve done a very good job in working with the 

resources they have and they will continue to do so. 

 

But I need to say this, Mr. Speaker, that there is . . . in the 

reduction in the provincial sales tax from 9 to 7, a number of 

municipalities are saving considerable amounts on their 

purchases. We’re sharing with them the infrastructure, federal 

and provincial infrastructure money this year. And they no 

longer have to remit . . . Although the revenue-sharing pool is 

reduced, they no longer have to remit the 2 mills for hospitals, 

the public health levy at 50 cents per capita, and the social 

assistance levy. They now have that tax room available to use 

for municipal purposes without their membership seeing any 

increases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, what you did is you 

removed $12 million and turned around and cut them by 29. 

That doesn’t sound like fair game to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m here to testify that everything is not rosy in 

small town Saskatchewan. On Friday afternoon I met with 

mayors and administrators who are frightened at the 

government’s attack on their funding. It all filters down, and 

this government is attacking property owners, councils, 

businesses, and the way of life in rural areas in smaller 

communities. These people want to know if the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government is including them in the plans 

for the future. 

 

Will the minister tell us if revenue sharing has any future in 

rural Saskatchewan, and are we heading towards zero — I mean 

zero, Madam Minister — funding for municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the rural and urban 

revenue-sharing pool stands at about $40 million right now. It’s 

subject to budgeting considerations like all government 

expenditures are. We have no plans at the moment to reduce it 

further. But we’re in constant communication with 

municipalities through the municipal round table and the 

memorandum of understanding, Mr. Speaker. And we think  

that that is the appropriate forum to deal with these issues and 

not necessarily grandstanding in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Snowmobile Accident Coverage 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). 

 

Mr. Minister, you recently received a letter regarding Mr. 

Darrel Fitterer of Fiske. Mr. Fitterer was participating in a local 

charity hill-climbing event for snowmobilers. He was involved 

in an accident in which he totalled his snowmobile off and 

broke his right leg . . . or arm. Mr. Fitterer has now been 

informed that SGI is not going to cover him for the damage to 

his snowmobile or for his injury because it occurred while he 

was taking part in a competition. 

 

Mr. Minister, why has SGI refused to cover Mr. Fitterer for this 

accident? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to first say to the member that I have not seen in detail the 

correspondence on Mr. Fitterer, and had I seen that 

correspondence, I would say to the member opposite that I 

would not be in a position here to discuss Mr. Fitterer’s case 

with you. It’s not the practice of this House that we would take 

an individual case and review it in any kind of detail in this 

Assembly. 

 

I know that Mr. Fitterer, if he was in fact participating in an 

event of this nature, SGI would be exercising its policy in 

accordance with that regulation and would accordingly speak to 

that. If the member opposite would send me a correspondence 

on that, I would be pleased to review it with you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 

already have sent correspondence to your office, and I would 

assume that your officials would be bringing it to your 

attention. 

 

Mr. Minister, apparently SGI has a policy that will . . . that it 

will not provide coverage for any accident that occurs during a 

competition. The problem is SGI hasn’t bothered to inform the 

people of Saskatchewan and the snowmobilers of Saskatchewan 

of this restriction. I have a copy of the latest SGI snowmobiling 

guide. Nowhere in this guide does it say that there is not 

coverage for local charity events like the one Mr. Fitterer was 

involved in. 

 

Mr. Minister, how far does this restriction go? Are poker 

derbies exempted? Or more importantly, how are people 

supposed to know that they don’t have coverage if it doesn’t say 

so in SGI’s own guide? 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that SGI has neglected to 

mention this restriction in its guide, will you provide Mr. 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

 Fitterer with the coverage for his accident? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to just explain again to the member opposite that in the 

current review of our policy, which is the SGI overall policy, 

one of the issues that we’re of course discussing and reviewing 

in some detail is how we’re going to insure snowmobiles into 

the future. 

 

As the member opposite may or may not know, in the province 

of Saskatchewan snowmobiles are expected to be insured. And 

we currently have about 40,000 snowmobiles that are operating 

in this province. And of those 40,000 only about 17,000 of 

those machines are insured in Saskatchewan. 

 

Accordingly, what we’re doing is examining in some detail 

whether or not into the future these kinds of events as they 

relate to snowmobiling . . . as you know, snowmobiling in this 

province has become a major winter sport, has become a family 

event. We have a number of snowmobile trails across the 

province that are going to be expanding into the future. 

 

And there may be some issues here that SGI hasn’t covered off 

as clearly as we would like within our campaign brochure. And 

to the member opposite, we would say to you that as we review 

that policy in some detail, we’ll be sure that we include this 

issue as it relates to snowmobile events. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Teachers’ Federation Disciplinary Procedures 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, the 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) has 

expressed some very grave concerns about your proposed 

changes to The Education Act and The Teachers’ Federation 

Act. Once again you seem to be tipping the balance in favour of 

the unions and against the best interests of schools and, most 

important, students. 

 

The SSTA is most concerned about section 45 of The Teachers’ 

Federation Act which gives the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation) sweeping powers to discipline individual teachers 

for anything the STF deems to be conduct contrary to the 

collective interests of teachers. Madam Minister, why is it 

necessary to give such wide-ranging powers to the STF to use 

against teachers who are simply trying to do their job? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t share the 

SSTA’s concern about this legislation, that it would impose 

unreasonable restrictions on individual teachers. 

 

What I can say to the member is that the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation is a mature professional organization 

which has demonstrated its integrity and credibility in this 

province for more than 60 years. And to suggest that the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation would somehow deny its 

own members fundamental individual rights is a disservice to  

the teachers and the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

questioning the age of the STF or exactly where they’re at. 

We’re questioning you and what you’re doing to them — and 

it’s your legislation. 

 

Madam Minister, the SSTA gives some examples of the kinds 

of infractions that may result in disciplinary actions and fines 

levied against teachers by the STF. For example, a teacher who 

volunteers to coach a basketball team after hours could be fined, 

because this is contrary to STF policy. A teacher who 

supervises pupils over the noon hour could be fined, because 

this is contrary to STF policy. 

 

Madam Minister, this new legislation shows no understanding 

of how schools are actually run in this province and no regard 

for the best interests of students. Madam Minister, because of 

your cut-backs a lot of schools cannot afford to pay extra for a 

basketball coach, so they’ll probably end up simply dropping 

the basketball team. 

 

Madam Minister, why do you want to penalize teachers who put 

forward a little extra effort and participate in the community? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I just disagree with what 

the member is saying. It is my view that the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation will not hold the view that is being 

expressed by the member opposite. 

 

It is my view that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 

which was very much involved in the drafting of this legislation 

— and this is the kind of legislation that they wanted — they 

are a grass roots organization that has the capacity to determine 

how it’s going to exercise its various powers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not unlike other professional 

legislation in this province. Each session we introduce 

professional legislation where organizations govern themselves. 

And all I can say to the member is that I have not seen any 

professional legislation that has implemented the kinds of 

abuses that the member speaks of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. She may not have 

seen it but I doubt if the doors have ever been that wide open to 

misuse as she’s opening them right now. 

 

This legislation will penalize them simply for their words — if 

they dare to speak out against the policy of the STF. For 

example, a teacher could be fined for expressing support of the 

present legislation requiring substitute teacher salaries to be 

negotiated at the local level, because that’s contrary to the STF 

policy. So not only are teachers prohibited from acting against 

the STF policy, now they’re prohibited against speaking against 

STF policy. 

  



1342  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Madam Minister, what happened to freedom of speech? Why 

are you giving the STF the right to fine teachers for expressing 

their views? And that’s why I know . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to make it 

clear that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, its executive 

and council, widely . . . had a wide consultation process on this 

piece of legislation. They have worked with the Department of 

Education on this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have served in this House for some 11 years and 

I have never seen, in the 11 years that I’ve served in this House, 

such an unprecedented attack on the teachers’ federation and 

teachers in this province. Mr. Speaker, I find the member’s 

response appalling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Drug 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Multiple 

Sclerosis Month and on May 8 members of this Assembly will 

likely stand in this House and recognize the thousands of people 

who live with this disease. 

 

That’s all well and good, Mr. Speaker, but MS (multiple 

sclerosis) sufferers need more than just recognition. They need 

a commitment from this government that Betaseron will 

become insured under this province’s health plan. Betaseron is 

a drug that would greatly improve the quality of life for many, 

but it is clear that the Minister of Health has no compassion for 

these people. 

 

When I last raised this issue on April 7 in this House, the 

minister stated, and I quote from Hansard: 

 

The drug Betaseron is not touted as a drug that allows 

people to live normal lives. It is a drug which may allow 

certain people with (MS) to have a better quality of life for 

a . . . short period of time. 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, after the minister made those 

statements, I did receive many calls regarding the minister’s 

statements. 

 

The MS Society of Canada is encouraging everyone to wear a 

carnation, make a donation this month . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 

has been quite lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to put 

his question directly. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 8 will the 

Minister of Health make a donation to the people who are 

affected with MS? Will the minister agree to include Betaseron 

under this province’s drug plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, certainly that matter is under 

active consideration by this government. And I stand by what I  

said before, that Betaseron should not be touted as a cure for 

multiple sclerosis. Tragically, there is no cure. However, 

Betaseron may be helpful to some individuals and the merits 

and costs of Betaseron will have to be considered. 

 

I want the member to know that I’ve certainly been to the MS 

research centre in Saskatoon and spoken to the medical 

professionals, spoken to people from the MS society, and I’ll 

continue to do so. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that one of the efforts that 

we’re trying to take is to talk to the federal government about 

Bill C-91, which is the patent drug protection for drug 

companies, which unfortunately raises the price of drugs quite a 

bit. We also are interested in talking to the federal government 

about funding a national drug plan, with which we would be 

willing to participate. All three of those things would be useful 

for sufferers of MS. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well listening to the 

minister, maybe I should ask him if he agrees with his federal 

leader, who thinks that Mr. Chrétien shouldn’t be putting any 

more money into health care. Maybe that’s the provincial’s 

policy plan as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However, you’ve been studying this thing to death for two 

years, Mr. Minister. We know that your government has 

received the report, the national review of the drug, and the 

minister said a year ago that very soon he would make a 

decision. How much longer do these people have to suffer, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Quebec, Ontario, and our neighbours to the west, 

B.C. (British Columbia), have already recognized the 

importance of this drug. Why won’t you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I’ve indicated to the member, Mr. 

Speaker, the matter is under active consideration, and I expect 

that we’ll be making a decision quite shortly. 

 

The member is not correct if he’s suggesting that we’ve been 

sitting on this decision for a year. This matter has been under 

active consideration, Mr. Speaker, by people who are expert in 

the field of pharmaceuticals, experts — unlike the member and 

myself; we’re not experts. 

 

So as Minister of Health I have to take advice from people who 

are expert. That’s what I’m trying to do, and we will take that 

advice, consult as widely as we can. We don’t want to hold out 

hope to people with multiple sclerosis that there is some drug 

that will cure them — tragically that is not the case. It may be 

helpful to some individuals. We’ll continue to look into it and 

consider it, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that we’ll be able to make a 

decision in the near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a known fact that this 

drug does help some people, so why not give them the 

opportunity to have this drug, the ones that afford it. I guess it 

goes back to the user-pay that this government wants us to 

have. If you can afford to buy the drug, Mr. Speaker, then you 

can use it. 

 

A good example: Prince Albert resident Michelle Mostowich’s 

brother and sister are just two of these many victims. I’ve raised 

them in this House before. One of Michelle’s siblings can 

afford the drug Betaseron and the other can’t; so one uses, one 

doesn’t. The government continues to say, and it did in the 

House again today, that we have the best health care system in 

the world, in Canada. And we do, and I’ve said we do, and 

people recognize that. But it’s getting to the point where only is 

it the best system if you can afford to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, why won’t you show some compassion to 

these people, get on with this. Make the announcement and let 

the people use the drug that want to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member has indicated to 

this House that Ontario, Quebec, and British Columbia have 

approved coverage of Betaseron. I want to assure the member 

that none of those provinces have Liberal governments. 

Because it is the policy of the Liberal Party, contrary to what 

that member says, to go to a user-pay system. And when that 

member, who admits that we have the best health system in the 

world here in Saskatchewan, notwithstanding that we may have 

some problems from time to time, when that member gets up 

and accuses this government of supporting user-pay, all I can 

say, Mr. Speaker, is to quote that member, who said on May 1, 

1996, “If there are people that are prepared to pay, then I think 

we have to let them pay.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the policy of this party and this government 

is to support the public medicare system that was founded in 

this province. That’s what we’re going to do. We’re not going 

to make people pay for medicare services and we’re not going 

to adopt the policy of the Leader of the Liberal Party, which is 

to privatize the hospitals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 61  The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

61, The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce three 

motions to substitute members on committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Cannington: 

 

That the name of Mr. Ben Heppner be substituted for that 

of Mr. Jack Goohsen on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move as 

well, seconded by the member from Cannington: 

 

That the name of Mr. Dan D’Autremont be substituted for 

that of Mr. Jack Goohsen on a list of members composing 

the Standing Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Cannington: 

 

That the name of Mr. Don Toth be substituted for that of 

Mr. Jack Goohsen on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of Bill No. 49, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

This legislation governs election procedures in all urban 

municipalities, all northern municipalities, and all school 

division in the province. The Act is reviewed and revised if 

necessary before each round of local elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because we amended the Act last year, this Bill makes only a 

few amendments to the legislation. These amendments in 

general were requested by local governments. At the proposal 

stage, they were circulated to stakeholder groups, including 

SUMA, the SSTA, the city clerk’s association, as well as local 

government administrators. 

  



1344  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

The first amendment of significance is the provision to permit 

persons who are disabled to vote outside the polling place in 

circumstances where it is not accessible to them. This is a 

standard feature in local elections in a number of provinces, Mr. 

Speaker. It supplements a number of provisions that already 

exist in the Act to ensure that voters who are disabled may cast 

their ballots with the minimum of inconvenience. 

 

A second reform in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, changes the old 

reference in the Act to handicapped persons. The new 

terminology in this Bill now makes reference to persons with 

disabilities. This is in keeping with the government’s policies of 

communicating with respect. 

 

A third amendment clarifies the existing provision for 

computerized voting or vote counting. It ensures that when 

local officials choose to use computerized methods to make the 

election process more efficient and cost effective, all the related 

procedures like recounts may be modified to reflect this 

automated model. 

 

A fourth provision reinstates the long-standing right enjoyed by 

spouses of resort village electors to run for office. This 

provision was inadvertently deleted when the Act was last 

amended in 1996. 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains only a few 

provisions that basically update and fine-tune local election 

rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 49, An Act 

to amend The Local Government Election Act. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have a Bill before 

us which does in some respects modernize the election 

procedures for municipal elections. I wish on behalf of the 

opposition to congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs for 

the reforms that are contained within this Bill and to say that we 

do not have any problem with them, except that there are a 

number of other suggestions for bringing election law into the 

20th century before we leave the 20th century, that the minister 

has not followed up on. And I’m disappointed with that. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that we are pleased, first of all, that 

there are provisions to make it easier for disabled voters to cast 

their votes. And secondly, that it certainly makes sense in this 

day and age that there would be provision made to have 

computers assist with voting and vote tabulation. So these are 

progressive moves, and as I say, I’m certainly not rising to 

condemn them. 

 

However, there are two other issues that I have previously 

raised that I would like to again commit for the minister’s 

consideration. I earlier asked the minister why we didn’t have 

health district elections and municipal elections on the same 

date. They are to occur this fall — municipal elections on 

October 22; health district elections, two days earlier on 

October 20. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they are going to be two days 

apart is just absolutely a ridiculous situation. It means first of  

all, increased cost because the staff to run the elections will now 

require duplication, and of course rental of facilities for polling 

stations will be duplicated. 

 

But what is more significant is that it is an inconvenience to 

voters and almost certainly will result in a lower voter turnout. I 

think one of the problems with calling our elections democratic 

is that a democratic election requires a decent turnout of the 

electorate. And by running health district elections 

independently and standalone as we did two years ago, we end 

up with voter turnouts which in some cases were not much 

more than about 10 per cent. 

 

Is that really a fair reflection of community opinion? I don’t 

think it is when you run into such very, very low voter turnouts. 

We could get a higher voter turnout, I believe, if the elections 

were run together so that we would have health district, 

education, and municipal. 

 

Now of course it is a long-standing tradition in this province 

that municipal and education elections are run together, and as I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that almost certainly results in both a higher 

voter turnout and in a cost saving. So it simply makes sense that 

we now run health district elections at the same time so that all 

local government elections are held together. 

 

They are all fixed-term elections. Now of course the problem 

with provincial and federal elections is that they’re not on fixed 

term. But all of our local district elections are on fixed terms; so 

they should be on the same date rather than, as I say, only two 

days apart. That’s inconveniencing voters who have to make 

two trips to the polls in the same week, and unnecessarily 

adding to the cost. 

 

We know that history tells us that municipal elections attract 

somewhere between 30 and 50 per cent of the electorate. Our 

health district elections last time attracted only somewhere 

between 10 and 15 per cent. So I think this is a reform which 

could double the voter turnout at least, double or treble the 

voter turnout for our health district elections if the minister 

would adopt it. 

 

Now I recall that I asked the minister this question about three 

weeks ago in this House, and at that time she said it was an 

interesting suggestion and she liked it and she’d have something 

more definite later. I wish now that she would give us 

something more definite by including that in this amendment. 

 

This session does not have a long time yet to go; so if the 

minister doesn’t move very quickly we are stuck with this 

ridiculous situation of health district elections two days apart. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as well as encouraging the minister to 

address my suggestion that health district elections should be 

run together with municipal and education elections, there is 

one other suggestion I would like to commit to her and ask for 

her consideration on. And that is the question of the voters’ list. 

As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, the tradition in this country has 

been to have enumeration and a new voters’ list prepared for 

every election, and I understand in Saskatchewan the cost of 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

 that procedure is $900,000 — just under a million dollars per 

election. 

 

Now as you are aware, Mr. Speaker, this year we have had a 

federal enumeration which is being called the last enumeration 

for Canada, and we are now moving to a permanent voters’ list. 

If we have a permanent voters’ list at the federal level, it should 

be a very simple matter for the province to link into that 

permanent voters’ list and that permanent voters’ list will then 

become the basic voters’ list for all elections, whether they be 

national, provincial, or local. And this would again result in 

both significant cost savings but also make the procedure far 

simpler than the procedure we presently use. 

 

The procedure of enumeration and new voters’ lists prepared 

for every single election is again something out of the Dark 

Ages. Let’s bring our election law into the 20th century before 

we go into the 21st century. 

 

We know that in the United States, their voter’s list — 

registration they call it — is the same no matter what level of 

election we’re on, and I think that this would be an excellent 

thing now that Canada has a permanent voters’ list. I would ask 

the minister to link into the permanent voters’ list so it becomes 

the basic voters’ list for our provincial and our local elections. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we do have some reforms before 

us in this Bill They are reforms that the Liberal opposition has 

no difficulty at all in accepting and agreeing with. 

 

But there are other obvious reforms that we’ve raised before. I 

raise them again. I ask for the minister’s consideration, if she 

would amend this Bill, to provide, one, for all local elections on 

the same date — municipal, education, and health; and two, 

provisions for the province and local elections to use the new 

permanent voters’ list. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 57, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 

to both rural and urban municipalities. Accordingly, these 

amendments give legal effect to decisions reflected in the 

1997-98 budget. This Bill provides for a method of calculating 

the funds available to both the urban revenue-sharing pool and 

the rural revenue-sharing pool this year. 

 

Although the funding to the pools is reduced over last year, we 

have undertaken a number of measures which will, in part,  

offset the reductions and result in some municipalities being 

better off than in the past few years. These measures include 

removal of the public health levy and the social assistance plan 

levy, support for an extended infrastructure program, and 

reduction of the PST (provincial sales tax) by 2 per cent. 

 

The 2 mill hospital levy has also been an irritant to 

municipalities and we have responded by removing this levy 

from the property tax base. The removal, however, will be 

revenue neutral to the provincial government and the municipal 

sector. For the province, the money that would have been raised 

by the levy will be taken from the revenue-sharing pool. At the 

same time municipalities have increased tax room. This allows 

them more flexibility to determine priorities of taxation and 

spending at the local level. 

 

Amendments updating references to other legislation and 

confirming the ability to address funding distribution in 

regulations make up the remainder of this Bill. 

 

In closing, total revenue-sharing funding of 47.7 million and an 

increased amount of tax room at the local level represent a 

significant level of financial support to Saskatchewan 

municipalities. I urge members to support this Bill. 

 

Accordingly, I move second reading of Bill No. 57, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

respond to the minister’s comments on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She had made the comment that some municipalities would be 

better off. I can’t in my wildest imagination understand how 

any municipality in this province could be better off after $29 

million in funding cuts. The removal of the 2 mill health levy 

did absolutely nothing for them because it was removed from 

the revenue-sharing pool; so they gained absolutely nothing 

there. 

 

I notice in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, also that what is conspicuous 

by its absence through the amendments is the main farm access 

road system, which was funded 50/50 by the government. This 

program is going to hurt rural communities and grain handling 

systems for years and years to come and it’s just another blow 

to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

What maybe even is going to hurt more is the elimination of the 

futures program, Mr. Speaker, which was cut from four to two 

after the ’91 election and now is eliminated completely. And 

this program, Mr. Speaker, allowed municipalities to do a larger 

project so that in any given year they might construct four, five, 

six miles, depending on their allotment. With the futures 

program eliminated, that completely rules that out unless a 

municipality would like to fund the total project on their own. 

And I’m not just sure that that isn’t what the government has 

intended in this Bill. 

 

This futures program is going to hurt rural Saskatchewan to no 

end, because there is no way that an RM (rural municipality) is 

going to rip up a stretch of road for five years in a row and  

  



1346  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

build a kilometre at a time. And they also cannot afford to fund 

the whole program on their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that this Bill is what sets the revenue 

sharing for municipalities and I believe this year to be around 

approximately $47 million with the infrastructure. When you 

work that out, Mr. Speaker, to the five or five and a half billion 

dollars that this province spends to run this government, $47 

million works out to be .008 or less than 1 per cent of the total 

budget for this province. And that’s what we’re giving out to 

our rural and urban municipalities to share in funding. I think 

actually at this point this is a complete disgrace, because we’re 

offloading all our problems onto the local municipalities and 

we’ve balanced the budget on their back. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have many other questions, but I think I can 

ask them in committee. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, despite 

the unexpected increased revenues due to strong resource sector 

and the increased rate hikes by Crowns resulting in record 

profits, this government has determined that our most efficient 

level of government — municipal government — should absorb 

a larger reduction in revenue grants than the proposed 25 per 

cent. 

 

The message I am receiving from municipal governments in my 

constituency is that even though the government’s proposed 25 

per cent reduction would have placed unnecessary hardships on 

them, they were given a year to prepare. However, these 

additional reductions will place the municipalities in a very 

difficult financial situation. 

 

The mayor of Watson, Myron Knafelc, said this about the 

revenue-sharing reduction — the town is going to receive a 40 

per cent reduction rather than the 24 per cent that it was told to 

expect. That translates into a reduction of almost $26,000. Last 

year the revenue-sharing grant was $63,823 and this year it is 

27,884. 

 

In contrast, when he started as mayor of Watson in 1991, the 

revenue-sharing grant was $98,000. If you add this $60,000 

reduction to the loss of the $52,000 community building grants, 

the $8,500 economic development program, and the elimination 

of the McNab Regional Park funding, you can see why it’s 

becoming increasingly difficult to operate a small town in 

Saskatchewan these days. 

 

Along with the revenue decreases, the province has stepped in 

and taken over 25 per cent of the police fine revenue, even 

though they pay absolutely nothing towards the police budget. 

And they have offloaded SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) funding onto the municipalities. Watson 

used to pay $850 for its SAMA fees and now they pay SAMA 

$8,700. 

 

Council is in the process of making the 1997 budget, and at this 

time no definite conclusions have been made. However, the 

town doesn’t see it possible to swallow the $26,000 grant 

reduction. The only choice they have to make up for the 

shortfall is a property tax increase. The comments of the mayor  

of Watson are very similar to the comments I am receiving 

throughout my whole constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government asks the municipalities to take a 

reduction in services and funding while their own coffers 

continue to increase, and increase their cabinet. What benefits 

have the taxpayers of Saskatchewan gained from the increase in 

staff at the legislature? 

 

I am positive that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would rather 

see the money spent in revenue grants to municipalities than an 

increase to the municipal taxes that most will face this year. 

 

This government seems to think that investing in a business 

venture such as NST and losing $16 million is acceptable. Yet 

they are unwilling to invest in the very foundation of 

Saskatchewan, that being our municipalities. 

 

The government has proudly proclaimed their grand strategies 

for economic development. But let me tell you there won’t be 

any economic development if this government continues to 

reduce its revenue sharing to municipalities. 

 

Many of the RMs in my constituency have indicated that their 

road construction plan for this year . . . that they had road 

construction planned, but with the elimination of the futures 

program and the reduction in other revenue-sharing grants, 

there will be no construction whatsoever. In fact with the 

allocated $15,000 per year, they will have to combine three or 

four other municipalities to determine what need is most 

pressing, and do that work. 

 

How many roads can be repaired with $60,000? Would $60,000 

every four years maintain the roads in all the municipalities? 

What economic development will we see in this province if 

there is not an infrastructure in which to move products? 

 

The federal government has announced another cost-sharing 

infrastructure program, with the feds providing 50 per cent and 

the provincial and municipal governments providing the other 

25 per cent each. That sounds like a great program. And the 

infrastructure in the province would benefit as well as the 

spin-off industries. Unfortunately in order to participate, the 

municipalities will have to raise their taxes. 

 

This government is continually talking about their job creation 

goal of 30,000 by the end of the century. We all know that the 

government is far short of this goal. At the present time they 

have no hope of ever reaching it with the continued cut-backs. 

 

The largest employer in the Kelvington-Wadena constituency is 

agriculture, followed by retail trade, health, manufacturing, and 

tourism. All of these areas, except possibly health, are totally 

dependent on access to market which can only be obtained 

through the continued maintenance of our roads. This 

government’s decision will in fact cause employment to 

decrease rather than increase when the employers are not able to 

move their products to market as a result of poor road 

conditions. 

 

We are all very well aware of the government’s agenda to force  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

the amalgamation of municipalities. It’s obvious that since this 

government lost its bid through the legislation, they are 

attempting to starve the RMs and the towns through cuts to 

revenue-sharing grants. 

 

However, as these cuts get deeper and deeper, our infrastructure 

is being directly damaged. Sadly, it won’t only be our 

infrastructure that will be ruined. Rural Saskatchewan will see 

the demise of the very industries it was dependent upon for 

survival. 

 

How can the government continue to shift the tax burden to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan? In an NDP document entitled Tax 

Fairness for the ’90s, the NDP stated Saskatchewan people are 

becoming increasingly concerned by the PC government’s 

pattern of shifting the tax burden onto the local taxpayers, a tax 

shift that amounts to back-door tax increases. 

 

What are they doing that’s any different from that? Why must 

local governments bear the brunt of the provincial 

government’s lack of commitment to the people of the 

province? 

 

Many of the municipalities I spoke to claim that this 

government could not have picked a more inopportune time to 

implement revenue-sharing cuts. Municipalities do not need to 

cope with a loss of revenue when they and the taxpayers of the 

province are coping with a changed assessment system which 

most taxpayers don’t even understand. 

 

On top of that, municipalities have to determine their business 

tax policy, which is creating disharmony among municipalities. 

 

This government sent out extremely loose guidelines which 

allowed municipal bodies to set taxes anywhere from zero to 50 

per cent of the fair market value of business in their 

jurisdictions, with a goal of generating a similar amount of 

revenue as in previous years. 

 

The education portion of this tax is creating disharmony 

amongst municipalities within in the Wadena School Division. 

The town of Wadena elected to adopt a 1 per cent business tax 

levy, which in effect has shifted some of the cost of education 

to neighbouring communities. 

 

In 1996, this town discontinued tax . . . business taxes by 60 per 

cent as a result of complaints made by business owners 

regarding taxes. As Mayor Perry Banadyga stated: 

 

We asked the school division to let us know what others 

were doing, but this dragged on and we needed to finalize 

our budget . . . 

 

Rather than being strapped with a 33% business tax if other 

communities did not go (with) . . . 0% we chose to go with 

a 1% business tax? 

 

The Wadena School Division offered all municipalities the 

option of a zero per cent business tax with a division 

establishing a policy based on no business tax. However, some 

communities set business taxes at 9 per cent, some at 12 per  

cent, and some at 33 per cent to generate revenues similar to 

1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it is irresponsible of this government to 

reduce the revenue-sharing grants at the same time the 

municipalities are having to cope with the ramifications of 

reassessment. To force municipalities to increase taxes as well 

characterizes this government’s lack of reality for the taxpayers 

of this province. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to outline the purpose and the main provisions of 

these amendments in The Education Act, 1995. This statute 

serves as a fundamental legislative basis for our province’s 

education system from kindergarten to grade 12. It provides for 

the establishment of school divisions and for the election of 

boards of education to govern the school services in their area. 

 

The Act sets out the various powers and duties of boards of 

education in a wide range of areas, from taxation to curriculum, 

facilities, student transportation, employment of teachers, and 

other staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our education system evolves and responds to 

the ever-changing needs and circumstances of students, 

teachers, and communities, the Act itself must be updated 

regularly so it continues to serve our collective interests 

effectively. 

 

The amendments included in this current Bill are intended to 

meet this objective. The amendments can be outlined under six 

major categories, and I will speak briefly about each of the six. 

 

(1445) 

 

First, housekeeping changes. A number of clauses in the Bill 

are intended simply to correct technical or drafting errors. In 

1995 The Education Act was redrafted in conjunction with the 

translation of the legislation into French. And given that the Act 

has almost 400 sections, it was inevitable that a number of 

errors and omissions arose. We are now correcting those 

problems. 

 

The second series of amendments are related to school 

year/school day issues. In recent years there’s been a growing 

interest in alternatives to the traditional school year and school 

day in our province. And although discussions have involved a 

wide range of possible alternative models, there’s been no 

consensus about the need for change or about the educational 

validity of these models. 

 

The only exception to this general view involves what is 

sometimes called the balanced school year model. This model 

has been of particular interest to school divisions which use a 

semester system in high school and in which the first semester  

  



1348  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

has traditionally ended towards the end of January. 

 

Over the past two or three years, school divisions in Regina and 

Saskatoon have implemented an alternative model in which 

school begins earlier in August and ends earlier in June, with 

the first semester ending just before Christmas. This concept 

appears to be working well and is supported locally, as well as 

by our various provincial partners. 

 

Under existing legislation, this model can be implemented only 

with the annual approvement of the Minister of Education. The 

proposed amendments will now give boards of education the 

flexibility to implement this model. Specifically, they’ll be 

allowed to schedule their terms or semesters to accommodate 

the model and will also be allowed to start and end the summer 

vacation somewhat earlier than is currently allowed. 

 

A further amendment in the area of school year and school day 

clarifies that boards of education cannot lengthen the school day 

without ministerial approval. And this amendment is intended 

to eliminate some perceived ambiguity in the current language 

of the Act. 

 

The third series of amendments relate to meeting the needs of 

special needs students. Mr. Speaker, for many years the 

regulations under The Education Act included provisions 

whereby parents of special needs students could appeal 

decisions made by a board of education about the designation, 

placement, and program of their student. However, the 

Department of Justice has determined that the Act itself did not 

provide adequate authority for these regulations. 

 

Amendments in the current Bill address this problem. The Act 

will now require boards of educations to have formal 

procedures in place whereby parents or guardians can request a 

review of these decisions. Third parties are not being given 

authority to overturn decisions of elected trustees. This process 

will afford parents the opportunity to have an independent, 

third-party review the decision and make recommendations. 

These new provisions do include authority to make regulations 

respecting the review procedures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth major amendment relates to the 

calculation of education tax on certain types of property. Earlier 

this year our government announced a measure designed to 

cushion the effects of provincial property reassessment on tax 

shifts in rural school divisions. Specifically, our government 

announced that, for education tax purposes, agricultural 

property would have a special factor applied to it. Explicit 

statutory authority is required in order for school divisions and 

municipalities to apply and administer this special factor when 

determining mill rates and levying taxes. This Bill includes the 

necessary authority, the actual numerical value of the factors 

being prescribed by regulation rather than being entrenched in 

the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the remaining two substantive amendments in the 

Bill are both related to current developments in the area of 

school division restructuring. Several months ago our 

government announced its policies and its approach to the 

restructuring of our K to 12 system in the province. We’re  

providing leadership by supporting locally developed ideas and 

proposals and by eliminating legislative barriers where possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan school divisions have historically 

been of two types — those whose area is limited to one city or 

town or village, and a larger rural school division which 

encompass a number of urban and rural municipalities. In the 

future, we expect to see school divisions amalgamating into 

jurisdictions which include both a substantial rural area and an 

urban area. 

 

Our current legislation is based on the premiss that in larger 

urban centres, members of the board of education can be elected 

either at large or on the basis of wards, or subdivisions as 

they’re called in the school division. In the rural area however, 

the only option has been election on a subdivision basis. 

 

Amendments in this Act provide greater flexibility in this 

regard. Specifically, it will now be possible for the urban part of 

the school division to elects its board members either at large or 

by a subdivision, and for the rural part to have the same two 

options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the boards of education in the Prince Alberta area, 

who are in the final stages of a planned restructuring, have 

expressed strong interest in having this flexibility. And I 

understand that the boards in the Battlefords areas are also 

interested. 

 

The final amendment which I wish to outline, Mr. Speaker, 

deals with successor rights for teachers. Collective bargaining 

for teachers occurs at two levels. There is a provincial collective 

agreement which deals with basic items such as salaries, sick 

leave, and pensions. This collective agreement automatically 

applies to teachers in every school division across the province. 

 

In addition, teachers in each school division negotiate a local 

collective agreement commonly knows as the LINC (Local 

Implementation and Negotiation Committee) agreement with 

their board of education. The existence of these local 

agreements makes it essential that legislation define what 

happens when existing school divisions are disestablished, new 

divisions are established, or schools in one division are 

transferred to a neighbouring division. The current provisions of 

the Act address this issue but do not do so consistently or 

appropriately. 

 

Under certain circumstances, teachers affected by a school 

division restructuring retain their existing local agreement until 

they can participate in negotiating a new one. In other 

circumstances, teachers automatically lose their existing local 

agreement and immediately come under the provisions of the 

local agreement in the new division. It does not seem 

reasonable that different teachers or groups of teachers should 

be treated differently with respect to their local collective 

agreements. 

 

The amendments in this Bill will establish a consistent  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

principle. Teachers who become employees of a different board 

of education as a result of restructuring will now retain their 

local agreement until a new agreement is negotiated for all 

teachers in the new school division. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, 

I might indicate that in two separate cases over the past few 

months, boards of education and teachers involved in 

restructuring concluded that this principle was the most fair. It 

was the most fair and the most appropriate one to apply, even 

though it was not supported by the current provisions of the 

Act. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the package of amendments included 

in this Bill will achieve a variety of objectives. In some areas 

they will establish and strengthen necessary statutory authority. 

In others they will provide greater consistency or flexibility in 

response to emerging trends. 

 

As I said at the start of my remarks, The Education Act, 1995 is 

the primary statutory base for our K to 12 education system, 

and as the system changes to meet emerging needs, 

amendments to the Act are required. The present amendments 

are one more step in this continuing process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. And I move that Bill No. 59, The Education 

Amendment Act, 1997, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since 

our last sitting day, at which time we received Bill 59, I’ve had 

the opportunity to look through the number of sections that are 

proposed. And it’s a far-reaching Bill in terms of the number of 

individuals and number of groups that are affected. 

 

The minister has pointed out, I think, six key areas where she 

sees things that have occurred, whether they’re of the 

housekeeping variety or whether they involve restructuring of 

boards and whether they involve teachers. 

 

What I’ve done is take a look at the actual groups of people or 

individuals who are affected by this change to The Education 

Act. Firstly I see changes that will have implications on 

students, whether we take a look at the fact now that the 

provisions for a different school year, school day, are in place, 

those will have far-reaching implications on students. The other 

one of course that has a major implication, I think, is the change 

to the current conditions for those students with special needs 

and the ability to have those needs addressed. That particular 

section has, I believe, some controversy around it and I think 

we have to take a good, hard look at what that section is 

actually stating. 

 

The other group, I think, that are affected very much so are the 

administrators. We see changes in this amendment in the actual 

Bill. We see changes to the duties of principal; we see changes 

to the duty of secretary-treasurer, directors. These are for 

clarification purposes, apparently, and that they re-examine the 

conditions that were in place prior to the Act actually being 

changed. 

 

Another situation to look at of course, is the implications on 

school boards. And the minister has pointed out that indeed 

school boards are in a process right now of consultation with 

other school divisions; are looking at possible restructuring, 

looking at possible amalgamations. And there are far-reaching 

implications on that kind of procedure. It’s not something that 

can be done very quickly, as we’ve seen across the province. 

 

And there are a number of amendments and changes that will 

involve school boards. And I think that there’s a need to pay 

very special attention to that area. 

 

We take a look at the teachers, as the minister has pointed out. 

Teachers will be affected by school division restructuring. And 

while there is a need to address the rights and agreements that 

exist, there are particular sections of this Bill . . . And I’m still 

trying to take a look at sections 19 and 20, as to how they apply 

to the teachers and whether they’re in the best interests of 

teachers, and the board as well. 

 

Section 204 changes the way the local teachers’ agreements are 

actually being applied, and that is also one that needs some 

very, very careful deliberation. 

 

Above all, what I want to look at when we have to chance to 

fully assess this Bill over the next day or two is the fact that 

boards of education have received many, many dollars less over 

the last number of years. They are struggling with reduced 

grants; they are struggling with the fact that programs have 

been reduced in many schools. And I don’t think boards of 

education want to have further . . . a further charge to them put 

in place. Costs that will be the responsibility of the board are 

not necessarily in the best interests of the students in that 

particular school division. So there’s a need to address those 

costs. 

 

When I take a look at all of the different groups that have been 

affected by this particular change to The Education Act and the 

fact that this Bill has just been before us, introduced for the first 

time at the last sitting, I would at this time move adjournment of 

this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to explain the purpose of these amendments to The Teachers’ 

Federation Act. Under this legislation the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation, the STF, is the principal organization 

representing the teaching profession in our province. 

 

The STF has a wide range of responsibility and authority for 

dealing with matters which affect the profession itself and the 

relationship between the profession and the public. The STF is 

responsible for maintaining high standards of professional 

competence and conduct among teachers. In this respect the 

STF is required to deal with disciplinary matters in order to 

ensure that the public interest is effectively protected. 

 

  



1350  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

As well, the STF deals with professional development for 

teachers and with a wide variety of teacher welfare issues. In 

this latter area, the federation’s most notable role is in collective 

bargaining at both the local and provincial levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments included in the present Bill 

involve all these major components of the federation’s 

activities. The amendments can be divided into three main 

categories: (1) matters involving the federation’s internal 

administration affairs; (2) matters relating to the federation’s 

role in professional discipline; and (3) matters relating to the 

federation’s dealings with its members in the context of 

collective bargaining. 

 

The fist category of amendments I will address is the category 

pertaining to the federation’s administrative affairs. In this 

category the Bill clarifies . . . 

 

The Speaker:  I’m having some difficulty being able to hear 

the minister’s remarks and I would ask all hon. members to 

allow the minister to make her remarks in an uninterrupted kind 

of way. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you. In this category, Mr. 

Speaker, the Bill clarifies the relationship and responsibilities 

among the federation’s chief executive officer, the executive, 

and the council. The various powers and duties are now defined 

in a way which more accurately reflects the federation’s internal 

structure. 

 

In addition, the terms “secretary” and “secretary treasurer” are 

replaced throughout the Act with the term “general secretary,” 

since this is the title used by the federation for its chief 

executive officer. 

 

Also the sections dealing with membership in the federation are 

amended to give the STF greater flexibility in admitting 

associate members and in allowing individuals to participate in 

health and other insurance plans administered by the federation. 

 

For example, teachers in Indian band schools will now be 

eligible for associate membership, while authority to allow 

members of the Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials to belong to the disability plan will be clear. 

 

Finally in this category, a time line is prescribed by which 

employers must remit pension contributions to the federation on 

behalf of teachers. The deadline is 10 days following the end of 

the month to which the contributions apply. This requirement 

applies only to the Saskatchewan teachers’ retirement plan 

administered by the STF. Contributions on behalf of teachers in 

the old pension plan administered by the Teachers’ 

Superannuation Commission are remitted to the commission 

under separate legislation. 

 

Prompt remittance of pension contributions is important 

because the financial stability of the pension plan depends in 

part on the ability to maximize investment returns on those 

contributions. 

The second area, the federation’s role in professional discipline. 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has a 

statutory responsibility for dealing with cases involving the 

professional misconduct and competence of individual teachers. 

The federation’s role in professional discipline is the second 

category of amendments I’ll address. 

 

The Act sets out principles and procedures which the federation 

must follow in investigating allegations of incompetence or 

misconduct. These procedures are designed to ensure fairness 

and due process for a teacher under investigation. At the same 

time, they’re intended to ensure that the interests of students, 

other teachers, and the public at large can be effectively 

protected. 

 

Over the past several years a number of standard features have 

been incorporated into Saskatchewan’s professional legislation 

in order to ensure that these statutes continue to meet these two 

objectives effectively. We are now incorporating these features 

into the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Act and I’ll outline 

the key amendments. 

 

One, the name of the discipline committee is being changed to 

the professional ethics committee. The new name reflects the 

type of issue with which this committee deals and distinguishes 

its role from a new type of disciplinary process which I’ll 

describe in a few moments. 

 

Two, a public representative will now be appointed to serve on 

the professional ethics committee, bringing an outside 

perspective to bear on professional matters. 

 

Three, complainants will now have an explicit right to be 

notified about disciplinary hearings and to attend those 

hearings. As well, the federation will be required to hold such 

hearings in public except where legitimate confidentiality 

considerations justify in camera hearings. 

 

Four, the provisions requiring a complainant to submit a 

security deposit before an investigation proceeds are being 

eliminated, as such provisions are now outdated and are seen as 

an unreasonable barrier to individuals who wish to bring about 

what they consider to be legitimate complaints to the federation. 

 

And five, the requirement for the federation to hold a penalty 

hearing before imposing a penalty will now be spelled out. As 

well, the complainant will have an explicit right to be notified 

of this hearing, to attend the hearing, and to be notified of the 

federation’s final decision or recommendation on a penalty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a trend in our society towards dispute 

resolution mechanisms other than the traditional adversarial or 

confrontational procedures such as arbitration and formal legal 

hearings. In particular, procedures for attempting to resolve 

disputes through mediation are becoming increasingly popular. 

 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has expressed a strong 

interest in having the authority to use such alternative dispute 

resolution mechanisms under its legislation, particularly in 

cases where a dispute is between members of the federation  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

itself. I consider this, Mr. Speaker, to be a forward-looking 

approach on the federation’s part. 

 

Accordingly, this Bill includes a new provision which will 

authorize the federation to establish mediation procedures 

where appropriate. 

 

Three, federation role in teacher welfare and collective 

bargaining. The final category of amendments in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, relates to the federation’s role in local and provincial 

collective bargaining for teachers. Teacher bargaining is not 

conducted under the provisions of The Trade Union Act; rather 

it’s covered under the provisions of The Education Act. 

 

The federation itself negotiates on behalf of teachers for 

purposes of a provincial collective agreement; while at the local 

level, local teacher associations appoint a bargaining committee 

to represent them. Given this structure for teacher bargaining, 

it’s important for the federation, like any other bargaining 

agent, to have adequate authority to discipline its members for 

inappropriate behaviour in the context of collective bargaining. 

 

The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal has ruled that a teacher’s 

conduct in the context of collective bargaining cannot 

legitimately be dealt with as a matter of professional conduct 

under The Teachers’ Federation Act. In the absence of any 

other relevant provisions in the Act, the implication of the court 

ruling was there was no mechanism for the federation to deal 

appropriately with this type of issue. 

 

To rectify this problem, a new section is being added to the Act 

dealing with the collective interests of teachers in the context — 

and I want to repeat that — in the context of bargaining. The 

principles and procedures to be applied are being incorporated 

in one self-contained section of the Act in order to make it clear 

that these provisions are totally separate from those dealing 

with professional conduct and competence. 

 

I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that these new provisions do 

not create any possibility — and I want to emphasize this again 

— these provisions do not create any possibility for a teacher to 

have his or her teaching certificate suspended or cancelled on 

the grounds of conduct relating to collective interests. The only 

penalties would be a reprimand or a fine similar to the types of 

fine which other bargaining agents or other trade unions can 

levy on their members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation was 

established in our province over 60 years ago. Over the decades 

its role and responsibilities have grown along with those of the 

teaching profession itself. Today the federation has over 12,000 

members throughout all parts of our province. 

 

Teachers I believe to be proud of the way in which the 

federation has consistently served the interests of education in 

our province by promoting increasingly high standards of 

training, professional development, and professional conduct 

among its members. 

 

As one of the key partners in education, the federation makes a 

vital contribution to our shared objective of quality education  

for all of our Saskatchewan students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the legislation under which the 

federation operates be kept up to date and that it be responsive 

to evolving needs and circumstances in our education system. 

The amendments in this Bill will assist the federation in 

administering its internal affairs, and in carrying out its 

responsibilities on behalf of teachers and the people of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. And I move that Bill No. 60, The Teachers’ 

Federation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 

be brief as far as my comments on Bill No. 30 . . . Bill No. 60. 

Taking a quick look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I’ve noticed that 

we have far-reaching implications for well over 10,000 people 

in Saskatchewan, when we look at the number of teachers that 

are in the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

The points that the minister has outlined have, I think, 

far-reaching implications on all teachers. Not only the people 

involved in the actual Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, as 

far as the executive council and the general secretary, but I 

think it has many, many implications on teachers all across the 

province. 

 

In our quick reaction to the Bill this morning, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

had a chance to consult with a few individuals just by making a 

quick phone call, and I guess I’m surprised. I’m surprised by 

the fact that teachers are not aware. The individual teachers out 

there in the field are not aware that this Bill is going through, so 

we have to consult with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

— and I’d like to have that meeting very quickly — to indeed 

find out why teachers in the field don’t know that this Bill was 

occurring. 

 

The other situation — and I know the minister has indicated this 

many times — that we have a unique situation in Saskatchewan, 

where we have all stakeholders involved in terms of 

consultation meetings. Whether we’re talking about leagues — 

the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents — or whether we’re talking about the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation or the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association; those are the major players. And 

of course then we have parents and students involved as well 

through other organizations. 

 

In contact this morning, I’m finding out that the stakeholders 

have not been all on the same page on this one. There has been 

very little consultation. In fact what I’m finding out, that is 

indeed the draft Bill has been given to stakeholders and said, 

this is what’s going to occur. And I don’t think that that’s the 

kind of procedure that we want to occur in education. And there 

has to be some consultation. There has to be, I think, a 

commitment by all people involved to improve education in this 

province, and improve the working conditions for teachers and 

the collective agreements that apply to teachers. Those are  

  



1352  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

the kinds of things that we have great concern with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move adjournment of 

this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No 17 — The Dental 

Disciplines Act be now read the second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 16 — The 

Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 be now read the second 

time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand that 

we’re on Bill No. 17, the Dental Disciplines Act. And . . . is that 

correct, Mr. Speaker? 

 

A Member: No, you just missed it. 

 

Mr. McLane:  We’re on occupational therapists . . . That’s 

right; that’s correct. That’s what I thought, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyway, just a few words on the occupational therapists . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I know we’re going to the 

Department of Health, Mr. Minister, soon, and that’ll be good 

to get into, too. 

 

Just a couple of comments on the occupational therapists, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will certainly be dealing with that in 

Committee of the Whole a little bit later, but one of the 

interesting things that I noticed of the news release that the 

minister put out regarding this Bill was the fact that, of course, 

that the occupational therapists will no longer have to require a 

person to have a physician’s referral to see them. And that gives 

access to the people that need the service. 

 

However it goes on to state as well that, because the health 

districts are the major employers, that a health district may say 

that they will require their patients to receive a referral from a 

doctor. And that’s the part that we have a problem with, Mr. 

Speaker, because what it does do is tend to not to have a 

consistent service right across the province. And some districts 

may opt to letting their residents receive the service without a 

referral, and others might choose to have their residents get a 

referral from a doctor, which can cause some problems. 

 

And the reason the districts do that might be for a number of 

reasons, whether its financing because the province has  

downloaded to the health districts and they don’t have the 

necessary funding to do all the things that they would want to. 

 

So that’s our major concern, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be 

addressing that in Committee of the Whole, as well as the issue 

of accountability by the council and all the ramifications that 

the council and the association may have in the event that they 

bring forward a concern of a resident who maybe hasn’t been 

treated just the way they should by a therapist. But I think we 

can deal with those in questioning in Committee of the Whole, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 15 — The 

Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  Before we start, I would ask the minister to 

introduce her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Next to 

me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind Bill is 

Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue division. 

Behind me is Doug Lambert, the director of the revenue 

programs branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

Minister. Welcome to your officials to review these two Bills 

this afternoon. 

 

Minister, as I understand it, the purpose of the tobacco tax 

amendment plan really is sort of related to the E&H (education 

and health) Bill as well. What it does is makes up for the 

revenue that would be lost as a result of the E&H Bill moving 

from 9 to 7 per cent, and this then offsets it and changes the 

way you calculate some of these taxes in relationship to the 

cigars and that sort of thing. Is that the thrust of what this Bill 

really is about? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chair, the intent of the Bill is 

because the sales tax is coming down. If we didn’t do anything, 

the cost of tobacco products would also drop. And we know 

there’s a lot of health risks associated with lowering tobacco 

prices; so this means that tobacco prices just stay even, to where 

they would have been without the tax cut. 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, another area that I would like to 

get some information on is how this impacts on relationships 

and agreements that you have with other provinces in terms of 

the whole issue that was very much in the fore not very long 

ago and I’m speaking of tobacco smuggling — primarily from 

eastern Canada — and I believe that there’s an undertaking or 

an agreement that our government has with Manitoba, or some 

kind of an understanding as to prevent smuggling, and how 

does that work? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this has no impact on 

that situation. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I realize that this Bill per se does not have 

impact in that it hasn’t changed what the price of tobacco is, but 

I’m asking the question about what the relationship is in terms 

of us . . . our agreements with other provinces in terms of the 

issues of smuggling, and has that become a greater or lesser 

extent with the tobacco prices essentially being maintained by 

this legislation at the status quo? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as you probably know, when eastern . . . the federal 

government and the governments in eastern Canada lowered 

tobacco taxes, the western Canadian governments decided to 

work together to ensure that we did not lower tobacco taxes and 

prices. And we have cooperated on enforcing the law and we 

have seen no major smuggling problems as a result of the lower 

. . . the higher tobacco taxes here. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  You’ve indicated that there is no major . . . 

Is there . . . Has there been any analysis by your department in 

terms of what opportunity there is for tobacco prices before the 

smuggling? Is there a threshold that you’ve identified as where 

you increase the risk of smuggling in some significant way? 

And I wanted to know if that’s been analysed. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we have not 

identified any particular threshold. I think the main thing that 

we look at is the revenue and the revenue has been basically 

stable throughout this period. So it looks like there is no 

significant concern about tobacco prices and there’s no 

significant smuggling activity. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, one of the great concerns I think 

we all have surrounding the issue of tobacco and the effect tax 

on tobacco has on consumption is the concern about what . . . 

the high incidence of young people starting to smoke. Has your 

department done any analysis, perhaps in conjunction with the 

Department of Health, that makes some relationship between 

the level of taxation on tobacco products and the likelihood of 

young people starting to smoke? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I know that 

information does exist and various national organizations have I 

think, pretty well proven a relationship between the price of 

tobacco products and young people smoking. That is, if tobacco 

products are cheap, it’s more likely that young people will 

smoke. Contrarily, if we keep tobacco prices up as this Bill is 

intending to do, it’s less likely that young people will smoke. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I have no further 

questions on this Bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

 

Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Bill No. 54  The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

(1530) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

have a few concerns here this afternoon regarding occupational 

health and safety as well as some of the items that are placed 

under the occupational health and safety subvote. 

 

To begin with, I note that there’s a slight increase in the amount 

of monies that’s spent on the Office of the Workers’ Advocate, 

who assists claimants with such things as Workers’ 

Compensation Board claims. Would you be able to provide us 

some indication as to what sort of workload the Workers’ 

Advocate has faced in the last couple of years and what sort of a 

case-load that you’d estimate that you would have for the 

upcoming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, this is 

information which I just don’t have with me at the moment but 

I’d be very pleased to provide the information in written form in 

the next day or two, if that’s okay with the member. 

  



1354  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman, also with respect 

to the Workers’ Advocate, who operates at arm’s length from 

the department, if the minister would also be able to provide us 

. . . or tell us what provisions, if any, are in place to allow 

clients that are using those services to offer feedback on the 

quality of such services; so that if there’s any improvements or 

reforms that might be necessary, that they could be so noted and 

undertaken. Perhaps the minister might be able to comment on 

that sort of a feedback mechanism here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that that kind of a mechanism is 

important. I know that the Workers’ Advocate office is used 

generally, not only by injured workers themselves but by their 

representatives, in the case of trade unions, and by members of 

this legislature who have cases that come to them involving 

injured workers and they have the opportunity to use the 

Workers’ Advocate office. A feedback mechanism is necessary, 

and of course it’s been going on for years as a matter of course. 

But I agree with the member that an organized approach to this 

question is probably desirable. 

 

As to the specific measures that are in place, again I can include 

in the memoranda that I’m going to send to the member an 

answer to his question in detail. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 

We look forward to those comments as well in the future. 

 

Coming from a rural area, most of the people in my 

constituency are self-employed, either as farmers or ranchers or 

small-business people. And in their roles as self-employed 

persons, many are quite concerned about occupational health 

and safety. 

 

Earlier in the year, as the minister is well aware, my colleague, 

the member from Wood River, launched the pothole patrol 

program to give people an opportunity to express their concerns 

about the overall state of our highways, including the potholes 

but not just restricted to potholes. Since that campaign was 

launched, many people in my constituency have taken the time 

to write me about their concerns. 

 

Now several of them actually make their living as bus drivers, 

and they’ve written to me and they’ve expressed some rather 

grave concern about our highways. They’re concerned about the 

maintenance of those highways in unseasonable conditions, and 

they’re worried about, just about the general upkeep of such 

things as potholes during the rest of the year. Now they’re 

concerned, Mr. Chairman, because they fear for their own 

safety while on the job, but they also . . . they fear for the safety 

of the children that they’re transporting to and from school. 

 

And I was wondering if the minister would be able to explain if 

there’s any steps that his department is taking to address these 

sorts of concerns and to attack the growing occupational health 

and safety hazard that’s posed by our crumbling highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we have no particular 

program in place to address the situation that the member raises. 

We have all sorts of programing about occupational health and 

safety matters and the member will know the rather 

 voluminous regulations that were brought down in September 

of last year covering all sorts of situations and covering this one 

in a general way, but nothing specifically with respect to the 

condition of the highways. 

 

And I must say to the member that this problem, cast in the way 

that he has cast it, has not occurred to me. But it is a matter that 

ought to be reflected upon and determine what, if any, steps 

could be taken in the department to assist drivers who find 

themself in the situation that the member refers to. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now another 

thought is one with respect to what your department might do to 

mitigate damages that are being caused by the Department of 

Municipal Government, given that they’ve recently announced 

some cuts to municipal grants. There’s fears that this will make 

it more difficult for municipalities to keep their roads 

maintained, and poorly maintained roads like highways pose an 

occupational safety hazard for the bus drivers and our children, 

as I’ve stated and as the minister has acknowledged here this 

afternoon. 

 

So just additionally I would wonder if the minister might make 

some comment that perhaps there are some steps that he and his 

department might take to convince the Municipal Government 

of this very occupational health and safety hazard that we have 

pointed out this afternoon, and what ways that you might be 

able to undertake to help mitigate the harm that’s being done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well to respond in a very general way, 

the member will be aware of course of the announcements that 

have been made with respect to our highways program for this 

fiscal year and for the next 10 years. And the member will also 

be aware of the policy paper that was recently released by the 

minister. So that while this is clearly a problem, made so by a 

number of factors, we are on the way to dealing with it as best 

we can, given the fiscal situation and the limitations that that 

imposes. 

 

From the point of view of the occupational health and safety 

division, we are prepared to respond to any situation that is 

brought to our attention to the best of our ability. 

 

Going back to the member’s previous question with respect to 

the bus drivers, it is difficult to know what it is that we could do 

to help them. You know the bus drivers are very skilled people. 

They require a certain skill level before they are licensed to 

drive their buses and it’s difficult for us to know how we could 

help them to better protect themselves from any of the hazards 

that they face. 

 

Surely the member wouldn’t suggest that we give them another 

driving course or something like that. I rather think the member 

is poking a bit of fun at me — his real point being the condition 

of the roads. The member will know that from the point of view 

of the occupational health and safety division in the Department 

of Labour, you’re aiming at the wrong people. 

 

But having said that, I want to say that we’re prepared in any 

work situation to try and see what we can do to intervene in any 

appropriate ways to try and resolve the problem. 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

Now I may have misinterpreted the member’s motives entirely 

when I suggested that he was poking at me with respect to 

something that would better be directed at another minister, and 

I in turn would simply reiterate this, reiterate this — the 

occupational health and safety program is a flagship program of 

this government, something on which we place great emphasis 

and it’s no joking matter as far as we’re concerned. 

 

And I say to the member quite sincerely that if there’s anything 

we can do to help anyone deal with their work situation and 

actually improve it, we are quite prepared to do that. And I 

think the member appreciates that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, Mr. 

Minister, I suppose I have been caught this afternoon, but just 

trying to highlight what we see as some very serious concerns. 

And perhaps if your department would be of any assistance in 

helping to mitigate some of these problems with the various 

departments of government — Highways being one, Municipal 

Government, as we’ve outlined, as well — certainly as you’ve 

acknowledged, the safety concerns for both children and for bus 

drivers are very real ones and I think they’re ones that everyone 

shares, and it’s just a matter of how seriously we choose to 

attack these problems. 

 

But if I could turn now to something that we spoke about rather 

at length the last session we had, and it was with respect to The 

Labour Standards Act and how it’s affected some of the parents 

with respect to having to pay some back-pays to babysitters 

who have came into their homes to babysit their children. 

 

Would you be able to, this afternoon, provide us with any sort 

of update as to where that situation would be at this present 

time — how many total claims are in and how many have 

actually . . . how many parents have actually had to make 

payments; if those payments have actually been temporarily put 

on hold until there’s some further resolution in this matter. 

 

And also, has there been any further thought given towards 

placing a, I guess a moratorium, if you’d have it, on the period 

of time in which claims will be allowed to be made? Has there 

been a significant decrease in the numbers of claims that have 

been coming in as of late and therefore would lead one to think 

that perhaps this whole matter could be brought to a conclusion 

a little bit sooner than perhaps what you may have stated 

earlier? If you might be able to just make some comments in 

that regard. 

 

The Chair:  I see that the minister’s officials have joined 

him. I would ask him to introduce the officials that have joined 

him, please. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Joining me is 

Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of the department. 

 

As to the member’s question, let me relay the number of 

matters in response to his remarks. We continue to monitor this 

situation, as the member will know. We have received in the 

labour standards offices a total of 40 complaints to this point.  

There has only been one new complaint in the last three 

months; 27 of these complaints have been settled and 13 remain 

outstanding. 

 

We have not considered the question of a cut-off date or 

anything like that. Our method of approaching this problem has 

been publicly stated and is well known. We are monitoring. We 

are at some point going to be in a position to decide the 

question of compensation. 

 

We have been petitioned all around from the parents, from the 

member himself, from others, that this is a situation where there 

ought to be a compensation program. We have not discussed 

that matter at all in the sense that there’s no proposal now 

before the cabinet or being considered as to compensation. But 

when we reach a point where we think we have enough facts at 

our disposal, we will put the matter for decision by the cabinet 

and by the government. 

 

One of the aspects of this situation which I find most 

concerning is that a compensation program is complicated by 

the fact that the people who were in compliance with the law at 

the time that this matter arose are out there somewhere, and we 

don’t know who they are or what kind of wages they were 

paying to their care-givers. 

 

I think you have to consider that, because if you don’t, you’re in 

the position of having . . . of saying well, we’ll compensate the 

people who were in breach of the law and who have now 

complied with the law, we’ll compensate them, without any 

consideration for the people who were in compliance with the 

law and were obeying it. And there is something very illogical 

about that, that you would compensate the offenders, however 

innocent they were, and not compensate the compliers, who you 

don’t even know about at this stage. And frankly I don’t know 

how we get over that problem. I’m trying to take advice on it, 

trying to find a way through it, but obviously it remains a matter 

of some concern. 

 

Now the present status is that we continue to monitor it and at 

some point, and I can’t tell the member when at this point, we 

will have to make a decision on it. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. 

Minister, I do undertake that I will be presenting some more 

petitions on behalf of those affected by this particular 

regulation. And we also do show some sympathy to those who, 

as you say, those unknown who have been in compliance with 

the regulation. But it seems to me that a lot of the problems go 

towards what was a lack of . . . ineffective communication 

policy or initiative, if you wish to call it, on the part of the 

department right from the outset. And perhaps in order to 

undertake to determine who has been in compliance, it’s 

something that the communication and policy branch of your 

department should be giving some serious consideration 

towards. 

 

And also given that there has been a number of reports that 

other government agencies were also not acting in a manner 

which was consistent with the law regarding the babysitter pay, 

I, like other people in the province, found that disturbing, that  

  



1356  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

the government would change regulations and then not abide by 

their own policies. 

 

And I’m wondering if the minister might explain on how many 

occasions government departments or agencies have violated 

these same provisions of The Labour Standards Act? And in 

addition, might the minister be able to tell us what changes in 

fact that are being made to the communication policies of the 

department to better communicate with other departments as 

well as with the public, and would serve to also answer some of 

my concerns towards your comments with respect to those who 

have complied with this particular regulation as well. So if we 

could just have your comments on that please, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m going to deal with the second point 

first. As far as we know, none of the departments are in 

violation of the law. I’m just not familiar with how Social 

Services structure their allowances or their payments so I don’t 

know to what extent that creates any kind of problems for social 

welfare recipients. But Social Services itself doesn’t hire any 

care-givers so they were not directly in violation. 

 

And the member could probably raise that question with my 

colleague when his estimates are before the House as to how 

that’s figured by them. I personally don’t know. 

 

With respect to information and the communications, I have 

publicly admitted that the law was not very well communicated 

at the time. And that’s a tough one. We communicated with all 

of the employers in the province, of which we had notice, where 

we knew the name of the employer and the address of the 

employer, and were able to do that through the mailing lists of 

the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

We can send out notice of any change in the law to all of the 

employers in the province in that manner, that is to say all of 

the employers who are paying premiums or are listed as 

employers by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

Persons employing babysitters for example are not covered by 

workers’ compensation and they’re not known to the board. So 

we miss all those people and we have no mechanism around by 

which we can identify them. They don’t have to register 

anywhere; they don’t have to identify themselves to any public 

office. So we simply don’t know that they exist. 

 

We, in connection with the labour standards legislation and 

regulations, consulted widely. And we had meetings all over the 

place. Again the people attending those meetings were 

employers or representatives of employer organizations or 

chambers of commerce. And again no contact between them 

and the employers of babysitters. 

 

So our communication efforts in connection with the 1995 laws 

were dealt with in the way I’ve just described, which is the 

traditional way of getting that information out. 

 

You would have to be in some kind of expert I think, or 

watching for the point, to have detected the change in the law 

and the effect that would have upon people employing 

babysitters. Nobody picked it up. We didn’t pick it up in  

government. I’ve openly admitted the error that was made. And 

I think that if we had communicated in a way more thorough 

than the way in which I’ve described, we would have missed 

them anyway. 

 

We would have missed the employers of babysitters because we 

had not intended to affect that situation. We did, but we hadn’t 

intended to. And when we learned what we had done, we 

changed the regulations to exclude them. So it’s hard to know 

what kind of communication strategy we could have taken to 

avoid the problem. 

 

I think in the future we will use more general advertising than 

we have, which is to say newspaper advertising. But we’re 

conscious, as you know, as we will do that, we are conscious of 

the fact that not everybody reads newspapers. In the cities, I 

think the percentage is very low, the people who subscribe to 

and read their daily newspapers. So it is a big problem; it has 

always been a big problem. 

 

You’d be surprised how many places we go into on labour 

standards matters and talk to employers who have received the 

information every which way and yet are not in compliance 

with the law because they didn’t know it was the law. And try 

as we may with people that we know, we’re still having 

communication problems with them and always have had — 

always have had. Always there are employers — we uncover 

them practically every day — who don’t realize what the law is, 

in spite of our best efforts to draw it to their attention. That’s a 

problem that’s common with governments everywhere. 

 

But in this case it presented particular challenges, because we 

didn’t know we’d made a mistake, or we wouldn’t have made 

it. And even if we had known that the law was being changed, 

we would not have known how to effectively reach the people 

that are concerned. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just another 

suggestion for the minister if I could, with respect to trying to 

identify those who have complied. I would suggest that the vast 

majority of those would have been not previously classified as 

employers, in the strictest sense of the word, and therefore 

wouldn’t have been making payroll remittances and such. 

 

So certainly you might be able to search for those who have 

recently became such and there would be a list that you could 

start on in terms of trying to narrow down how many people 

actually complied with the babysitter regulation and therefore 

shouldn’t be penalized, and we agree, for having complied, just 

as those who through no fault of theirs were not aware of it. 

 

So I just would make that comment, because I think if there is a 

genuine attempt to identify those, it could be done fairly 

readily, actually, in that regard, and then we would have 

satisfied all of those who have been affected. 

 

Just one further question if I might, though. You’ve touched on 

not knowing whether or not the Department of Social Services 

actually was in violation of this particular regulation. But I just, 

for clarification, there’s something like 40 claims altogether, to 

date. Twenty-seven are settled, you were saying, and the  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

balance of 13 remaining outstanding. Are we to take it then that 

none of those 40 claims involve Social Services, with an 

employee having been of Social Services and providing 

care-giving services to a Social Services’ client. If you could 

just clarify that for us, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ll undertake to do that. I don’t have 

that kind of information with me but just say that as far as we 

know — the deputy minister and I just conferring a second ago 

— there was only one case that involved Social Services. But 

we’ll check into it and I’ll undertake to advise the member. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Minister, 

and official, welcome. 

 

Minister, I would like to shift gears a bit and talk about the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. Last session we 

documented two projects specifically that indicated that there 

was some serious discrepancies between bids that were done in 

compliance with the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement, which was just coming into effect, and what a free 

and open market tender may be. 

 

There were two specific: one, the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline; 

and the other a SaskTel renovation project. And this year, not 

many days and weeks ago, we outlined another project that had 

occurred in the north-east on a SaskPower channel enlargement 

project which specifically showed that the discrepancy between 

the tender that was accepted under the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement and the tender that was made outside of 

that agreement for a project by a company right in the Hudson 

Bay area was some 30 per cent less. 

 

Mr. Minister, at the time in the House when you were asked 

about that, you had made the comment, either in the House or in 

interviews afterwards, that the idea of reviewing the actuality of 

the discrepancy is something that you felt was important to do, 

and that you also indicated that it might not be a bad idea that 

this report be made public so that this issue could be clarified. 

And I wonder if you’d comment today. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I stand behind the remarks I made the 

other day. I think it would be very useful if we could get as 

much of this information out as possible and investigate the 

situations that come up. Now it is not the function of my 

department to do that. It’s a CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation) function and I haven’t had a response to them. I 

haven’t had any information from them that could assist us on 

the two matters that the member raises. 

 

I said during that time and I want to repeat here, that looking at 

tenders itself is not enough. Maybe in the Hudson Bay situation 

it is where we can assume that the tender was real. You know, it 

was . . . no indication to the contrary and I think that situation is 

one that could be usefully looked at. 

 

I make the point though that we have to be a bit careful to just 

follow that process generally, comparing tenders, because the 

contractors who don’t qualify under CCTA (Crown  

Construction Tendering Agreement), are not prepared to live 

with CCTA, could submit any kind of bid at all, knowing that 

they are not going to be accepted. I’m not accusing anybody of 

anything, but I just enter that caution, that we should not draw 

any firm conclusions on the basis of simply comparing the 

tenders. 

 

I’ve answered the question in the following way and I do so 

here again today, that so far as we can figure out, our costs for 

work done under the CCTA are not out of line. They are similar 

to what we think the costs should be, having regard to the costs 

of doing other Crown work, Crown construction work. 

 

The member will know that most of our work is done outside 

CCTA, most of the public construction work, and only a small 

portion of it is done under the CCTA. And it’s difficult to 

compare the costs of one project to another because each of 

them have got their own characteristics and their differences 

and it’s tough to make any direct comparisons. But we’re 

comfortable because there doesn’t look to be any big 

discrepancy. 

 

We also know that the wage rates being paid in the non-union 

as compared to the union sector are not different. In some cases, 

the non-union wages are higher even. There are differences in 

the benefit packages, and the things like travel time may get 

involved in some contracts and that may make a particular 

contract more expensive, but not hugely so, not unacceptably 

so. And so we’re not uncomfortable with the economics of the 

situation. 

 

But I stand behind what I said earlier. It would be very 

productive here if we could produce a document showing 

answers to these concerns that the opposition and people in the 

construction industry have about our policy, to lay the matter to 

rest once and for all. But at the moment I just don’t have that 

kind of information. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I appreciate, Minister, that you may not at 

this time have that information at hand, and I certainly 

appreciate . . . And perhaps I’m reading something into your 

remarks about saying that, number one, since you are 

responsible for the agreement that you will look into this 

numerical type of thing and have a report done; and secondly 

that you will make that report public so that the stakeholders 

that you’ve identified . . . not necessarily just us in the 

opposition, but there’s a great number of people that are very 

concerned in the construction industry. 

 

The Saskatchewan Construction Association of course is on 

record as even attempting to participate in a process that would 

find a way through this whole CCTA issue, and then that went 

off the rails because they felt that the process was in some way 

flawed. 

 

I wonder, Minister, what you’re going to do to get the 

construction association and the industry to get back together 

again, because it seems that the whole thing went off the rails 

and now we’re sitting here in sort of limbo, and that seems to be 

a pretty unacceptable situation. 

 

  



1358  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I will never clearly 

understand how I got to be “it” in this game around the CCTA. 

The agreement is negotiated through the offices of the Crown 

Investments Corporation, and the Crowns have a relationship 

with that office and not with my department. And I have 

absolutely nothing to do with the administration of the 

agreement. 

 

The only way in which the Department of Labour got involved 

was when somebody suggested that the problem be mediated. 

And the Department of Labour knows all the mediators and 

had, you know, some . . . were able to put up a list and people 

could think about that list and determine whether anybody on 

there was of any interest to them. And indeed that’s how 

Stephen Kelleher’s name got identified, was working from our 

list, or working through names that had been suggested by the 

Department of Labour. 

 

But in any event, here I am standing on my feet, purporting to 

answer for an agreement about which I have . . . over which I 

have no control or any real responsibility. That doesn’t mean I 

sit down. I mean somebody has to deal with these questions, 

and I’m certainly prepared to do that today. 

 

The subject of the CCTA is being considered in the context of 

larger questions in the construction industry and constructive 

industry collective bargaining. I have had meetings recently 

with a Mr. McLachlin and we have begun to discuss the issues 

and what kind of process might be useful to try and address 

them. And we have had excellent meetings to this point where 

we seem to be headed in the right kind of directions. 

 

I’ve also had meetings with Sid Matthews of the CLRA 

(Canadian Labour Relations Association of Saskatchewan). 

And I have just this day had a request from the building trades 

unions to organize a meeting with them. And I think I’ll be able 

to accommodate that within the next week or 10 days. So the 

things are afoot. 

 

There are broader questions that are here. The novel idea of 

double-breasting or spinning off that’s been around this 

province for the 15 years is part of it because that really is the 

underlying problem that leads us to things like the CCTA. And 

the way in which the structure of bargaining in the industry 

which has been a problem ever since but especially so in the 

last 20 years — who bargains with who, and how are the 

agreements made, and who gets to vote on them. And generally 

how we keep collective bargaining going in that industry is 

really what’s involved, and I’m hopeful that our discussions 

with the parties that I’ve mentioned will lead us to some 

progress in these areas. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I just have a couple 

of question on the Workers’ Advocate. Last year, could you 

give me an idea of how much money Workers’ Advocate area 

cost in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The cost for the Workers’ Advocate 

program in ’96-97, which would be last year, was $267,000, 

made up of $239,000 for personal services and $28,000 for 

other expenses. 

Ms. Draude:  Are any of the wages for personnel within the 

Department of Labour paid for from funds that comes through 

Workers’ Advocate, through workmen’s compensation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  All of the costs of the occupational 

health and safety program are recovered from the Workers’ 

Compensation Board, and the costs of the Workers’ Advocate 

office is covered also. And an invoice is submitted annually to 

the Workers’ Compensation Board for those items. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there a projection given to the workmen’s 

compensation board for the estimated amount, or is it just an 

invoice that’s given at the end of the year as a done deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We bill the . . . we send the invoice I 

referred to on the basis of the costs for a calendar year — that’s 

as opposed to a fiscal year. The amount we bill them for is 

directly related to the amount in the estimates for the fiscal 

years that we’re considering right now. And they are paid the 

actual amount that we spend. 

 

They are involved with us during the development of our 

budgets. There are no surprises in it. The budget that we have 

before the Assembly today is one that was prepared with the 

Workers’ Compensation Board having all kinds of opportunities 

to react to the proposals respecting occupational health, and the 

Workers’ Advocate. So there’s no surprises as far as the board 

is concerned. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Was there a substantial change in the amount 

of money that the Workers’ Advocate charged to workmen’s 

compensation after ’91-92, or maybe it was ’92-93 when the 

deeming came in effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I don’t know the answer to 

that question but I’ll find it. We’ll have to dig back in the 

records and we’ll provide full information to the member in 

answer to that question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  With the new OHS (occupational health and 

safety) regulations that are coming into effect this year, are you 

estimating a substantial change in the amount of funds that’ll be 

required to implement these? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The budget that is before the Assembly 

today provides for three new positions in the occupational 

health and safety division. The costs related to those are the 

increased costs. They are there in order to strengthen the 

division’s abilities generally and partially in response to the 

new regulations, but also recognizing the fact there’s a growing 

number of workplaces that have to serviced and it is likely the 

fact that the division is understaffed. 

 

I think we have to strengthen and build up our staff in order to 

properly do the job that The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act mandates to us. The amount of the increase, my deputy 

minister tells me, is $205,000 for the increases to the branch, 

including the three positions that I’ve referred to. 

 

(1615) 

 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

Ms. Draude:  So the $205,000 is on top of the 239,00 for the 

advocate and it includes three positions, plus how many 

positions are already in place right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are no new positions being 

created in the Workers’ Advocate office. No, none at all. The 

increase is in the occupational health and safety division and 

there are three new officers being added to that branch. And the 

total cost, according to the numbers I have, of that increase is 

$205,000. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So that’s just the increase. Can you tell me 

how much the total cost of the OHS regulation . . . or OHS 

portion of it is, period, then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It’s difficult to answer the member’s 

question with any precision and I’ll tell you why. This program 

has been going on for 25 years. This is the 25th anniversary of 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, which was passed in 

1972. And the program is ongoing. 

 

The regulations that the member referred to are in part old news 

and in part new news. There was a rewrite of the regulations 

with new provisions included in them. And it is therefore 

difficult to answer the member’s question in terms of how much 

the new regulations cost. 

 

We know how much . . . We had a study done as to the amount 

they would cost the employers in this province, what would be 

the increased costs for the employer community as a result of 

the new features in the new regulations. So far as the 

department is concerned, the only new costs are the ones that I 

detailed a few moments ago — I think relatively little, but still 

some increase. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Then I guess because that number isn’t 

available, that means that it isn’t fully funded then from 

Workers’ Compensation, the OHS part of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It’s fully funded so far as the cost of the 

government program, occupational health and safety, is 

concerned. But the regulations impose certain new requirements 

upon employers, and as a result some of them are going to have 

to make some modifications to their plans. And it’s that figure 

that we had studied before we implemented the regulations and 

we announced what those numbers were at the time that we 

announced the regulations. 

 

But any new costs that we have as a department to administer 

those regulations are included in the estimates and will be paid 

by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Okay, can you tell me then what the bill for the 

OHS regulations for last . . . or for the OHS part of it was last 

year, the total amount? Not just the three new employees — all 

of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I will answer that question, Mr. Chair, 

by telling the member the bill that we sent to the Workers’ 

Compensation Board for 1996 . . . As I mentioned earlier, we 

bill them on a calendar year basis. The invoice consists of three  

items. Usually it consists of two; this year it consists of three. 

 

The occupational health and safety program, the number was 

$3.845 million, rounded out. I’ll give you the exact number — 

$3,845,783.42. The second item was the Workers’ Advocate 

office, and that amount was $319,303.69. The third item was 

the cost during 1996 of The Workers’ Compensation Act 

review, the review. And of course the Act provides that the 

board must pay the cost of that review. And the total there was 

$113,143.81. 

 

So the total billing was the sum of those three figures. It was 

about $4.278 million and change. That was our bill for 1996. 

 

Now the bill for 1997 will be larger, but based upon the 

numbers that we have in this year’s budget and will include the 

same items that I’ve referred to, although the review I think was 

substantially completed in 1996. So if there’s any item there, if 

there’s any expenses there, it would be relatively little. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 

what the estimate was for cost per employee to implement the 

new OHS regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m going to give the member an 

answer, but it’s subject to some calculation because we haven’t 

worked it out on the basis that she has asked. 

 

We think that the cost per non-agricultural employee in the 

province would be about $2 per employee per year. The cost for 

all of the employers in the province would be about $10 million 

to comply with the new parts of the regulations. 

 

Now as I say, that’s just the best we’re able to do in the few 

seconds that we’ve had, but we’ll go over those numbers and if 

they’re any different we will write to the member and tell her. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Per employer then? Could you just give me 

just a ballpark figure, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are approximately 37,000 

employers in the province, so the arithmetic is there. But that’s 

a number, that’s a number that we’ll also check and write to the 

member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 

committees, Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’d like to welcome 

you here today and your officials, to answer questions on 

Labour. I want to also deal with some of the issues that have 

already been brought forward — the babysitter situation, 

CCTA. 

 

But I have another issue that is directly related today to my 

constituency, and that deals with the death of Mr. Hughes in a 

crane accident that happened a couple of weeks ago. I’m just 

wondering, why is this particular circumstance being dealt with 

by officials of Labour Canada and the federal occupational 

health and safety situation. It happened in Saskatchewan. Surely 

our jurisdiction should at least play some role in it, and that it 

simply shouldn’t be just a federal situation. 

 

  



1360  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I appreciate the member’s question and 

I understand it, understand his frustration and no doubt those of 

the family of the victim as well. And we would be pleased to 

play some part in it, but we’re not able to. 

 

These matters are dealt with on the basis of constitutional 

jurisdiction, and the federal government claims jurisdiction over 

interprovincial trucking enterprises. So if you have a trucking 

company that crosses provincial boundaries, all of the 

operations of that company fall within federal jurisdiction, and 

they assert that jurisdiction and protect it. They are quite 

aggressive about that. 

 

And so in this situation, we have no option but to stand aside 

and let them do their thing. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Has your department . . . have you as 

minister approached the federal government though, to do some 

joint investigation and some joint jurisdiction over these 

particular types of circumstances? Faced a similar situation with 

the Shand crane accident, where it became a federal jurisdiction 

rather than a provincial one, even though it happened in 

Saskatchewan, it was working on a Saskatchewan work site. 

 

The companies involved — I’m not familiar with the Shand one 

— but may have been interprovincial, but nevertheless they 

were working with Saskatchewan employees at a Saskatchewan 

work site. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We in the Saskatchewan Department of 

Labour are very interested in pursuing this subject with the 

federal government and there is some indication that we are 

going to be able to do that and work out some arrangements. 

 

At the moment the negotiations are with respect to uranium 

mining, where there has been a federal presence, a federal 

jurisdiction, because the uranium mining and milling have been 

declared to be for the general advantage of Canada and 

therefore fall within federal jurisdiction. 

 

We have asserted for years, an interest in that and it has been 

informally a matter that has been dealt with in a cooperative 

way, and we’re trying to formalize that now with negotiations 

and an agreement. And we are quite interested. We’ve told the 

federal government we’re interested and they’ve indicated an 

interest also in negotiating broader provisions that would cover 

all sorts of things — the operation of grain elevators, 

interprovincial trucking is one that you mentioned — all kinds 

of interprovincial transportation. 

 

It makes no sense that one company will fall within provincial 

jurisdiction because it doesn’t transport outside the provincial 

boundaries, where the truck company just next door with the 

same kind of operation, because it sends a truck across the 

border regularly, falls within federal jurisdiction. So we’re 

interested in working out those kind of arrangements. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 

certainly encourage you to carry that out, because these are the 

lives and the safety of Saskatchewan people that we’re talking 

about. In this particular case this company is running with  

Saskatchewan licence plates. It may very well have licence 

plates with other provinces, but nevertheless I think, Mr. 

Minister, it behoves us to protect our Saskatchewan employees 

as best we can. 

 

I’d like to now move on to the CCTA. Before I go any further, I 

was interested in one of the comments that you made about 

keeping bargaining going. I wonder, Mr. Minister, in what 

context you meant that or how you meant that; how does it 

apply in this particular case with the CCTA? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the phenomenon of the spin-off 

company has created a particular problem in the construction 

industry so far as collective bargaining is concerned. Since the 

Labour Relations Board opened the door to that kind of spin-off 

arrangement back in the early 1980s, collective bargaining has 

really been threatened — in some trades almost extinguished in 

the province. 

 

Every labour expert, every collective bargaining expert that I’ve 

ever talked to and many that I haven’t talked to, would advise 

us that this kind of arrangement is just totally outside the pale. 

Completely beyond the pale; that it just can’t be allowed to 

continue or can’t be allowed to exist in the labour relations 

system. 

 

It’s as though an established company like Intercontinental 

Packers, for example, could escape union certification and 

escape their collective agreement by deciding one day to set up 

a new company to run their operation in Saskatoon. That 

wouldn’t be allowed in any way, shape or form in the meat 

packing industry or anywhere else, and it ought not to be 

allowed in the construction industry. 

 

But the precedents are clear before the Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board and so it has happened. It has already 

happened. And it has really put collective bargaining under 

great stress and poses a threat to its continued existence. 

 

We believe, we believe that collective bargaining in the 

construction industry ought to take place; that it ought not to be 

extinguished. And we’ve made no secret of that. I mean the 

CCTA itself is an example of a policy that has the effect of 

keeping collective bargaining alive, because it requires that 

there be a bargaining relationship between the contractor and 

the unions in order to qualify under that agreement. That’s what 

I was referring to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 

this is where you and I philosophically disagree, because I don’t 

believe that we must have collective bargaining. I think 

collective bargaining should be available if that’s what the 

employees wish to do. If they wish to organize, to unite, to 

bargain together, so be it — that should be their privilege. And I 

agree with that. But I don’t think that it must occur. And that’s 

where we differ. 

 

It seems you have a serious complaint with spin-off companies. 

To my knowledge, other jurisdictions, either they don’t have  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

spin-off companies or they don’t find it a problem because only 

in Saskatchewan has there been a move such as the CCTA. 

Perhaps it deals more directly with Saskatchewan labour laws 

rather than with the need to protect bargaining units in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If spin-off companies are not occurring in other places across 

Canada — and I don’t know if they are or if they’re not — but 

if they are not, then perhaps that speaks to what the labour law 

is in Saskatchewan; that those corporations that do construction 

across Canada — and there are a number of them; they operate 

in various provinces, perhaps under a federal charter as we were 

talking about earlier with the safety standards — they don’t . . . 

aren’t spinning off companies in other provinces, perhaps 

because the labour standards there allow them to operate and 

still allow bargaining to take place. 

 

Yet in Saskatchewan it seems to be a problem because of the 

way the labour standards are written that companies are trying 

to avoid some of the more stringent or Draconian measures 

within Saskatchewan’s labour law. 

 

I think that’s where the problem lies, Mr. Minister, not in the 

fact that we must have bargaining but rather in the fact that 

Saskatchewan labour law almost forces companies into that 

position whether their employees want it or not. And I think 

that is a major part of what’s happened in this province. 

 

If you talk to a number of employers in the construction 

industry, they’ll tell you that when they’re on a non-union site, 

in a lot of cases, their employee holds a union card but isn’t 

trying to unionize that particular work site, but rather simply 

wants to be employed. So, Mr. Minister, it’s not always the 

situation where all sites must be unionized. Many can operate 

without it and do so very effectively. 

 

When we talk about the CCTA, you see a particular benefit in 

there for the unionized employees. And if I can paraphrase 

some of the things that have been said in the past, during this 

session, during the last session — and you can correct me if I 

take the wrong interpretation of your words — is that the 

benefits of the CCTA are: first, employment; secondly, wages 

and benefits to the employees that they be on a par with the 

union negotiated contracts, travel, and accommodations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can indicate 

whether or not my summation of what the CCTA provides as a 

benefit is what you would agree is what those benefits are, or 

what you’re at least trying to achieve. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ll deal with the both of those 

questions. 

 

First of all, the member’s got it exactly wrong, exactly 

backwards. The spin-off companies just simply aren’t allowed 

in any other province. Their labour relations board wouldn’t 

allow it. They simply would laugh — would laugh — at an 

employer who would pretend to escape a union certification just 

by spinning off a new corporate entity. 

 

The other provinces would gather those together and treat them 

 as one employer, and that includes the province of Ontario, the 

province of Manitoba — even the province of Alberta wouldn’t 

allow such a thing as this. And yet Saskatchewan’s labour laws 

during the 1980s were just not up to it. 

 

The repeal of the previous construction bargaining Act, was the 

very point on which the labour relations board at the time 

decided that in Saskatchewan you could spin off. So as a result, 

most of the . . . well, practically all of the big contractors 

created spin-off companies, and away they went, and the unions 

were left holding an empty bag. 

 

Now that’s, you know . . . Kelleher says we should amend our 

law to take care of that situation. We thought we had taken care 

of it back in 1992 with the enactment of The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act, but evidently we haven’t. 

Kelleher recommends we patch up that hole, and the member 

will know that we have not yet responded to the Kelleher report 

because we have not yet finished our consultations with respect 

to the recommendations that were contained in it. 

 

Now as to the benefits of the CCTA; there are, I think, a 

number. One of the reasons why we’re interested in a continued 

union presence in the construction industry is the contribution 

that they make to the apprenticeship program. It is in the public 

interest of this province that we have skilled tradespeople here, 

that we have apprentices, that we have journeypeople, and that 

there be a progression through the ranks of the apprenticeship in 

order to produce some more and more tradespeople. 

 

We need them now. We need them at any time that there is a 

significant level of construction in this province. Some of the 

trades are now running short and we simply must have a system 

in place to continue to produce these tradespeople. 

 

I’m not arguing that only where there is a trade union can you 

have a successful apprenticeship program. But in the building 

trades, the unions have been central to that program. They have 

provided the focus and the energy and the attention that’s 

needed and we believe that their continued presence is 

important for that reason. So we encourage trade union 

employment by the CCTA; and in that connection, we 

encourage . . . we help to encourage and to strengthen the 

apprenticeship program. 

 

The CCTA also helps to ensure that Saskatchewan people are 

employed on construction in this province. And anyone 

working under the collective agreements in Saskatchewan have 

a hiring procedure laid out in the collective agreement. And that 

ensures that Saskatchewan tradespeople have access to 

construction industry jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

think that’s a worthy benefit. 

 

It has been argued that it ensures a certain level of wages and 

benefits. But as collective bargaining has weakened in the 

construction industry and as the use of non-union labour in the 

construction industry has developed in the way that it has, very 

often the union rates are higher than the — pardon me, the 

non-union rates are higher than the union rates. And we know 

that to be the case. 

 

  



1362  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Now the benefit packages can vary and get arguments about 

how these things should be costed out, but that’s not a major 

impact of the CCTA at this time. 

 

Travel and accommodation provisions are higher under the 

collective agreements than they are outside the collective 

agreements, and on some jobs that can make a difference. I 

know that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Any time 

that something costs more for one than it does for the other, 

obviously there’s a cost . . . an extra cost built into the project 

and that is picked up, in this particular case with the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement, only by the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could clarify something for me? 

You mentioned certifications for the trades apprenticeships. 

Right now who certifies someone, let’s say, as a journeyman 

carpenter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s done by the department of 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So really then, Mr. Minister, that could 

be done through some other avenue other than through the 

union process. If someone wanted to, do they have to go 

through an apprenticeship, or can they simply write an exam for 

the journeyman if they have worked with a carpenter some 

place? 

 

I know within the electrical trades that you have to work with a 

journeyman electrician for a certain amount of time, write I 

think it’s three exams over that period of time, and then you’re 

entitled to write — not necessarily you’re going to pass — but 

entitled to write for your journeyman electrician ticket. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No, the requirements, as I recall them, 

are that you have to have a certain . . . you have to enrol in the 

program and get your required hours in the program, take your 

required training at the appropriate time, pass your exams at 

each level. And at the end of the day, when you’ve completed 

the academic part of your training and logged the number of 

hours that you have to log, then you become entitled to your 

journeyperson certification. 

 

Now I’m not arguing that it is essential that trade unions be 

involved. I mean, there are many parts of the system, the 

apprenticeship system, where there are no trade unions involved 

at all. What is important is that you have somebody at the table, 

at the advisory board tables, to make these programs work, to 

keep the flow of apprentices coming into the trade and going 

through the trades. 

 

And in the construction industry, the building trades have been 

very much a part of that — a very, very important part of it. 

And indeed they’ve built their whole . . . in some cases their 

whole collective agreement and their whole compensation 

system around the apprenticeship program. We would hate to 

lose that. We would all be worse off if we were to lose that 

element of the apprenticeship program. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. While it might 

be of benefit to have the unions involved in that, it certainly 

doesn’t seem to be a prerequisite or the sole means by which to 

achieve an apprenticeship program, and at the end of the day, a 

journeymen in whatever trade that might be. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if there is a report out there about the 

CCTA? Last year while we were in session, the member from 

Rosetown, the minister in charge of CIC, kept telling us: we’re 

preparing our report; there’s a study going on; it will come 

down on day X. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, when day X arrived, all of a sudden the 

study was postponed. It will come down now on day Y, which 

was approximately a month later than day X. It comes to day Y 

all of a sudden there is no study. We don’t have a study. How 

could we give you the discussions on a study? How could we 

give you the results of a study when there is no study? But on 

two different occasions dates were set for the release of a study. 

 

Mr. Minister, was there an incomplete study done that would 

have contributed to the minister from Rosetown saying that a 

study will be presented on day X and Y? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I don’t know. I wasn’t aware 

of what the member has just said. As I explained earlier, this is 

really not my business. I protest having been drawn into this 

issue, but here I stand anyway. I’ll try and learn the correct 

situation and advise the member, but I can’t tell you as I stand 

here today. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it just seemed that 

as this issue become hotter and hotter during the last session, 

the less and less willing the minister from Rosetown was to 

present a study. So finally at the end of the day, he made a 

determination that there was no study to be presented even 

though on two different . . . he had two different dates set to 

release it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give us a list, and give the 

costs of all the contracts awarded by Crown corporations 

pursuant to the CCTA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I have no such information. I will take it 

up with the minister responsible, but I have none of the 

information that the member asks for. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, perhaps the minister should call in 

the member from Rosetown and he could help you as an official 

to answer these questions and provide the information. It seems 

that he should be the one answering the questions on the 

Assembly floor, and yet he doesn’t come forward in this 

Assembly to answer those kinds of questions. The fact is, I 

don’t believe he has an estimate that does come forward on the 

floor of the Assembly. And yes, there’s the opportunity in the 

Crown Corporations Committee, and that’s always a year or 

two down the road. And I have questioned him, but those were 

for the numbers for 1985. 

 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

So now we would like to have something that’s a little more 

relevant to 1997, Mr. Minister. Would it be possible to get these 

kind of lists from you from the minister for CIC, because we’re 

looking for lists of the contracts and the costs, what they were 

awarded, and which projects they were, etc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t know whether I’ll be able to do 

that or not. I’m conscious of the role that I play here as the 

minister responsible for this particular department, and I don’t 

know whether I’m even permitted to make any kind of an 

undertaking with respect to the matter such as the member 

raises. 

 

But I have an interest in this because I seem to be the one that’s 

questioned all the time with respect to it, and I would like to 

make it go away. It may be that the member’s question provides 

me with some useful thoughts on how this matter might move 

towards some kind of completion. But at the moment I don’t 

think I can give the undertaking that the member asks for. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll give you some 

more lists to try and find out about. And that would be the list 

of all the tenders that were put forward on those CCTA 

contracts and whether or not those bids were accepted. 

 

I know the minister answered the member from Thunder Creek 

about this particular issue, about those non-unionized 

contractors that tender on the CCTA projects, and the minister’s 

concern that they’re underbidding, that those are false bids, that 

they really have no intentions of ever winning those bids so that 

they can low-ball them and try to make political hay and make 

the CCTA look bad. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it’s working. Because the CCTA does look 

bad. You may be comfortable with it, but nobody else is in the 

province other than perhaps the unionized people and the 

unionized contractors. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, if you believe that these tenders are 

unrealistically low, that they’re low-balling, that they have no 

intentions of filling those contracts at that price, why not accept 

one of them? If you just did one and the person, whoever had 

submitted that tender, won the tender and lost a lot of money on 

it, you can be assured that they would not be back again to do it 

again a second time. 

 

But because you don’t do that, you leave the assumption out 

there that these are valid tenders and that now you have a big 

disparity between the one you accepted and something else that 

was on the tender list. And those look like they’re running in 

the neighbourhood of 20 to 30 per cent difference between 

those two costs. 

 

And the British Columbia experience was that CCTA . . . that a 

similar project to CCTA in that province, in the highway 

construction industry, amounted to about a 30 per cent increase 

in the cost to highways to build their roads under a similar 

arrangement. 

 

And in many cases in the tenders that come forward in 

Saskatchewan . . . We’ve seen it with SaskTel in Regina here  

on a project worth 2 or $300,000, another project up in the 

north-east, the Melfort pipe line, all of those examples was a 

significant difference between the private contractor, 

non-unionized, that tendered, and the unionized contractor that 

got the job. It was a significant amount of percentage difference 

between those two costs. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think it’s very important that these numbers 

be provided and that it’s very important that you take one of 

these bids — just one; that’s all you have to take. If the thought 

is out there that if we low-ball a bid on there, somebody’s going 

to accept it and we’re going to lose a lot of money on it, 

nobody’s going to want to take it, take that chance that they 

might . . . it might be their project that’s accepted. If they’re not 

low-balling and those prices are realistic, they’ll be back again 

the next time around when you have a construction project. 

 

And then you will know, we will know, and the public will 

know whether or not your CCTA is actually costing the 

taxpayers money or whether or not it is . . . as you say that 

you’re comfortable with it, that it’s not costing the taxpayers 

money, that it’s fair for everybody. 

 

But until you take one of those contracts, Mr. Minister, the vast 

majority of taxpaying Saskatchewan people don’t believe it. 

They believe CCTA costs them money out of their pocket. 

 

You have the opportunity, Mr. Minister, to let them know. You 

have the opportunity to let the construction industry know that 

if you’re low-balling your bids, you’re going to pay for it. So 

give them the opportunity, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I’ve listened carefully to what the 

member has said, and I’ll give all of that some consideration, 

mindful of the fact that it doesn’t fall within my area of 

ministerial responsibility. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, you’re the only 

minister in here that we get a chance to present these 

recommendations to. 

 

I’d like to deal a little further with the Kelleher report, and you 

mentioned Mr. Kelleher just a little bit earlier. And the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association, the SCA did not 

participate in the consultations that went into the recent 

Kelleher review of the CCTA because the review had not been 

given the mandate to look at the issues that concerned them. 

 

Why did you go ahead with the review when one of the two 

major participants had walked away from the table? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The process started as I recall in July. 

And it was some . . . Kelleher was right into it and it was some 

considerable time before we learned that the SCA had a 

problem with the terms of reference. Then as we . . . When we 

learned that and investigated that aspect of the situation we . . . 

it became clear to us that there was a misunderstanding right at 

the beginning of the process; that the ministers who were 

involved at the time did not agree that double-breasting or 

spin-off would not be a subject to be addressed, but the SCA 

thought that they had made it clear that that would have to be a  

  



1364  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

prerequisite. So there was sort of miscommunication there. 

 

Then when the matter came to my attention in the fall of the 

year, when the process was well under way, how would you go 

about remedying it? If you alter the terms of reference to take 

spin-offs out, you lose the other party, you lose the building 

trades, because that’s their main issue. And they had made no 

bones about that. 

 

They had in fact tabled that issue at the time when the parties 

were actually meeting each other head on, when the SCA and 

the building trades were meeting with CIC representatives in 

the room and talking about problems they had with the CCTA. 

It was right on the table. And if you suddenly . . . if I then came 

along and tried to snatch it off the table, I would lose that side. 

 

It was a non-winning situation. There was no easy way out of it. 

I met with the construction association a couple of times to try 

and find a way through this difficulty and keep the mediation 

going with everyone participating, but I couldn’t do it. 

 

Now I must say quite bluntly that I don’t understand the 

position that they took. I mean there was an opportunity there 

for everybody to put all their issues on the table before one of 

Canada’s real experts and try and use his mediating abilities to 

work out some compromises in the situation, or at least to get 

his best judgement on how issues ought to be resolved. And I 

frankly don’t know why SCA took the position that they did. I 

regret it and I wish they’d stayed in the process. But they didn’t 

and there didn’t seem to be anything I could do to either keep 

them there or to change the situation so they would stay there. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the Kelleher report made seven 

recommendations on how to fix the CCTA — five of which had 

been suggested by the SCA before they left the table. Which of 

these have you acted on or which ones are you going to act on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The answer is none. The 

recommendations are still in front of us and we’ve shipped — 

long since — shipped the report out to the people who are 

interested and we’ve had some responses, but not all, by any 

means. It may well be — and I believe it to be the case — that 

the meeting that I’m to have with the building trade sometime 

in the next 10 days will address their response to the Kelleher 

report. I don’t know that, but I assume that that’s what they 

want to meet with me about. 

 

The SCA, the Saskatchewan Construction Association, has 

responded without prejudice to their position on the spin-off 

issue, and it is a detailed response. And that is the only detailed 

response that I’ve had to this point. So we’re not doing anything 

about it at the moment except encouraging the people to get 

back to us and tell us where they stand. We’d like to get as 

much consensus as we could on some of these issues. 

 

Some of them would be addressed through amendments to the 

CCTA, and the legislative package, I think will have to wait 

until the next session because we’re already into May and it’s a 

little late to start introducing legislation of such a major nature 

at this stage. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 

items that Kelleher noted in his report was that the CCTA 

should not be used as an organizing tool by the unions. His 

recommendation was that any certification votes affecting a 

non-union company under CCTA should only apply to the 

project. 

 

Now I know that you haven’t made any decisions on this yet, 

but what is your opinion, what is the government’s opinion, on 

this recommendation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I will answer the question in the 

following way. We haven’t made any decisions about . . . we 

haven’t . . . I haven’t recommended anything to cabinet with 

respect to the provisions of it. I have some personal views on it 

but they’re not really relevant to what the government may do, 

except they will receive my recommendation and consider it. 

 

I mentioned the SCA response in my previous answer and it 

was I think negative with respect to all of the recommendations. 

So getting consensus on this may be some kind of a trick, but 

we do need a lot more consultation than we’ve had so far. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 

one of Kelleher’s recommendations was that the 21 cent an 

hour check-off for non-union employees working under the 

CCT . . . that this check-off was essentially a slush fund for the 

unions. 

 

He recommended that these monies be moved to a fund to help 

all construction workers, not just unionized ones, and he 

suggested putting it into the apprenticeship and skills training 

program. I think that one, Mr. Minister, has a lot of merit to it. 

That those monies that are taken from the non-unionized 

employees . . . or non-unionized employers, excuse me, 21 

cents an hour for all their employees, not be turned over to the 

union — obviously those people are not union members — but 

that it be put into the apprenticeship programs to benefit all 

construction workers, not just those that are unionized. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1335 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1335 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1335 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1335 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1336 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1336 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Holocaust Remembrance Day 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1336 

 25th Anniversary of the Provincial Ombudsman 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1336 

 New Hospital for La Loche 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1336 

 Aid to Manitoba Flood Victims 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

  Ward ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 

 Tragic Accident in Thunder Creek Constituency 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

 Arbor Day 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1337 

 Interchange on Canadian Studies Conference 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1338 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Melfort Power Failure 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1338 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1338 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1339 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1339 

 Snowmobile Accident Coverage 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1340 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1340 

 Teachers’ Federation Disciplinary Procedures 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1341 

 Multiple Sclerosis Drug 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1342 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 61  The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1343 

MOTIONS 

 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

 Standing Committee on Communication 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

 Standing Committee on Estimates 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 49 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1343 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1344 

 Bill No. 57 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1345 



 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1345 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1346 

 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1347 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1349 

 Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1349 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1351 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No 17 — The Dental Disciplines Act .................................................................................................................................. 1352 

 Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1352 

 Bill No. 15 — The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997........................................................................................... 1352 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1352 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1352 

 Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2)....................................................................... 1353 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1353 

 Bill No. 54  The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1353 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Labour  Vote 20 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1353 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1357 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1358 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1359 

 

 


