



















































Hansard: March 25, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 393 

 March 25, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about youth 

offenders: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Saltcoats, 

Bredenbury, Esterhazy, Stockholm, and Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Presenting the 

following petition, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And these come from a number of rural areas in the south-west. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime; 

and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the 

Saskatchewan big game damage compensation program to 

provide reasonable compensation. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was ready to sit 

in deference to my fine colleague, but I would like to, through 

you, Mr. Speaker, and to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, introduce 28 grade 4 students that are seated  

in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, 

Betty-Ann Faber, and they’re students from St. Marguerite 

Bourgeoys School in my constituency. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to be at St. Marguerite on a few 

occasions and have always appreciated the warm welcome. And 

it is indeed a school, Mr. Speaker, that is bursting to the seams. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting with this group after they’ve 

had a chance to sit through question period in the gallery and 

have a visit and a photo later on. I ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming this group from St. Marguerite School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’d think 

after all my time in the House I wouldn’t get so excited about 

introducing guests but it still happens. And I’m pleased today to 

welcome four guests from the Cancer Patient Lodge in Regina 

and four people accompanying them, James Debienne, Harry 

Sawchyn, Carol Lovett, and Mary Holash. We wish them all 

well and thank you for having the time and taking the time to 

show interest in the legislature and to join us today. So would 

everybody join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure and 

privilege to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, 15 students, grade 11 and grade 12 students from 

Martin Collegiate who are seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

They are attended today or their teacher with them today is 

Peter Flasko, and I want to welcome the students and teacher 

here today and hope you enjoy question period. I look forward 

to visiting with you after question period if that’s possible; if 

not, some other MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

will meet with you. But welcome, and hope you enjoy your 

stay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Kelran Microbiologicals Expansion 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, Kelran Microbiologicals is 

expanding its Prince Albert operation. Kelran currently supplies 

biological cultural media to hospitals and labs in the prairie 

provinces. Its new division will manufacture and supply labs 

with products manufactured from polystyrene. Kelran will 

focus on its traditional markets but also plans to expand into the 

Pacific, Europe, and Latin America. And this expansion will 

mean 49 new jobs in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  That makes me happy, Mr. Speaker, but 

here’s also something else that makes me happy about this 

announcement. There has been some discussion in this 

Assembly about the effectiveness of the Minister of Finance’s  



394  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

budget to promote the Saskatchewan economy. Some members, 

not many, some members seem to think it won’t matter. 

 

Let me quote from the Kelran announcement by Randell 

Toporowski, CEO (chief executive officer) of the company: 

 

This expansion is possible because of the efforts and 

determination of the Minister of Finance to create a 

financially stable economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the sales reduction, he says, saves his company $6,500 off 

the top of an equipment purchase for $325,000. A $6,500 

saving matters to Kelran, Mr. Speaker, it matters to the people 

taking on those jobs, and it matters to all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Legislative Building Repairs 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was shocked earlier 

this week to read in the newspaper that we are in some danger 

as we sit in this Chamber, that this Assembly is crumbling, that 

it requires $20 million in repair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now is the time for us to finally admit the 

egregious error in judgement committed 125 years ago when 

the capital was located on the banks of Wascana slough. Let us 

admit the mistake of our forefathers and return the capital to its 

rightful place in the Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not suffer from the unstable land that is a 

problem here. In fact the original capital, the place it’s supposed 

to be, is a beautiful height of land, a firm, stable hill 

overlooking the forks of the Battle and Saskatchewan rivers — 

a truly scenic, beautiful, and firm place of which to locate a 

capital. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that part of the renovations 

consist of lifting this building. Now I say if we’ve already gone 

to all of the trouble and expense of lifting it, put some wheels 

under it, get it back to where it belongs. 

 

Now if that’s a trifle unrealistic, if that’s a trifle unrealistic, the 

initial capital building is still there; it requires a bit of 

renovation. 

 

I’m also pleased to advise that this has all-party support. The 

hon. member from Battleford-Cut Knife agrees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Froehlich Floriculture 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, we have heard many times how 

Saskatchewan producers have diversified their operations in 

order to remain competitive or maintain their viability. Today, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention another family farm 

operation at Tramping Lake that has successfully diversified its 

operation. 

 

Seven years ago David and Hannah Froehlich decided that they  

needed to supplement their farm income. Their venture, Mr. 

Speaker, produced Froehlich Floriculture, Saskatchewan’s 

largest producer of cut and dried flowers. On 20 acres of land 

the Froehlichs grow approximately 30 different varieties of 

flowers and harvest between 50,000 and 100,000 plants each 

year. In addition to the planting and harvesting, the Froehlichs 

also arrange displays — a remarkable accomplishment 

considering that gardening is just a hobby for them. The success 

of Froehlich Floriculture illustrates a versatility of 

Saskatchewan producers that they can adapt and incorporate 

new ideas and new methods to remain competitive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agriculture climate of Saskatchewan is 

changing. There is no questioning it. How producers face this 

change is the question. The Froehlich adapted to it well and 

now have a very successful business. The success enjoyed by 

the Froehlichs is being repeated throughout Saskatchewan in 

many forms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan producers are adapting, changing, and 

overcoming challenges. They are succeeding. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Expansion 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize an exciting development at the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool. The Wheat Pool has for years been Saskatchewan’s 

largest company and truly one of its leading corporate citizens. 

As we learned this morning, the Wheat Pool is planning to 

expand its operation into Alberta and Manitoba. This latest 

move comes as the culmination of a dynamic period for that 

company. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Pool has developed a new, 

aggressive, market-driven approach to business. And surely 

they have left old habits and old ideologies behind and have 

focused on raising new capital and finding new markets. This 

was exemplified recently in their successful share offering. 

 

That decision was clearly the foundation on which today’s 

exciting announcement was built. We see here an organization 

that was previously fearful of private investment, that has since 

been able to use that as a springboard for greater things. 

 

I think there is an important lesson here for the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government. If some of our provincial 

Crown corporations adopted a progressive and competitive 

attitude that we see at the Pool, Saskatchewan’s taxpayers 

would surely benefit. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus I would like to extend our best wishes to 

the Pool on their new venture, and I invite the NDP to watch 

closely the rewards that can be reaped from private investment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

Tourism Saskatchewan Awards 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We often say, but 

we don’t say it often enough, that things just don’t happen, they 

are made to happen. They are made to happen by 

knowledgeable, dedicated, energetic people who know what 

they are about. A cliché perhaps, but even clichés have some 

basis in fact. 

 

This is particularly true of the tourism industry in 

Saskatchewan. Without mountains, a seashore or ancient 

monuments, we have to work like the dickens to get people to 

sample our more subtle attractions. And they do come, Mr. 

Speaker. They come in such numbers that tourism in 

Saskatchewan is the fourth largest economic sector in our 

province, a sector that directly employs 40,000 people — 

40,000 people who make things happen and deserve to be 

recognized. 

 

Last Friday, 18 businesses and individuals were recognized. 

Tourism Saskatchewan held its Awards of Excellence gala in 

Regina to present the awards in front of the 400 people who 

attended. All the winners are deserving, but two I want to 

mention. 

 

First, Fred Heal of Saskatoon was presented with the 

Chairman’s Lifetime Achievement Award, a distinguished 

award for a worthy recipient. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the winner of the Rookie Attraction of the 

Year was something called Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

My congratulations to all the award winners and to all the 

workers in this crucial sector of our economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Museum Volunteer Honoured 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are hundreds of 

people across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who donate their 

time, energy and expertise in order to help preserve our history 

and their efforts cannot and should not be overlooked. 

 

Recently the Museums Association of Saskatchewan 

acknowledged members who are actively involved in their 

respective local museums by awarding them with honorary life 

memberships. 

 

Among those recognized was Ron Bell, a volunteer with the 

Humboldt museum. Ron was commended on his efforts to 

improve the quality of museums in his area. He has volunteered 

thousands of hours of his time attending museum conferences 

and advisory council meetings and has devoted a lot of energy 

to networking with the museums in the Humboldt area. 

 

I would like to commend Mr. Bell on his efforts and thank him 

for taking the time to ensure the precious and diverse history of 

the people in the Humboldt area is preserved for future 

generations. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Two Traditional Events Held in Lloydminster 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being born and 

raised in rural Saskatchewan, as other members of this 

Assembly are, we are well aware of the deep traditions that 

exist in rural Saskatchewan. One of these deep-rooted traditions 

has been going on for 78 years in Lloydminster. 

 

This tradition, Mr. Speaker, is the annual Pride of the Prairies 

bull sale. Results from this sale indicate that this was the 

third-best sale in the history of the bull sale, following 1994 and 

1995. Four hundred thirty-seven bulls were sold during this 

show, with a total price reaching $1.155 million, Mr. Speaker. 

Sales improved by almost $200,000 over 1966 totals, which 

illustrates the improvement in the cattle industry this year. 

 

But the bull sale was not the only significant event held in 

Lloydminster. There was also the third annual Midwest 

All-breed Stallion Services charity auction. This event, Mr. 

Speaker, raised over $4,500 for the Lloydminster and Area 

Brain Injury Society. 

 

People of this province have strong traditions and they also 

demonstrate a tremendous amount of community pride and 

spirit. I congratulate the success of both the bull sale and the 

charity auction for continuing a tradition and believing in the 

value of community. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Reform 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the provincial 

budget was delivered last week, the Minister of Health 

indicated that he wanted two messages to emerge. The minister 

stated that nurses and health care employees should no longer 

worry about losing jobs, and communities should not worry 

about losing hospital beds and nursing home beds. We’ve 

achieved the number of beds we should have, he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House I called on the Premier to 

back up this statement by his minister and make a commitment 

that not one more care-giver will lose their job; not one more 

acute care or long-term care bed will close under this 

government. The Premier responded by indicating that it is 

“patently impossible and undesirable.” 

 

Will the Minister of Health set the record straight: does he stand 

by his promise or is his commitment undesirable, as the Premier 

has suggested? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member from the 

Liberal Party should realize that there will always be changes in 

any system, including the health system. Nobody can or should 

say that the health system will never change. 



396  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

But what I’d like to say to the member opposite is that the 

federal government set up a committee called the National 

Forum on Health a few years ago, which was chaired by the 

Prime Minister. And that committee recently reported and gave 

us a lot of good information about how we should change our 

health system. It more or less confirmed the direction our 

province is taking. 

 

And the other thing it did, Mr. Speaker, is it recommended that 

the federal government stop the cuts to health care that had been 

going on. That was the federal government’s own committee, 

Mr. Speaker. And that committee, if its recommendations were 

followed, would result in $53 million more money for our 

province for health care, Mr. Speaker. And if we got that 

money, we would cooperate with the federal government to 

bring about a national program for drugs and we would improve 

home care even more. 

 

And I’d like to know if those members support those initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, it has been said that an honest 

man’s pillow is his peace of mind, so I truly hope that the 

Minister of Health is able to sleep at night. While the minister is 

lulling the people into a false sense of security, the Premier 

insults the public by indicating an end to the gutting of health 

care as undesirable. 

 

While the government sends out mixed messages, people in 

communities such as Eatonia sit waiting and wondering if the 

axe is going to fall on their local health centre. At present the 

people of this town do not know whether funding cut-backs will 

see their health centre reduced to an eight-hours-a-day clinic or 

completely closed. Because of this uncertainty the town’s only 

doctor yesterday announced that he is leaving — something a 

number of other communities can identify with; Dodsland to 

name one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the minister’s earlier statements 

indicating that an end has come to the onslaught of health care 

cut-backs, will he make a commitment that the cuts have ended; 

that residents of Eatonia and other communities do not have to 

live in fear of losing their only access to emergency health care 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, most people in the province, 

despite the fact that the member opposite may want to mislead 

them, are aware that, not only have cut-backs to health care 

ended in Saskatchewan from this government, we have 

back-filled all of the cuts to health care from the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if the member wants to talk about cut-backs to health care, 

what I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker, and what the people of this 

province would like to know is this: since the National Forum 

on Health, chaired by the Prime Minister who’s a Liberal, 

indicated that the Liberals should put $53 million more money 

into our health care system in Saskatchewan this year, and in 

every province, Mr. Speaker, I want to know if the Liberals in  

this House will join with this government in saying to the 

federal government, follow the advice of your own committee, 

stop the cut-backs to health care — which are all Liberal 

cut-backs, Mr. Speaker — and let’s get on with the job of 

building a better health system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health District Elections 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a long-standing 

practice in this province that we combine municipal and school 

board elections. And this has been done of course not only to 

save money, but in addition it has provided us with a higher 

turnout of voters than would otherwise be the case. Indeed, 

municipal elections I understand get out approximately 40 per 

cent of the electorate. 

 

This fall, health district elections are scheduled two weeks 

before municipal elections. Our last health district elections 

only got out between 10 and 20 per cent of the electorate. 

 

I would like to suggest to the Minister of Municipal Affairs that 

our health district elections be conducted simultaneously with 

the school board and municipal elections, both to save money 

and to encourage voter turnout. And I would ask for her 

reaction to that suggestion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have the 

opportunity to answer that question. I’d like to point out that the 

municipal elections aren’t quite synchronized because the RMs 

(rural municipality) have elections every year on a rotating 

basis, so they’re out of step with . . . But in terms of the health 

districts, it is a good suggestion. We are reviewing it, and stay 

tuned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also for the Minister of Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance announced in this week’s 

budget that a reduction in the provincial sales tax is this 

government’s way of rewarding people of Saskatchewan. And 

for seeing the light, we congratulate her for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  However, the $29 million reduction in 

funding for municipal governments is going to result in many 

communities increasing their mill rates. The mayor of Meadow 

Lake indicates his community will have to make up $80,000 

because of these cuts. The mayor of Preeceville says his 

community will lose $20,000. And as he puts it, and I quote: 

 

The businessman may get to keep an extra $30 a month of 

the money he’s (collected) from the consumer(s) . . . But  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

you come back to him and say, ‘by the way we’re raising 

your taxes three mills to compensate for . . . 

revenue-sharing grant cuts.’ 

 

Will the Minister of Municipal Government explain how her 

government can pat themselves on the back for reducing the 

PST (provincial sales tax) with one hand and on the other hand 

they simply are passing on a greater tax burden to the 

municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the estimate of the 

benefit of the sales tax in the PST to municipalities, rural 

municipalities, is about $5 million annually, which is 

considerable. I’d also like to point out that in this year for 

example, we are returning $16.3 million in futures to rural 

municipalities. We are giving them $4.4 million of the 

infrastructure money and they will receive on the Crow offset 

$21 million this year for a total of over 40 million — $40 

million — 36 of which is new money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  The minister made the comment that $5 

million is a lot of money. Well then I’ll remind her that 29 

million is a lot more for these people to absorb after they’ve 

already been cut about 50 per cent of the funding since you 

come into power in ’91. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Ottawa recently announced phase 2 of the 

federal infrastructure program, the Premier indicated that such a 

program is, and I quote, “something we need in this province.” 

And that it only makes sense that if our cities, towns, and 

villages and RMs are to take part in this initiative, they must 

have finances to take part. 

 

This government’s decision to slash municipal funding by 30 

per cent poses a very large roadblock in their way. As the 

mayor of Langenburg so aptly puts it, and I quote: 

 

How do you find your share of the infrastructure money 

when you’re getting the money taken away from you on 

the other hand. Somehow (it just) doesn’t make sense. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Langenburg is right. It doesn’t 

make sense. Will the Minister of Municipal Government 

explain how you intend to address this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad to hear the 

member opposite acknowledge that a long-term plan for 

development and retention of infrastructure is a necessity. And 

perhaps he could pass that message on again to his federal 

cousins in Ottawa — the Liberals in Ottawa. 

 

I also . . . This year the sharing in the infrastructure money will 

go 87 per cent to municipalities; the other 13 per cent is set 

aside for northern municipalities. So municipalities, for their 

infrastructure, will get 100 per cent of that money this year  

unconditionally, subject to the review process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Barley Marketing Vote 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 

the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, I don’t think you or 

Ralph Goodale got anywhere near the level of support you were 

expecting out of your all-or-nothing question on barley 

marketing. Over 21,000 farmers voted for a totally open market. 

I think it’s quite clear, Mr. Minister, if they had been given the 

choice, a clear majority of farmers would have voted in favour 

of dual marketing. 

 

Mr. Minister, for years you’ve been telling us that dual 

marketing is an idea being promoted by a small group — a 

radical fringe group — of farmers. Today’s vote shows this is 

clearly not the case. Support for the open market has grown 

from about 3 per cent last fall, according to Ralph Goodale’s 

own polling, to 37 per cent today. Support for dual marketing is 

58 per cent according to your own polling. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you immediately call on Ralph Goodale to 

call a question on dual marketing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I give the member full credit for being 

very brave, Mr. Speaker. After taking a whipping like they did 

on the barley vote to stand up in this House and ask the question 

for dual market takes a lot of courage, but I give him credit for 

that. 

 

And I ask the member to remember, I ask the member to 

remember this is a democracy. And nearly two out of every 

three people — basically two out of three people — support the 

Canadian Wheat Board, support the hundreds of millions of 

dollars . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Support the hundreds of millions of 

dollars that that board gives us and premium prices over the 

street price. And I’d just simply ask the member, why in the 

world do you continue to want to take $350 million out of the 

pockets of western Canadian farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, farmers 

who support dual marketing are not trying to impose their will 

on others. They are not saying get rid of the Wheat Board. In 

fact the Wheat Board is . . . if the Wheat Board is working as 

well as you and Ralph Goodale say it is, many would still 

continue to market their grain through the Wheat Board even 

under a dual-marketing system. 

 

These farmers are not trying to restrict your freedom, Mr. 

Minister. So what gives you and Ralph Goodale the right to 

restrict their freedom of choice? 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a growing number of farmers getting  



398  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

sick and tired of the Liberals and the NDP telling them how to 

market their grain. In spite of all of the efforts of the Liberals 

and the NDP with a flawed question and trying to influence the 

vote, over 21,000 farmers voted for a totally open market. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to listen to them? When are 

you going to call for a dual-marketing vote? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can just put it very 

bluntly by saying we are listening to the farmers of western 

Canada — two out of three. 

 

I find it really amusing though, Mr. Speaker, as to how the 

coalition oppositions works together over here. One member 

here wants to take 300 and some million dollars out of farmers’ 

pockets; members over there, the Liberals, they took 320 from 

the Crow, they took 250 from stabilization payments, they took 

$65 million out of farmers’ pockets by no train transportation 

regime that serves the farmers of this province. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are listening to that vote. I now 

call on the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale, to for once 

and for all put this to bed. Let’s get on with building a stronger 

Wheat Board now that we know that two out of three people in 

western Canada want the board. Let’s build it stronger and 

stronger. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is for the minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). Mr. Minister, two years ago SGI 

tendered a renovation project on its claim centre in your home 

town of Yorkton. That tender had to be withdrawn because 

nobody wanted to bid on this project under your 

union-preference tendering policy. 

 

We have now been informed that this project is going to be 

re-tendered, but this time it is going to be tendered as an SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) project, 

allowing you to circumvent your own flawed Crown tendering 

policy. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn’t this an admission that your union-preference 

tendering policy isn’t working? Will you admit that this flawed 

policy has caused a major problem for SGI in Yorkton? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to answer the question. First I want to advise the 

member opposite that initially when we looked at a facility in 

Yorkton for a new SGI, we looked at a new SGI building in 

Yorkton. When we reviewed the requirements for a facility in 

Yorkton, we found that we had a Highways building that was 

only 60 per cent utilized. So we entered into an agreement with 

the Department of Highways, and the property is owned by 

Saskatchewan Property Management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what the member opposite should know, that in this 

province we have reduced the number of leases by over a 

million dollars in this province. Because what we’re doing in 

this province is using facilities to their maximum ability, not 

like the Tory administration of the past that ran up huge, huge 

expenses in this province, was leasing properties to their 

friends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the 

minister that he cannot rewrite history. What happened in 

Yorkton is history and everybody there knows what happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Leader of the Third Party quoted 

from a national survey on Canadians’ attitudes towards unions. 

That survey also found that just 25 per cent of Canadians feel 

that bidding on a publicly funded project should be restricted to 

unionized companies. In the Saskatchewan-Manitoba region, 

which was lumped together, that number is even lower. Just 19 

per cent of the people support a union-preference tendering 

policy. Even among union members, less than 40 per cent 

support that kind of unfair policy, Mr. Minister. 

 

Immediately after question period I will be introducing a private 

members’ Bill to repeal the union-preference tendering policy. 

To the minister responsible for the CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), will you finally listen to what 

the contractors and taxpayers are telling you? Will you support 

our Bill and repeal this unfair policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that the 

answer is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Addictions 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, few 

people would argue the fact that the expansion of gambling in 

this province has resulted in an increase in the number of 

Saskatchewan people who are unfortunately becoming 

gambling addicts. 

 

The Liberal opposition believes that the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, the arm of the government which has caused the 

upsurge in gambling addiction and related problems, should 

bear the cost of treating and rehabilitating the victims of its 

activities. At present the cost of providing these services is 

borne by health districts which, as everyone knows, are walking 

a very fine financial tightrope. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to serve notice that 

following question period I will be introducing the gambling 

addiction accountability Act which would address this fact. 

Does the minister in charge of Liquor and Gaming not agree 

that this is an issue that must be addressed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Department of Health and the Government of Saskatchewan are 

doing a better job dealing with the problems of problem 

gambling than we’ve ever done in the past. We have, Mr. 

Speaker, a toll-free help line for anyone that has gambling 

problems. We’re trying to reach thousands of young people. 

We’re going to all the high schools with public education. 

 

We’re trying to be proactive and preventive, Mr. Speaker. And 

we recognize that addiction to gambling, like addiction to 

alcohol or drugs, is a real problem in our society. We’re 

spending more per capita than other provinces are, Mr. Speaker, 

to deal with this problem. And we’re going to continue to have 

the best and most innovative programs in our country to deal 

with these problems as they arise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how we know just 

exactly what we’re spending because there is no accountability 

for the spending of addiction treatment for gambling. And while 

this government continues to build up its Liquor and Gaming 

slush fund, it is failing to establish or address the true extent of 

the addiction problem in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have recently commented about the explosion in the 

number of people attending Gamblers Anonymous meetings, 

the massive increase in the number of phone calls to the 

gambling addiction hot line, and the fact that the number of 

people actually being treated has ballooned — they’ve doubled 

in one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it only makes sense that the department which 

benefits financially should also be accountable for the social 

costs. The Liquor and Gaming Authority is the agency which 

licenses VLTs (video lottery terminal) and other gambling 

activities. The cost of treating and rehabilitating gambling 

addicts should be shown as one of the expenses of this branch 

of government — not health care. And again this is the thrust of 

my private members’ . . . Will the minister in charge of Liquor 

and Gaming make a commitment in this House to support my 

Bill this afternoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, once again what we see is 

smoke and mirrors from the Liberal Party because the member 

should know that any revenue that comes from Liquor and 

Gaming into the government, Mr. Speaker, goes into the 

General Revenue Fund. And what is it used for in the main, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s used for health care and education. 

 

Now the member complains, the member gets up and complains 

that a lot of people are getting help with their gambling 

problems. And I say to the member, if somebody has a 

gambling addiction problem in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, that person is going to get assistance and help. 

That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker; that’s what we’re going 

to continue to do. 

 

And I also want to say to the member, because he gets up and 

tries to mislead the people about health districts having deficits 

— the members opposite, both Conservatives and Liberals,  

were talking a lot about health care deficits over the last few 

years, Mr. Speaker — the health boards will complete this year, 

Mr. Speaker, with an overall surplus and they’ll have a bigger 

surplus next year. We don’t need the smoke and mirrors from 

the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Fuel Rebate 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Human 

Rights Commission ruled last year that this government was 

discriminating against farm women who were not eligible for 

the farm fuel rebate in spite of the fact that many are farmers in 

their own right. As a result this government was forced to 

extend the rebate to women last year. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Finance minister indicated in September that 

this government may change the rebate policy for this year, but 

to date has made no announcement and we have heard no 

mention of this issue in the recent budget. Therefore will the 

Minister of Finance explain what commitment she is prepared 

to make to farm women in Saskatchewan to continue the 

program and adhere to the Human Rights Commission ruling? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the opportunity to clarify this. As we stated publicly, I think 

before the last House even recessed, we are complying fully 

with the Human Rights decision, and we said that we would 

review this program for the budget. Obviously the budget has 

passed. There has been no changes. The program is obviously 

sustainable as structured. So there’s no new news here. We are 

complying with the decision. We are accepting applications that 

go back to the original date of the program. We are fully paying 

those applications and the program is sustainable for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  I thank you, Madam Minister, for the clarification. 

There were many people asking about that. 

 

My next question is for the Minister of Social Services or his 

designate. Mr. Speaker, recently I had the great pleasure of 

participating in a freedom march in north-central Regina. 

People from all across Regina, including the Minister of Social 

Services and the Women’s Secretariat, were on hand. A 

dedicated group of community volunteers paraded through 

downtown Regina to raise awareness about the child 

prostitution problem and to warn the public that soliciting 

children for sex will not be tolerated. 

 

Last week I introduced a Bill entitled, measures to combat child 

prostitution. Now that the Minister of Social Services has had 

ample time to review the Bill, will he be supporting it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



400  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased 

to join with the hon. member opposite in that march. This is a 

very complex problem because as people in other places who 

have dealt with it even legislatively have found, if the 

underlying problems in the community aren’t dealt with, a 

strictly legal solution is not going to solve this problem. 

 

We have been taking a look at that Bill, and as the member 

acknowledged in her statements at that march, that her Bill may 

not be the appropriate action and there may in fact be some 

other action that’s more appropriate. 

 

So we’ve got an interdepartmental group looking at this. We’ve 

put substantial money in this budget into the child action plan, 

into child prostitution, into other community-based initiatives. 

 

And I think if the members were to vote for the budget it would 

go a long way to solving this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate that child prostitution is a complex issue for the 

Social Services, Health, and Justice departments to handle. But 

local community groups across the province are doing their part 

to raise awareness of the pedophiles preying on young children 

for sex. 

 

Now it’s the government’s turn. And make no mistake, time is 

of the essence. These child victims need help now. If the 

minister won’t act quickly to support our private members’ Bill, 

what kind of a time line is he setting to establish new legislation 

governing the issue of child prostitution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well again I would say to the member 

opposite that supporting this budget would be a good first step 

in this. 

 

But I also have to say that one of the true solutions to this 

problem is the strength of the neighbourhood, the strength of 

the community. And I think it’s all of our jobs to do as much as 

we can to support the work that the local community people are 

doing to organize, in that instance, the street patrols and the 

various activities within the community that are going to make 

that whole environment safer for the children and more difficult 

for the child sexual abusers who are in that community. 

 

For myself, I’ve spoken with people involved in the community 

and said if there’s anything we can do to help resource some of 

the community-based actions that are taking place we certainly 

want to get involved with them in doing that. 

 

I indicated that they should call me at any time when they have 

anything they want me to be involved in, anything they think 

we can do. And we’re just going to have to keep working 

together on this because it’s a very deep-seated problem. And I 

agree totally with the member opposite; once a child 

experiences this kind of damage it takes a lifetime, and even 

then the damage is not undone. So we do have to deal with it. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Canadian Wheat Board Vote 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased this afternoon to rise in this House and to report 

that a solid majority, two out of three people, of prairie barley 

producers, have voted to support the Canadian Wheat Board 

and to continue to have the barley market . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Nearly 75 per cent of eligible voters 

exercised their right to mail in their ballots to the federal 

government on this important issue, and the results are crystal 

clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is calling upon the federal 

government to make the results of this vote binding and to put 

this issue to rest once and for all. Despite an expensive 

campaign by the forces that wish to destroy the board, the 

farmers have made their wishes known loud and clear. Mr. 

Speaker, the federal government must put this issue to rest and 

move forward to strengthen the Canadian Wheat Board, and to 

build our grain industry. 

 

I urge the federal government to put safeguards in place to 

ensure that grain moves in this country in a timely fashion to 

port in the future, and to pass legislation quickly that would 

give the board added flexibility in its continuing efforts to 

provide farmers with the service of marketing their grain while 

achieving premium prices. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board gives prairie wheat producers a 

competitive advantage worth $265 million a year in premiums 

paid by foreign customers, and $110 million a year in 

reduced-cost risk management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the board gives barley producers a competitive 

edge worth $72 million a year. It is obvious that barley 

producers recognized that fact and voted accordingly. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to this 

ministerial statement, unquestionably, Mr. Minister, there is a 

result. There’s no question about that. Farmers have voted 

something in the neighbourhood of 67 per cent in favour of a 

Canadian Wheat Board marketing base. Thirty-seven per cent, I 

believe it was, were voting opposed to the question of, do they 

want an all Wheat Board or do they want all open market, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Unquestionably though, during the whole debate about this 

grain marketing, I don’t recall one farm group — not one farm 

group — calling on the all or nothing question that we saw. Not 

one farm group, Mr. Speaker. The farm groups that were 

wanting change were wanting the dual marketing question to be  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

included on that. 

 

And the minister’s own polling, his own polling indicated that 

58 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers wanted dual marketing 

here in Saskatchewan. And if you look at Ralph Goodale’s own 

polling surrounding the question of single-desk marketing, or 

open marketing entirely, the open marketing question went 

from 3 per cent of support to 37 per cent of support in the 

course of a few months. 

 

Unquestionably the winds of change are a blowing, Mr. 

Minister, and you recognize it, and I think every other farmer 

across Saskatchewan recognizes it. People want to see change 

in this. The struggle will continue. This question is not over, 

Mr. Speaker at all. 

 

And the important question on this is that we should recognize 

here in Saskatchewan, we clearly favour dual marketing. You 

people don’t. What is the Liberal’s position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. All hon. members will 

come to order. Order. 

 

Thank you to Sask Water Employees 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker 

. . . (inaudible) . . . river basins. High water levels are also 

expected along the Qu’Appelle and Souris River basins. 

Temperatures and amounts of precipitation which affect snow 

melt may reduce or increase the probability of flooding. This 

was the case in Swift Current last weekend where above-normal 

temperatures in south-western Saskatchewan triggered major 

flows in the Swift Current and Wood River basins. 

 

Although some of the areas of Swift Current were flooded, 

damage was less than expected largely because of advance 

preparations and cooperation, coordinated emergency action, 

and communications between various government departments 

and local agencies including Sask Water. 

 

Sask Water, Mr. Speaker, plays a major role during spring 

run-off. The corporation is responsible for hydrometric 

monitoring of water throughout the province, precisely tracking 

and predicting water flows, and communicating this 

information to affected municipalities, and in some cases, 

personal contact with the affected landowners. 

 

Such extra efforts by Sask Water staff throughout the province 

are helping ensure everyone in affected areas . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The Chair is having difficulty 

being able to hear the minister’s ministerial statement and I’ll 

ask for the cooperation of all members of the House on both 

sides to allow the statement to be heard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I think we have a 

difficulty here. Is it all right if I move to this desk? Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m going to try this again from this side. 

 

I want to commend the extra efforts by the Sask Water staff 

throughout the province who are helping to ensure, in affected 

areas, everyone is aware of potential flood situations. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I can say that many Sask Water’s employees have 

been working day and night including weekends since the 

spring run-off began. 

 

Staff in the corporation’s forecast centre have also been 

working around the clock, diligently monitoring hydrometric 

stations throughout Saskatchewan in order to provide the most 

up-to-date data on the spring run-off situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Water also issues monthly province-wide 

news releases of flood forecasts. This began in February and 

will continue until the run-off period is complete. As well, 

media advisories are being issued by the corporation in the 

event of spot flooding or controlled releases from reservoirs. 

News conferences updating the run-off situation are also being 

held regularly to ensure the public is aware of any potential 

problems in their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that there has been much cooperation 

within the different departments, within Municipal 

Government, Emergency Measures, Sask Water Corporation, 

and the local municipal governments. But I want to in particular 

commend the people in the Swift Current area and those who 

have been responsible, volunteering their time preparing for 

situations with all of us . . . which all of us wish would not be 

occurring. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are managing the situation very 

well and I want to commend them for that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Before providing for a response to the 

ministerial statement, I do want to remind ministers of the 

Executive Council that the purpose of ministerial statements is 

for announcements of government policy. Now I — order, 

order, order — I was listening carefully to the remarks made by 

the minister. Granted, with the confusion of the microphone, I 

may not have heard as clearly as I would normally be able to, 

but I do want to remind the ministers that statements are out of 

order unless they are announcements of new government 

policy. That’s their purpose. There are other ways of making 

statements that are appropriate and other means. 

 

Order. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I trust maybe what the minister 

for Sask Water was trying to say — if there was a lot of 

damages — that maybe his government would come up with 

some emergency funds to cover some of these damages. But in 

the meantime, I do want to thank the staff of Sask Water, as I’m 

sure the people of the province do, for helping them. 

 

But I think we can’t underestimate the fact that the people of 

the province are working together to make sure that the damage 

is as little as possible. That’s what Saskatchewan people do do, 

is work together well. 

 



402  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

start, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I really believe I did hear a 

statement of policy in the minister’s address. 

 

And I believe that what he was saying is that the government is 

strongly considering a policy whereby they will study water 

problems in our province and take initiatives that will in the 

future stop these kind of floods from damaging properties, 

especially in areas like Swift Current where we have asked the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs yesterday if she would in fact 

introduce a policy of examining what went wrong and helping 

people to understand how the system works and to find out if 

we can somehow, in that particular case, stop people from 

pointing fingers one to the other, saying, it’s his fault; no, it was 

his fault; no, it was someone else’s fault. 

 

And if we can have that kind of an investigation, we not only 

can clear up a lot of misunderstandings within those 

communities, but we can also then go back to the minister of 

the Water Corporation’s new idea, which is to plan for the 

future. 

 

Plans that were suggested by one of my constituents just 

yesterday that go along the lines that the CPR (Canadian Pacific 

Railway) used to have a dam on Swiftcurrent Creek. It was 

about a few miles west of . . . or rather east of No. 37 Highway 

but west of the Duncairn dam’s present site. It was a back-up 

dam and what it did in effect was provide a back-up system for 

flood control. 

 

Unfortunately of course, the CPR doesn’t need water for its 

engines any more so the dam was allowed to wash out and 

disappear. Now we have some flood problems. If those kinds of 

secondary dams were put back into place under this new kind of 

policy, we would see flood control minimized I think, a great 

deal. 

 

We also of course could put in dams in places like Battle Creek. 

And of course we were very happy over the past weekend to 

receive a message directly from the Governor of North Dakota, 

Mr. Schafer, who congratulated the Progressive Conservative 

government of the past for putting in the Rafferty-Alameda 

dams because this spring those two dams are going to ensure 

that Minot, a very beautiful city just across the border from us, 

will not probably flood. And they’re very happy about that and 

they recognize the significance of those dams being in place for 

water control. 

 

And so we do see that there is some hope for a policy coming 

out of this statement, Mr. Minister, or Mr. Speaker. And we 

encourage both of these ministers to now take very seriously the 

requests of people to study these problems, to plan for the 

future, to build flood-control dams, and to follow this piece of 

Liberal advice, which was to give some emergency aid to those 

people who are hurting at the present time. 

 

We do have ranchers that have lost feed. We do have ranchers 

that have had bins surrounded by water. Some of their grain 

supplies are soggy and wet. They do need some immediate  

help. We suggest that you get right at it. 

 

Infrastructure Works Program 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the provincial 

and federal government signed an agreement for a one-year 

extension of the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works 

program. The Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works 

program is a fine example of how much can be accomplished 

through cooperative action. And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

people know — maybe better than anyone in Canada — about 

working together. 

 

When this government took office, the province was facing a 

financial crisis. We inherited a large deficit, a growing debt, and 

high interest payments. But Saskatchewan people turned to their 

long tradition of cooperation and community to restore the 

province’s finances. And just last week when the Minister of 

Finance introduced the 1997-98 budget, we saw the benefits of 

working together. And now working together — federal 

government, provincial government, and municipalities — we 

will continue to improve and upgrade the infrastructure of 

Saskatchewan and provide jobs. 

 

Since the beginning of the program, the federal and provincial 

governments and municipalities have invested more than $295 

million in improvements to Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. A 

total of 23.16 million will come from the federal and provincial 

governments; with the municipal contribution, this will provide 

more than $34 million for infrastructure improvement in this 

province in the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be encouraging communities to work 

together on infrastructure projects in the Saskatchewan tradition 

of cooperation. The entire federal and provincial share of 

infrastructure funding under this top-up is being directed to 

municipal projects. We expect that much of this funding will be 

spent on the province’s transportation infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people want government to make sound, 

long-term investments. Our investment in Saskatchewan’s 

infrastructure is a sound, long-term investment and also 

provides jobs now. More than 5,000 were created in 

Saskatchewan under phase 1 of the infrastructure program and 

some 1,200 in community projects benefited from the dollars it 

injected into the economy. It is anticipated that this funding will 

result in the creation of about 600 new jobs while once again 

helping communities complete important projects that will 

improve services to Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Our commitment, Mr. Speaker, is to build for the future by 

investing in people for prosperity and jobs. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

infrastructure joint ventures and funding assistance is 

appreciated by everyone. But the downloading and the cuts to 

revenue-sharing pools since ’91 by this provincial government 

have caused a great hardship to all. As the minister knows, rural 

governments, towns, villages — everyone — could not deficit  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

finance; and they kept their house in order and now are being 

penalized very heavy for doing that by this government who did 

not keep their house in order or the third party’s government. 

 

So, Madam Minister, if you want these municipalities to be able 

to take advantage of programs such as you announced 

yesterday, you’ve got to quit the downloading and dumping on 

all forms of municipalities so they can take advantage of these 

programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You mentioned in 

this particular statement, Madam Minister, that cooperation is 

needed. And I think that’s definitely there. I would hope 

though, that after you made the statement that all the money 

was going to the municipalities, that we’ll see it all go there — 

every single last dollar. 

 

I would also hope that as the information is sent out, that the 

municipalities are given a lot of leeway to do exactly what they 

want with that particular money and not have it earmarked in 

ways that you probably see fit but may not be needed and 

necessary for those particular communities. I think it’s very 

important that that takes place. Nothing is the same in any two 

communities, so any kinds of rules and restrictions that are put 

in place will definitely hinder the usefulness of this particular 

money. 

 

With the way that this government has made it difficult for 

municipalities to survive over the last numbers of years, this is a 

critical program and my municipalities are already looking 

forward to getting this money and making good use of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

The Speaker:  I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Speaker:  Are there any further ministerial statements? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to all members of the 

legislature three guests that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m privileged to introduce Taras Mazuryak, who 

is a curriculum writer from Ispas Secondary School in 

Chernivtsi Oblast province in Ukraine. Taras is here as part of 

an international agreement that was entered into between the 

Premier of Saskatchewan and the Prime Minister of the 

Ukraine. 

 

This agreement called for a government-to-government 

exchange, particularly in the area of curriculum development. 

And we now have the Department of Education involved in the 

exchange, and Mr. Mazuryak is here for, I believe six months, 

involved in developing a Ukrainian-English language 

curriculum. 

 

Joining Mr. Mazuryak is Vera Labach, who is a Ukrainian 

language development consultant with Saskatchewan Education 

located in the city of Saskatoon, my home city. And 

accompanying her is, I gather, her husband, Terry Labach. 

 

And I would like to welcome our international guest from the 

Ukraine to the province of Saskatchewan along with the tour 

guides. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  To also introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 

the guests. 

 

Vitaemo vace, i dobre dehn. ( Translation: welcome to you and 

good day.) 

 

Taras Mazuryak, as pointed out, is doing a tremendous amount 

in terms of coordinating programs between Ukraine and 

Saskatchewan. And I know of many, many students who have 

travelled across to Ukraine as exchange students, to take part in 

cultural and educational trips. 

 

And I welcome you; I understand a six months visit to 

Saskatchewan. I hope you enjoy the province very much. Also a 

welcome to Vera Labach. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  To ask for leave of the Assembly to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me distinct 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you several . . . or two 

very important guests of the Assembly. We have people from 

the very far North visiting the city and visiting the Assembly 

today. These people are from the beautiful town of Black Lake. 

 

I’d like to introduce Edwin Alphonse and Philip Bouvier. I 

believe they’re both here on behalf of the Uranium City hospital 

board. Edwin is a board director and Philip Bouvier is the 

Vice-Chair. 

 



404  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

And I wanted them to know that I’m one of the first members to 

speak Dene in the Assembly. So I’ll try it here. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.) 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 211  The Gambling Addiction 

Accountability Act 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 211, The 

Gambling Addiction Accountability Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 210 — The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement Revocation Act 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

introduce first reading of Bill No. 210, The Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement Revocation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, The 

Wildlife Act, 1997, be now introduced and read for the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, there was a point of 

order raised yesterday, last evening, and I would like to present 

the Chair’s ruling. 

 

Yesterday evening the Government Whip raised a point of order 

concerning the propriety of certain remarks made in debate by 

the Leader of the Opposition. It was the Government Whip’s 

contention that the Leader of the Opposition had impugned the 

character of government members by, as he stated, making the 

suggestion that those members might have used confidential 

knowledge of the reductions of provincial sales tax for their 

own personal gain. 

 

The Deputy Speaker indicated that the Chair would review the 

verbatim record before making a ruling. Having reviewed the 

remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, I am prepared to rule 

on the matter. 

 

In reference to the sales tax reduction I find that the Leader of 

the Opposition stated the following, and I quote: 

 

And I’d be interested to know as to the large purchases that 

people make, especially the members of the government 

benches opposite. I wonder how many government 

members bought a brand-new car in the last, oh let’s say, 

two months . . . 

 

Order. 

 

. . . and wonder about whether or not they invested the 

additional 2 per cent in sales tax. 

 

It is stated in Beauchesne’s, 6th edition, at paragraph 487(2) 

that: 

 

Words may not be used hypothetically or conditionally, if 

they are plainly intended to convey a direct imputation. 

 

From the cited remarks it is unclear that the hon. member meant 

to impute about the motives of other hon. members. 

 

Beauchesne also states at paragraph 486(1) that: 

 

It is impossible to lay down any specific rules in regard to 

injurious reflections uttered in debate against particular 

Members . . . much depends upon the tone and manner, 

and intention, of the person speaking . . . 

 

In this instance, upon review of video tape of proceedings, it is 

the Chair’s considered judgement that the Leader of the 

Opposition’s tone and manner did not impute dishonourable 

motives on the part of other hon. members and I find the point 

of order not well taken. 

 

Order. Order. Hon. members will come to order. 

 

Order, order. I will ask all hon. members to come to order. I 

will ask . . . 

 

The Premier knows that members are not allowed . . . the 

Premier knows that the members are not allowed . . . Order! 

Order. The Premier knows that hon. members are not allowed 

to say from their desk what they’re not permitted to say from 

their feet, and that Speakers’ rulings are not to be challenged. I 

will ask the Premier to withdraw his remark . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I will ask the Premier to withdraw his remark 

challenging the Speaker’s ruling. 

 

I will ask the Premier to withdraw the remark challenging the 

Speaker’s ruling. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, what remark did I 

make? I have to know what the remark is before I know what I 

have to withdraw. 

 

The Speaker:  The Premier knows . . . the hon. member will 

be aware that he has made several comments in response to the 

Speaker’s ruling, and I will simply ask the Premier to withdraw 

the remark and apologize. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I withdraw and I 

apologize. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

The Speaker:  Order! All hon. members will come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, in the interest of 

open, accountable, and responsible government, I hereby table 

the responses to questions 23, 24, and 25; and I respectfully 

request that question 26 be converted to a notice of motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker:  The answers to items 1, 2, and 3 are tabled, 

and item no. 4 is converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 

stand here in my place and reply to the budget speech. It is an 

honour for me to represent the constituency of Lloydminster. 

 

It was an honour in 1991 when I was just a novice at this, but 

when I was re-elected in 1995 the constituents of Lloydminster 

said to me, we want you to continue on the track that you have 

started on. We want your government to deliver accountable, 

financially, fiscally responsible government. And that is why I 

was re-elected in 1995, and that is what we are trying to do. 

 

I want to thank a number of people before I start my main 

address. I’d like to thank the people of Saskatchewan for 

standing behind the government five and a half years. It was not 

an easy time for any of us. Most of us that are elected, on both 

sides of the House, really care for people, for the programs that 

we support, and we represent our constituencies to the best of 

our ability. And so it was difficult when we had to bring in 

budgets the first few years. 

 

And I just want to tell the member from Melfort-Tisdale that we 

were very much aware of the financial situation in ’91, in 

October ’91 — I should say November 1, when we took over — 

in ’92 and in ’93. And we took the measures that we had to. 

Many times I felt physically ill when I looked at the situation 

and the decisions we had to make, because I say I believe 

people on all sides of the House really do care about the people 

that they represent. So I want to thank the people of 

Saskatchewan for standing behind the government. 

 

When I look at the television and I see other places in the world 

where people actually riot in the streets, I have to say that I’m 

thankful to the people because they backed our government and  

they re-elected it with the second big second term majority that 

any government has enjoyed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  I want to thank my colleagues. We are an 

extremely diverse group. Here we are together, with all our 

idiosyncrasies, with all our gifts, but with all our differences. 

And let me tell you one thing. I’d like to tell the member from 

Saltcoats one thing. We are not just back-benchers. We are not 

just back-benchers. What we are is people that represent our 

constituencies, and we do it in an honourable way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  When I was listening to the member for 

Saltcoats yesterday and he said we’d just all go together and 

speak together and just follow along with the Executive 

Council, I don’t think that they really understand the process. 

So I’m going to explain it very slowly. 

 

In our caucus all our debate is done within the four walls of that 

room. And if you think . . . and when you look over here, if you 

think that you can coerce or shut up any of these people that I 

sit with, you’re wrong. We have our debates and then we vote. 

 

And let me guarantee the member from Saltcoats that I’d rather 

be a back-bencher in this Premier’s government than a cabinet 

minister in Chrétien’s government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Any Liberal government. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  That’s right — any Liberal government. But 

I’ll tell you one thing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  One thing’s for certain — that’ll never 

happen. 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Stanger:  You’re darn right it will never happen. 

 

That leaves me to the third person that I’d like to thank. I’ve 

thanked the people of Saskatchewan; I’ve thanked my 

colleagues. And just before I go on to the next person, I’d like 

to say something about my colleagues. I’d like to say something 

about the member from Regina South, because the member 

from Melville said that he was a young upstart that didn’t have 

life experience. 

 

Well let me tell the member from Melville that the member 

from Regina South was not put in a closet when he was born. 

He was exposed to the world, and he’s lived 29 years and a full 

life. 

 

Also, he insinuated that the member from Regina South did not 

have any experience in rural Saskatchewan. The member from 

Regina South was born in rural Saskatchewan, was raised in 

rural Saskatchewan. He had to go to university in Regina or  



406  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Saskatoon. Or is the Liberal member saying that we should 

have a university in every rural town? Of course that kind of is 

Liberal mathematics. 

 

So let me just say in defence of the member from Regina South, 

if you want to know how valuable this member is, I want you to 

take out the Public Accounts Hansard and read the Hansard 

and Public Accounts. He is the same age as my youngest 

daughter; they worked together promoting the progressive 

movement that we belong to, and we value the member from 

Regina South. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member:  Which department is your daughter in? 

 

Ms. Stanger:  My daughter teaches in Duck Lake, 

Saskatchewan, and so does her husband. They’re wonderful 

teachers. 

 

Now to the third person that I want to thank. I want to thank the 

Premier of this province, the leader of our party, for what he has 

done for the last five and a half years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  He has presented our case across from coast to 

coast to coast in this country. And I can tell you one thing, 

when I look at the national media, when I read The Globe and 

Mail, when I listen to people across this country, they tell me, 

you are so fortunate to have the Premier that you do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  I know the members of the opposition don’t 

have an insight into our caucus, but let me tell you, if it was not 

for the leadership qualities of men like Roy Romanow, caucus 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now the hon. member I think 

already knows that she has just used a proper name, and that’s 

improper to do. On the rules of debate in the House, a member 

should only be referred to by the positions that they hold in the 

House. And I’ll ask the hon. member to guide herself 

accordingly. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I kept telling myself, I 

can’t say the Premier’s name, but it slipped out. I know him so 

well, you see. That’s the other thing — open and accessible 

leadership. 

 

Okay, so I have thanked those three important groups: people of 

Saskatchewan; my colleagues who have hung in there through 

thick and thin; and the Premier who has been there for us at all 

turns. 

 

I just want to say, before I get to the main part of my speech, 

that I was very surprised at the reaction to the barley vote this 

afternoon. I wasn’t surprised as far as the third party was 

concerned. That’s the one thing I appreciate about the third 

party. At least you know where they stand. You may not agree  

with them but you know where they stand. You know where we 

stand. 

 

Now where were the Liberals? They were supposed to . . . 

Maybe in their inexperience they didn’t realize they were 

supposed to respond when there is a ministerial statement. 

 

Now where exactly do the Liberals stand on this? They will 

have an opportunity this afternoon to get up. I’d like them to tell 

us where they stand. It would be interesting to see. 

 

Now to get back to my speech, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to say that 

when the budget was brought down, I was one of the proudest 

people in my constituency, but not the only one. And I sent out 

press releases to the Lloydminster Times, the Meridian Booster, 

and the Maidstone Mirror. And this is sort of the text of what I 

said. 

 

It is extremely satisfying that we can now reinvest in people in 

the ways that have not been previously possible because of our 

financial restraint. Decreased taxes and increased spending on 

our social programs is a major accomplishment. Now is this 

enough? No it is not. 

 

And I just want to say that, to the member from Humboldt, I 

commend her on the stand that she has taken on some social 

initiatives, but just to remember, please remember, the people 

elected on this side of the House really do care. I mean it isn’t 

as if we are doing things deliberately without a heart. Most of 

us in this House agree with the problems that you have named. 

The solutions maybe aren’t that easy. 

 

We know for instance that Alberta has put in a Bill similar to 

what you’re proposing. The minute, the minute the money was 

taken away and the police were off, the same problems 

reoccurred. This is not a simple solution. I am with you; I agree 

it is a problem. 

 

And I don’t call it child prostitution. It’s not; it’s child sexual 

abuse, that’s what it is. And I agree with you. Those kinds of 

issues, I’m with you. But just remember this situation was not 

created in a day, and not one law or one day can erase the 

problem. It’s going to take all of us working together — 

opposition members, police, community leaders, the 

government, and everybody — to solve those kind of problems. 

 

I also said in my press release, the 2 per cent reduction in the 

education and health tax is an added bonus to all the people of 

this province, but especially to those in my constituency who 

live so close to Alberta. And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 

small-business people in my area have hung in there right 

through thick and thin and I want to acknowledge them and 

thank them. And they are going to prosper. 

 

Everybody is aware that Alberta has no provincial sales tax. 

Reducing our tax puts the people of this province in a better 

position than many in Alberta though. A typical family in 

Saskatchewan will pay up to $700 a year in sales tax. The same 

family in Alberta would not pay the sales tax, but they’ll be 

paying over $800 in health premiums. And not to criticize 

another provincial government because they run their province  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

the way they see fit, but let’s just say that when you have 

money you make some choices. 

 

This morning I had an appointment at 11 o’clock. It was 5 to 

11, and I saw a gentleman wandering around on Albert Street. 

And I thought if I stop — he obviously looked very confused — 

and I thought if I stop, I’ll be late. And then I thought, darn it 

all, I’m going to stop anyway. I turned around and stopped and 

I said, can I help you? And he said, I’m looking for the T.C. 

building to pick up my health card. And I said, well look, get in 

the car and I’ll drive you there. 

 

And of course I didn’t know this gentleman, so as I’m driving 

there he says to me, do you work for the government? I said no, 

I work for the people of Saskatchewan. And I said I’m part of 

the government. I explained who I am. He said, well I’ve just 

come here from Alberta, and he said, it is really a sad state, 

what is happening to people on social assistance and people on 

the lower end of the scale in Alberta. 

 

Now that is just one person’s opinion. But let me say to you, 

that is not happening here, because we have some new 

initiatives. And I won’t go through them all; I’ll just mention a 

few that I’m really proud of. 

 

The national child support guidelines will be giving $1.1 

million to Justice, so those guidelines are written. Early skills 

development program in health; I really think that that’s 

important, as a teacher. The fetal alcohol syndrome strategy; 

again health and social services. Many of these babies . . . I 

have taught some of the children of fetal alcohol syndrome. 

They really do need extra help, and if they were helped when 

they were younger, that would assist them as they grew up. 

 

Another program that I’m really proud of is the teen and young 

parent program. I remember going to a school in Saskatoon in 

the Minister of Education’s constituency and talking to some of 

the these teen mothers. And they had the babies there. They 

were taking their grade 11 and 12. And what the teacher said, 

she said to the girls, these people are legislators. They are here 

to listen to you and what you have to say about the program, 

and all of us are leaving so that you can tell them what you 

really think. 

 

Well it was heartening to hear these young mothers say that 

they would have not been able to continue and finish their 

education and care for their children if this program wasn’t in 

place. I’m glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that we’re extending it. 

 

The street youth and youth prostitution initiative is another one 

that I’m proud of and hope to see this fleshed out in the next 

few days. One-time initiative transition to the child benefit 

package, another 6 million. 

 

Now is this enough? No it is not enough, but it is a start. It is a 

budget finally that I can stand up and feel good about. Our other 

budgets were geared towards getting our house in order so that 

we can do some of the programs that we really believe in. And 

this is why I say that we shouldn’t overlook some of the smaller 

items in the budget which everybody seems to have. 

 

For instance the increase to RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) policing in rural areas. This is one thing that I have said 

time and time again to my colleagues and to the Minister of 

Justice, and to people. I have said, rather than putting a gun 

control law in like the federal Liberals are saying, I said it 

would do more to prevent crime and violence against women in 

rural Saskatchewan if we had special trained police officers that 

would be able to answer immediately to some of the domestic 

problems that were . . . that are in our communities. Far more 

effective to have RCMP police officers specially trained. I have 

talked to some of them in Lloydminster; they’re actually 

amazing people. 

 

And I was so happy when the Minister of Justice told me that 

they would be . . . there would be more money for RCMP 

policing in rural areas. That is taking a decent step. Gun control 

to license guns — I’ve tried to tell some of our urban 

counterparts — is not going to do a thing to prevent violence 

towards women in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And of course we’re narrowing the things that are taxed under 

the E&H (education and health). A tax exemption again for 

medical devices is a good thing. We have the narrowest tax 

base of all the provinces that have a sales tax. This is one of the 

reasons why our Minister of Finance was so against 

harmonization. Because harmonization increases the taxes, the 

sales tax, almost by double. 

 

If you look at the Atlantic provinces and you look at what they 

. . . an individual’s going to pay in sales tax with a harmonized 

tax. And not only are they going to pay 15 per cent for 

everything, but their base is so broad. I mean hair cuts, you 

know, service to your vehicle, lawyers’ fees, all of those are 

included. 

 

We have the narrowest sales tax and I’m proud of that. And 

that’s one of the reasons why we didn’t harmonize in 1991 and 

why we have decided not to harmonize now. It’s because the 

poor people of the Atlantic provinces, which are Liberal 

provinces, cannot afford to pay this expanded, harmonized tax. 

 

Everyone in Saskatchewan has a good reason to feel good about 

this budget. It shows our commitment for the many social 

programs that have provided services to everyone. In our mind, 

people come first and that is what a good budget is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just compare, as I said 

before — not to run down — other governments. But 

governments are different, and I have said to my constituents, 

yes we’re all politicians but we do make different choices. Just 

like individuals make different choices in the way they spend 

their money, governments are the same. We’re a group of 

individuals. 

 

And I want to compare the Saskatchewan NDP government’s 

choices in this budget, as opposed to the federal Ottawa Liberal 

government’s choices. 



408  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Okay, our provincial debt after this budget and our former 

budgets is decreasing to the gross domestic . . . GDP (gross 

domestic product). 

 

An Hon. Member:  Product. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Product, thank you. 

 

In fact it’s decreased from 70 per cent, and by the year 1999 it’ll 

be 35 per cent of our GDP. That is an amazing feat when you 

think about it. 

 

Now, what’s does the federal . . . what’s happening with the 

federal budget? Federal debt is increasing relative to the GDP. 

Ours is decreasing; theirs is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

That’s one choice. 

 

We’ve back-filled a hundred per cent of federal cuts to health 

and increased health spending over $56.6 million in 1996. What 

has the federal government done, the federal Liberal 

government? They’ve continued to cut social programs, and 

they have some bulk investment in pilot projects over the next 

three years. But like I have said in my constituency: no 

long-term planning, just short-term election promise. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Get them through the election. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Get them through the election. 

 

Okay, we have put in $6 million in transitional funding until the 

national child benefit program begins, in this budget. 

 

What have they done? They haven’t even started. They are not 

even going to start until July, 1998. There is the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order, order. Now all 

hon. members know that it’s not appropriate debate to be 

shouting comments across the floor at one another and that all 

hon. members will have the opportunity to put their remarks on 

the record. And I would encourage them to make the remarks in 

that way. 

 

Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  With permission, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At noon today, I was 

very privileged to be invited to attend the Regina United Way’s 

annual general meeting and I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to this House two people who were at the AGM 

(annual general meeting). 

 

First of all, Karen Rowan, representing the Regina United Way 

— if she would stand, please. And also Chuck Shannon from 

Denver, who was here to do a workshop for the United Way on 

practical ways to build healthy communities. 

The Regina United Way, as members are likely aware, is 

moving beyond its basic mandate of being a community 

fund-raiser and fund distributor, to a new role as a community 

facilitator and builder. And in that, they are greatly helped by 

the advice and guidance and wisdom of Chuck Shannon, who 

gave an extremely poignant and moving talk at noon today 

about how to build civic society and healthy communities. And 

he gave some very practical examples of exciting ways of 

keeping people involved in a long-term, dedicated way in their 

local communities. 

 

I learned a tremendous amount from attending the AGM today, 

and I’m sure that all members of the House will join me in 

welcoming Karen Rowan and Chuck Shannon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I’ll just start 

at the top because this sort of broke up my thinking. 

 

Okay, the comparison between choices that governments make. 

We are decreasing our debt in proportion to our GDP; they are 

increasing their debt in proportion to the GDP. We have 

back-filled 100 per cent of the cuts, 5.6 million this year; they 

have cut 6 billion. They have continued cutting. Minimal 

investment over the next three years in pilot projects, but no 

long-term planning. I call it, I just call it election planning. 

 

We put in 6 million in transition funding in the child benefit 

because the national government is only starting in 1998. What 

children are supposed to do until 1998? I guess hang on; that’s 

the only thing they can do. 

 

Now back-filled 100 per cent of the federal cuts in university, 

allowing them to reconsider tuition fees. What has the federal 

government chosen to do? Cut post-secondary education. They 

have made some small benefits that favour mostly higher 

income families. 

 

Now I just want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the 

way we have been different since the ’40s is that somebody like 

myself could aspire to go to university, to graduate, and to do 

better than my parents did. And this has been because I 

remember as far back as the ’50s when other provinces weren’t 

even thinking about it, I was able to get a student loan to go to 

university. 

 

In this province we have always supported people going to 

university. I remember . . . and I have to quote Tommy 

Douglas. He always used to say, it doesn’t matter what you 

have here, it’s what you got up here. Not what you have in your 

back pocket, but what you have in your head that counts. And 

always we have taken that. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

It would make me very sad . . . Both of my children have been 

to university and graduated. It would make me very sad if 

people from low income families could not aspire to that. More 

than other places in North America, people in Saskatchewan 

have been able to do better than their parents did. And I’d like 

to see this continue. 

 

Now we have expansion of the E&H tax exemptions to include 

medical devices and materials and a very narrow base. That’s 

our choice. What does the federal government do? No new GST 

(goods and services tax) exemptions. And the GST, Mr. 

Speaker — I travel all over my constituency — it is the most 

hated tax by Canadians, of any tax. And this is the difference. 

We have narrowed our tax base again. They have done nothing. 

And by the way, I hate to point this out, but they did promise 

that they would do something about it. 

 

Okay, we cut our E&H tax from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. Now 

what did the federal government choose to do? No cuts in GST 

or other taxes. We have a $24 million surplus forecast for 

1997-98 and they have a $17 billion deficit forecast. After all 

the pain and all those cuts, they have a deficit. That’s what 

really startled me last year. I thought, they have to come to 

grips with their financial situation. I realize that. They cut the 

social safety nets when they have many more areas to cut from 

than us. They cut their social safety nets, cut their government 

less. We did the opposite. We cut the government more and our 

social safety nets by far less. So they’ve done exactly the 

opposite. Again they made the choices. Fine. They should live 

up to those choices and face the choices. Don’t cry to us 

because this is the kind of choices that Liberals make. 

 

No. 9, this is the ninth comparison — increased funding for 

training by 26 million. And what did the feds do? No new 

money for training spaces, and they withdrew from the labour 

marketing training. And here we have increased funding for K 

to 12 by 8 million; further increase in capital funding for both K 

to 12 and post-secondary education of 5.8 million. Is it enough? 

No, it’s not enough. But what have the federal people done in 

their budget? More cuts to education. And they continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are very progressive people. They 

are facing the 21st century. And I want to compliment a few of 

my small-business people in our area — the oil workers and the 

service industry which welcome the tax breaks we have given 

them. We have more oil drilling, high land sales. This has given 

us revenue to all the people of Saskatchewan. Areas like mine 

have contributed a great deal. These people are working with 

us. 

 

I can remember in the ‘80s when oil people wouldn’t even 

speak to us because they were told by the former government 

that we were anti-business. Well you know what? Now they 

come and speak to us because they see that we realize that there 

are three engines that make an economy work. And that is, 

private investment . . . we are not against private investment. 

For heaven’s sakes, every one of us is a private investor in some 

way or another. 

 

Public — well we do believe some things should be public, 

should never be private. I’ll give you an example. Some of the  

roads were taken over in the United States by private 

companies. They’ve turned them all back to the states. I mean 

those are the kind of things that shouldn’t be done privately — 

some of the toll bridges and some of the toll highways. There 

are things that should be done publicly. 

 

And there is the cooperative sector, a sector that works in 

cooperation with public and private to make the economy work. 

 

So I would say our Premier, our caucus, takes a pragmatic 

approach to government, and this is going to stand us in good 

stead going into the 21st century. 

 

I have a group of game farmers that are absolutely amazing 

people. And they are just coming into their own. This industry 

is going to bring us a great deal of business and it’s going to 

help the economy also, a diversification of rural Saskatchewan. 

Our cattle producers are doing well. You heard about the bull 

sale today, the bull sales. We had the first elk sale ever in 

Saskatchewan in 1995 — very successful one in 1996. And our 

small retail business people are the most tenuous and tenacious 

anywhere. 

 

And I’ll tell you, this is the things that we have done to help 

small-business people. 

 

We’ve reduced the income tax rate for small business by 20 per 

cent since we’ve been elected. We removed the sales tax on 

1-800 numbers, 1-888 numbers. We’ve improved the tax 

treatment for Saskatchewan-based truckers so that they can do 

their job — hard-working people who work long hours for not 

that great a pay. I know because my husband, years ago, was a 

trucker. 

 

Reducing the manufacturing and processing income tax from 17 

per cent to as low as 10 per cent. We’ve done that. Reduced the 

fuel tax on aviation fuel from 7 cents to 3.5 cents. We’ve done 

that. We eliminated the sales tax on direct agents used in 

manufacturing and processing. 

 

And we’ve provided a sales tax rebate on building materials 

used for livestock and horticultural facilities. And this of course 

will really help the cattle, the pork industry, the game farming 

industry, greenhouses. It’s a great asset to the farm folks. 

 

And a 9 per cent investment tax credit on new and taxable used 

equipment for manufacturing and processing. And people might 

think, well how does that help small business? Well it does. I 

just had a small-business person last year who wanted to buy 

used equipment to set up a dry-cleaning plant and they had to 

pay the tax on it. It was a hardship. Now those kind of things 

won’t happen again. 

 

And we did listen to them and we did these things. 

 

And just before I close, because I could . . . actually now that 

I’m up here, Mr. Speaker, I could go on for another hour or so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  But I do know that other people want to get  



410  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

into the budget debate. But I will say that I want to highlight 

some of our economic highlights, and I want to read this into 

the record. Because while it isn’t enough — no, it can be more 

— I can tell you that I am proud of the things that we have been 

able to accomplish. 

 

In 1996 investors and business people were active in every 

sector and corner of the province. And you know, this isn’t just 

a statement. You cannot get a house to rent, an apartment to 

rent in Lloydminster or Maidstone, or to sell. It is just amazing 

what is going on. 

 

(1515) 

 

And here are some of the things that have happened. Retail 

sales were up 8 per cent, triple the Canadian average. New 

vehicle sales increased by 16 per cent this year . . . in 1996. 

Housing starts rose by more than 40 per cent. Business 

investment rose by 18 per cent. Crop production was up 23 per 

cent over 1995, 29 per cent above the 10-year average. 

 

And God only knows, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers would like 

to deliver this crop. That is one thing that is very frustrating for 

the farmers in my area, that they have this crop and they can’t 

deliver it. And I’d say that if the federal government and the 

railways can’t come up with some system to deliver things a 

little more efficiently, I’d say just give up the job and let 

somebody else take over federally. 

 

Manufacturing shipments increased by 10 per cent, the highest 

in Canada. Manufacturing, the highest increase in Canada. The 

number of oil wells drilled rose by 35 per cent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The real gross domestic product was up 3.3, twice the 

national average. And that just makes me laugh when I think of 

the Liberals who said they would have 8 per cent growth. There 

isn’t any place in North America that has 8 per cent growth. 

 

Saskatchewan unemployment was 6.6 per cent and remained 

the lowest in Canada. Our population is growing, Mr. Speaker, 

rising to the highest levels in eight years. 

 

Best of all, Saskatchewan families are showing renewed 

confidence, hope, and optimism. And as I have said before, 

people in my constituency are particularly happy with the 

budget. And let’s just say this is a first step. There are many 

things that need to be done. The one thing that has to be done is 

a lot of our infrastructure has to be strengthened and improved 

on. 

 

But you know, as I tell the folks, just remember — just 

remember, in Saskatchewan we are a million people spread over 

750 miles long, 350 miles across. We are not Alberta with the 

population two and half times the population in two major 

cities. We are not Manitoba where only a third of the province 

is densely populated. 

 

We are Saskatchewan, and governments of all political stripes 

have supported the notion, whether they were Liberal, PC, or 

NDP, or CCF, that if you lived in Shaunavon you got the same 

type of service as if you lived in Lac La Ronge. We have tried 

to . . . all the people have tried to do this. 

We have huge infrastructure in health, in education, in 

highways. Highways, we have 25 per cent of the highways and 

roads in Canada and 4 per cent of the population. 

 

SaskPower, SaskTel — wherever the people of this province 

embarked on, it took a huge infrastructure to accommodate it. 

Let me say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There isn’t any 

government with the debt that we had in 1991 that could have 

renewed all this infrastructure, balanced the budget, and paid 

down the debt. The numbers just wouldn’t have added up. 

 

Now we have. This is the fourth successive balanced budget. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can begin to do the things to 

rebuild our infrastructure. Remember this isn’t going to happen 

overnight; this is going to take more than one budget. But I 

want to say to the opposition and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, stay tuned, keep us in power, and we’re going to 

do the best that we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to respond to the address, the budget speech. Thank 

you also to the members opposite for allowing me to take this 

time to do that so that I can get on with some other obligations. 

 

I want to say that it is indeed a pleasure to be in this House and 

to pay tribute to the role of Mr. Speaker that he has taken on for 

himself in getting out to the communities, meeting with the 

students across Saskatchewan, launching the new cable 

television networks into rural Saskatchewan. It is indeed a time 

when we are striving to improve the communications and the 

relationships across Saskatchewan, and these new services of 

rural Saskatchewan are of paramount importance. And the 

strength of Mr. Speaker in taking the message of the importance 

of our democratic structures to the schools across our province 

is indeed a tribute to him. And I wish him well as he continues 

on that path. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is indeed an honour to have 

the opportunity to respond to the budget speech given by my 

colleague the Minister of Finance. It is an honour because it 

responds to the spirit that Saskatchewan people have shown us 

in how to face tough challenges responsibly. It’s an honour 

because the strength of Saskatchewan has been reflected in the 

last five years as we’ve come through difficult times, whether 

they were in agriculture or other parts of the economy. 

 

And Saskatchewan people have shown us . . . have given us the 

faith to continue on the road of responsible management; 

they’ve encouraged us on the way. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

give tribute to the people of Saskatchewan who have allowed us 

to today table the budget that my colleague the Minister of 

Finance tabled several days ago. 

 

I want to say that it responds to the spirit of caring that reflects 

itself across Saskatchewan, but I want to pay special tribute to 

the way in which that is reflected to us from the constituency of 

Rosetown-Biggar which I’m honoured to represent. 

 

In the last year the people in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

in four communities — and I’m speaking of four but I’m 

guessing there may even be more before I’m familiar with our 

. . . Biggar and Rosetown and Herschel and Harris; there may 

be others in the southern part of the constituency yet — who 

have taken the responsibility of giving opportunity to Bosnian 

refugees as they face the struggles that many immigrants to 

Canada have faced in other times. 

 

It is indeed the spirit of caring that is Saskatchewan that says 

we remember the times when our families were facing 

disruptions of war and hunger and brutality in parts of the world 

where many of our ancestors came from. And that caring is 

reflected back now through the community ventures that have 

opened up their communities and been enriched by the coming 

to our communities of these people from another part of the 

world where life has not been pleasant recently. 

 

So I want to say that it gives us hope and courage to continue 

on with sound government when we see the community . . . 

people at the community level working to build their 

communities. 

 

I want to also say that in the community of Milden there has 

been another demonstration of caring — the bridge point centre 

for eating disorders. There’s a group in the community of 

Milden who has been working for three years simply out of the 

commitment to do something about this devastating condition 

that afflicts mostly young women but afflicts many people in 

our province. 

 

These people have challenged the present system to do better 

than it is in helping people with eating disorders. They have 

made a partnership with an individual whose name is Denise 

Hinds, who herself has had experience with eating disorders, 

who has come to be a friend of people with eating disorders. 

And I can tell you it is a matter of pride and touching 

compassion when one sees the community holding out its heart 

and its hand and its dollars and its efforts to try to create a new 

approach to eating disorders. 

 

And I can say that those efforts, I’m convinced, will soon be 

rewarded with the launching of a new program that is a joint 

venture between Milden and the people of the bridge point 

eating disorder centre and the health district and others across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also in the community of Rosetown is the Wheatland Regional 

Centre which is the workshop where people with special needs 

do special things. This is a centre that is an example to centres 

across Saskatchewan in the innovation they have demonstrated 

in the work they do. Not only do they provide the regular 

recycling work, which helps so much in keeping our 

environment clean here in Saskatchewan, but they have taken 

the initiative to set up a driving range which becomes a 

recreational asset to the community that was not there before. 

 

They have taken over the management of the campground. 

They have taken over the management of a local mobile home 

park. They have done some gardening and some other 

horticultural work around their centre. And it is indeed a 

pleasure and an honour to have the opportunity to visit with 

these  

people who are so engaged in building the community from this 

community centre called the Wheatland Regional Centre. 

 

Some communities in my constituency are also reaching out 

beyond Saskatchewan. In the vicinity of the community of 

Lucky Lake is an aggressive group of outfitters who have 

gathered together with other outfitters in Saskatchewan to form 

the professional outfitters and tourism association. This group, 

aside from promoting tourism within their own region and 

building that part of the economy, have made an arrangement 

with the forestry and conservation branch of the People’s 

Republic of China, and have on their own brought 

representatives from there to here to establish a partnership to 

help the people in the People’s Republic of China engage their 

tourism, but also to build their clientele here from the People’s 

Republic of China. And I can only say with that kind of vision, 

how can we go wrong in Saskatchewan? 

 

In another corner of my constituency is a new guest ranch 

called the La Reata guest ranch. This is a brand-new venture 

where a Saskatchewan farmer-rancher is bringing people from 

Germany and other parts of Europe to his ranch, not to do 

anything very unusual — for us — to have them be around his 

ranch. Not to do anything very unusual for us — to have them 

be around his ranch, to have them experience the Saskatchewan 

experience, and this is an excitement to people from other parts 

of the world, to see our open prairies, to see our unspoiled 

environment. And it is a tribute to the creative minds of people 

of Saskatchewan that they see the opportunities that we have 

here to share with people in other parts of the world. 

 

In the village of Herschel from which I come, we had a school 

closure a couple of years ago. In fact I was on the local board 

when it happened. And the mayor of Herschel, who was 

honoured as a nominee in the Saskatchewan Tourism Awards 

banquet that was held on Friday night here in Regina, was 

nominated for his efforts in building on the base of that school, 

which no longer was useful for that purpose, in building a tea 

room, an interpretive centre for people to come and experience 

the natural history of the Bear Hills and the hills of the . . . 

around the Eagle Creek, to see the history of our aboriginal 

people that is reflected in the stone carvings and in the number 

of rock effigies and many other . . . medicine wheels and other 

features around those hills; in addition to seeing some of the 

very, very old history where we have in those same hills 

uncovered in recent years the skeleton of a Plesiosaur, which is 

resident in Regina now. So from this story of a community 

which was changing, these people in the village of Herschel 

have created a new growth environment. 

 

And then there are the ongoing ventures that happen. I 

mentioned, I mentioned the outfitters in the Lucky Lake region. 

Well only yesterday the Star-Phoenix featured the Lucky Lake 

region for all of the things that are going on there. In the Lucky 

Lake area, they have invested in the tourism around . . . 

ecotourism in the wetlands that are there, that have been created 

as a result of irrigation projects. They have invested in new hog 

ventures. They’ve invested in producing potatoes with 

partnerships with American partners. They’ve invested in 

growing new . . . dry beans and peas and a variety of  



412  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

agricultural products in the area. 

 

And to crown all of that, they’ve now announced the 

construction of the largest potato, table potato, processing plant 

in western Canada. This is in a little community of 400 people 

from which this kind of energy emerges. And I want to say that 

this is the kind of spirit that makes us all sit up and take notice 

and take direction. 

 

(1530) 

 

In the town of Biggar of course, there are some huge successes. 

If one wants to start on the natural environment, there is the 

history of the Hanson buck, which is the world-record 

white-tailed buck and will probably be it for some time to 

come. In the area also is the Prairie Malt plant, which is a very, 

very successful venture in international trade. And to name 

another, Advanced Ag, producing environmental tanks in the 

community of Biggar. One can go down the list of major 

enterprises and one can only say that we are indeed blessed by a 

wealth of entrepreneurial spirit and a commitment to build this 

province. 

 

Over Christmas there was a group of Junior Achievers in the 

village . . . in the town of Biggar which took on the project of 

building cribbage boards. They won an award for their cribbage 

board, the design; they received recognition for it. And again 

it’s . . . from young to mature people in our constituency, there 

is leadership. 

 

And I want to pay special tribute to the community of Beechy, 

the community of the member from . . . where the member from 

Regina South was born, that my colleague from the 

constituency of Lloydminster was speaking about earlier. 

 

This is a community that a number of years ago was the home 

of — post-war — of two examples in cooperation, with the 

Beechy co-op farm and the Matador co-op farm, the Beechy 

co-op farm being the home of the member from Regina South. 

But this is a community that has struggled with the stresses and 

strains and the joys and the pleasures of Saskatchewan life all 

its life. 

 

And you will remember that early in 1992 when we initiated 

health reform, Beechy was one of the communities that lost its 

hospital. And that is, I can tell you, always a blow to a 

community. In the community of Beechy I think there was 

something like 30 families who had relied on that hospital for 

employment. 

 

Now one could sort of roll over and give up, but that was not 

the spirit of the people of Beechy. The people of Beechy stood 

up and took notice of the world that was going around them. 

They stood up and they noticed the changes that were going on 

in agriculture and they set about to be part of that. So they are 

partners in much of what happens in that region. And one of the 

projects I didn’t mention was the fish farm on Lake 

Diefenbaker. 

 

They are into hog production. They’ve become aware of the 

opportunities in tourism and they’ve taken on a new  

community-owned motel in the town. They’ve built a new rink. 

They’ve recently renovated their school. It is indeed a very, 

very sound spirit that they have brought to their economy. 

 

But not only to their economy. They have decided that since 

health care was changing they were going to lead it, and not be 

swallowed up by the change. So in the community of Beechy 

they have now piloted, in the Midwest Health District, the idea 

of the advanced clinical nurse. And they have, I understand a 

few weeks ago, run a pilot project on Telemedicine, on 

communicating from the clinic to the place where the specialists 

are by television and computer technologies. 

 

And I can say that the community took some of the resources 

that it had and they built a new personal care home. This 

community has become in itself the model for future care for 

health. And I want to take my hat off today to Beechy for taking 

this spirit, to lead Saskatchewan when they found themselves 

faced by challenges. 

 

And this is the spirit of Saskatchewan. This is the spirit that 

helped us, when we came to government, move from the dark 

days of 1991 to the positive announcements which were able to 

flow from this budget speech only a few days ago. 

 

This is a spirit that helped us overcome our dark days when we 

watched the people of Saskatchewan putting their shoulder to 

the wheel, people across my constituency putting their shoulder 

to the wheel to engage themselves in the process of change. 

And we have achieved much as a result of this spirit that comes 

from our people across the province. 

 

I was glancing over in the post-budget tour, some of the 

highlights of our economy at this moment. I just want to reflect 

back to a few of them. 

 

Our retail sales last year were up 8 per cent, triple the Canadian 

average. Our new vehicle sales were up 16 per cent. Our 

housing starts were up 40 per cent. Our business investment 

rose by 18 per cent. 

 

Crop production was up by over 29 per cent over the 10-year 

average; manufacturing shipments, the highest increase in 

Canada, up 10 per cent; the number of oil wells drilled, up 35 

per cent; the gross domestic product up 3.3 per cent, twice the 

national average; all the time, our unemployment rate being the 

lowest in Canada. 

 

Indeed a tribute to the people from the constituency of 

Rosetown-Biggar and the people from every community across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These success stories, these attributes of our new and growing 

economy are what now allow us to engage in what we have 

called in this budget speech, the speech that the Minister of 

Finance has just introduced, to invest in Saskatchewan, to invest 

in jobs — the idea of investing in jobs across Saskatchewan but 

with special emphasis on rural Saskatchewan. The E&H tax 

reduction of 2 per cent puts $180 million back in the pockets of 

Saskatchewan people, so they can begin to reinvest in their 

community as they choose. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

But in addition to that, the special emphasis on the hog industry 

. . . Saskatchewan is the natural home for the hog industry in 

Canada. We have the agricultural land. We have the progressive 

producers. We have the technologies. And we have encouraged 

the hog industry, which is already strong and growing, by 

removing the sales tax for materials for livestock facilities and 

horticultural facilities. 

 

I want to say that I expect — because everywhere I go in 

Saskatchewan people are asking me, how do I get in touch with 

somebody who can help me into a new hog barn in my 

community — I expect that this is going to become one of the 

really large growth sectors in our economy, in our rural 

economy, which will not only build jobs there, but in all the 

service sectors around it and will strengthen our market 

intervention into the Asia Pacific area. 

 

Only today I read in a news clip that Intercontinental Packers 

has signed a supply agreement with a Taiwanese company. This 

is the beginning of the kind of outreach and the kind of jobs that 

result when a community puts its shoulder to the wheel and 

decides to build. And we’re going to be there to help them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, we also committed to invest 

in education. We are adding money to the K to 12 system. We 

are restoring funding to the post-secondary system. But I think 

the jewel in this budget on the education side is a piece that has 

not been that visible, and I expect the minister will be 

highlighting it in the days to come. 

 

But there is a jewel contained in this budget which is the labour 

training strategy for Saskatchewan. It is the labour training 

strategy which is the consequence of some creative planning by 

the Department of Post-Secondary Education with the business 

communities of Saskatchewan, with our regional colleges, with 

our technical institutes, in order to provide in rural communities 

across this province the opportunity, larger opportunities, in 

spite of the cut-backs which would have resulted in 40 per cent 

reduction in the provision of service in most of our regional 

colleges — larger opportunities for people in the communities 

to be trained for the jobs that are developing in every corner of 

this province. 

 

And I want to say how important that is, because there are 

communities across Saskatchewan who at this point cannot get 

the trained people they need to fill the spots resulting from the 

profound economic growth which is happening across the 

province. By the way, as a sidelight, neither can they find 

housing. 

 

So the opportunities in Saskatchewan to build housing, to train 

for jobs, are appearing across the board, giving our economy 

breadth and strength. And they are rooted in the sound 

education of our young people who can provide the necessary 

skills to make this economy tick in the future. 

 

We are reinvesting in social programs. And without spending a 

great deal of time on that, I just think that Saskatchewan people 

should be proud that we received national recognition for our  

involvement with the child action plan, for the community 

partnership which puts everybody’s efforts together in making 

children the centre of attention at a time when like never before, 

they need our help. 

 

In health, others have spoken about the transition in health, and 

I’ve spoken about the community of Beechy. And I think that’s 

almost enough said, except to say that the strength of 

Saskatchewan people’s work has allowed us to put almost $57 

million additional into this year’s budget so health districts 

across Saskatchewan can provide better service, so they can 

continue in their visionary leadership of changing the health 

care system to meet the needs of the 21st century. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say that I wish them well and wish them 

continued blessing as they continue to work with their 

communities to be the world leaders in health care delivery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Now we are also allowed by the 

circumstances to invest in transportation. And I want to say that 

there is a large area of policy that we are quickly finding 

ourselves alone on in western Canada with the withdrawal of 

the federal government from the strong, strong support that in 

the past we have expected. We have seen the erosion of federal 

support for the transportation system. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that is shameful. 

 

I think when you look at the importance of Saskatchewan’s 

resources to Canada and to the world, that we do not have a 

transportation policy nationally which would guarantee that 

these resources can get to the rest of the world without farmers 

getting their product basically valueless by the time they get to 

the market, is a shame on the national Government of Canada. 

 

It is the only country in the western world where there isn’t a 

national transportation policy. And I think we need to continue 

to pressure the federal government to reverse its short-sighted 

policies with respect to the removal of the supports that are 

there for a national transportation policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will do the best we can with our partners in 

Saskatchewan, with our municipalities, with the companies that 

are doing business. But that will be an effort which is hindered 

by the absence of federal support if the federal government does 

not come to the table. 

 

While I’m talking about transportation and the importance of 

the agricultural sector, of the transportation and agricultural 

sector, I want to just put on record my disappointment that 

nowhere in this House, other than on the government side of the 

House, is there support for the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

We should be delighted that today two out of three farmers in 

western Canada, which includes Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 

Manitoba, all three provinces, have said the Canadian Wheat 

Board is an important business tool to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the people of Alberta and to the people of 

Manitoba. We should be delighted. 

 

What do we see from the members opposite? Now maybe the  



414  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Liberals, being relatively new in opposition, are still 

contemplating their position. I hope not. I hope that they . . . 

This ought to be as automatic as the sun coming up in 

Saskatchewan. The Wheat Board, as an agency that provides 

financial benefit and orderly marketing for our products into the 

international market, is a proven fact. And I encourage the 

provincial Liberals to take the stand which is solidly behind the 

Wheat Board, solidly in support of the farmers who know that’s 

true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  And I am appalled that members from 

rural Saskatchewan who sit in the Conservative benches here in 

the House would dare to oppose the Canadian Wheat Board. It 

is shameful. I can say it’s shameful that members of the 

Conservative caucus here don’t know enough in 1997 to know 

that good business means orderly marketing, pooling your 

strengths in a market-place where others already have pooled 

their strengths. That is a business principle that is as old as time. 

And it’s not surprising that this caucus, coming from a caucus 

that had no business principles, should also understand no 

business principles. But it still appals me that that should be the 

case. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t call them any names, Berny. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — I won’t call them any names. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me again say that we are privileged to 

live in a province where our people, with their community 

spirit, with their knowledge of how things really work — 

Canadian Wheat Board, common transportation policies, 

cooperation that we have here — and I speak now again about 

my constituency. 

 

In my constituency an organization called the west central local 

government association, wile everybody’s been talking about 

reorganization of government, the people in the west central 

Saskatchewan have been doing something about it. And they 

have formed alliances between the urban and rural 

municipalities to make plans for the future. 

 

This is an area that goes from Lloydminster to Davidson to 

Leader. It’s a huge area of the province. And these people sit 

down and they plan and they challenge government; and they 

plan some more, and they work in cooperation with us. 

 

(1545) 

 

Recently they released a study called the west central local 

government association’s transportation plan for that region. 

They identify the traffic patterns resulting from all these new 

things going on in the economy. They identify where those road 

impacts will be. And they’ve committed themselves to working 

in partnership with our Department of Highways, using their 

resources and our resources to meet the transportation 

challenges of the future in the absence of federal support. 

 

I can say that this is the spirit that will see Saskatchewan 

through some of these challenges we’ve not yet completely  

faced. And I want to say that we commit ourselves to those 

local governments to work with them in achieving these things 

for the future. 

 

I want to say that one of the other aspects of Saskatchewan life 

which reflects on the spirit of cooperation is an area that falls 

under my responsibility, which is the Crown corporations. 

 

The Crown corporations have a history in Saskatchewan of 

which we should all be proud. We have presently today in 

Saskatchewan a $7.7 billion asset, which is the collection of 

Crown corporations and public assets, that is the result of the 

forward-thinking of people from many years in the past. The 

forward-thinking of people who knew that the private sector in 

this province, over the years, would not provide the services 

required to the communities in order to make this economy 

work and thrive as it has. 

 

So they committed themselves together to doing the things that 

they could not do alone, and through the Crown corporations 

they provided telephone and power and natural service from 

one corner of the province to the other. 

 

They provided government-owned insurance for automobiles 

and for general insurance. They provided a transportation 

company where others would not. I want to say that that’s our 

history — that’s the strength. 

 

And in the ’70s, Crown corporations in the resource sector were 

created, and in the ’80s those Crown corporations disappeared 

with a lot of Saskatchewan people’s money disappearing along 

with them. But that’s the fate of history and politics and we 

won’t address that at length here today. 

 

But I can say that Saskatchewan people have continuously 

committed themselves to doing things together because we do it 

better that way than when we do it apart. And the Crown 

corporations are a reflection of that. 

 

Our Crown corporations today are facing a new era. They’re 

facing a new era where we have free trade between nations. We 

have lifted the restrictions on internal trade within Canada. We 

see deregulation and global marketing. And our Crown 

corporations, I can tell you, are — and this is vouched for by 

studies by consultants from all of the areas of expertise that are 

needed in order to make this analysis — our Crown 

corporations are well fit to face that future challenge. 

 

But they will have to be prepared to change in order to continue 

to respond to the needs of Saskatchewan people. And I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that our Crown corporations are prepared to 

do that in partnership with the Crown Investments Corporation 

and the people of Saskatchewan to address the needs of our 

community in the ‘90s and into the next century. 

 

And I want to say to the public that I encourage them to 

continue to work with us and advise us, to help us respond with 

their assets to their needs so that we, the province of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, with the assets 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan, can build this future to 

be as positive a future as the experience that we have had as  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

people of this province who’ve had the opportunity to live and 

grow up here in this province. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that because I believe in that spirit 

of cooperation, because I know that the people of Saskatchewan 

believe in that spirit of cooperation, and because this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, reflects that new approach to partnership and 

some financial freedom — not infinite, but some financial 

freedom — that we are on the verge of exciting times in 

Saskatchewan, where the Saskatchewan community will 

continue to be shaped by compassion and cooperation and 

working together in partnership to build the communities that 

we all value. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I support this 

budget. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad 

to get the opportunity to be able to address the budget. But just 

before I do, I would like to apologize and thank the member for 

Lloydminster for straightening me out a little bit here today on 

my impression of what a back-bencher really represents and 

what they really do. Someone, when I first got elected about a 

year and a half, told me that the best job in the great halls here 

is to be a back-bencher on the government side. And I’ve seen 

nothing to change my mind on that to this point, because I 

didn’t realize all the work they really do. 

 

So I just want to take a minute to apologize to the member, and 

I want to thank her for straightening me out because I would 

have gone to my grave thinking that, had she not straightened 

me out. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to commend the Minister of 

Finance for the 2 per cent PST reduction. To me that is the first 

step in the right direction. Finally I think that she has realized 

that high taxes in this province are slowing business, they’re 

stopping job creation, and they’re one of the big cruxes holding 

this province back. 

 

Now having said that, I think we must remember though, of 

course, that we are still paying $790 million more in taxes than 

when that government came to power in ’91. All our utility 

rates have had increases. And really all we’re using our Crowns 

for — that the previous speaker spoke on — is another form of 

taxation. 

 

Our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, if used properly, have a very good 

benefit to be Crowns. But they do have a benefit if all they are 

used for is a tax tool and we lose the benefit that we had at one 

point for having these Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care, we were told, received $51 million in 

this budget, and I take exception to that because I believe earlier 

this year 40 million of that 51 was put in to counteract all the 

mistakes in the system that had built up to this point with 

reform. So really all the new money we see here is $11 million. 

That will not even address the deficits that the health boards are 

carrying. 

Mr. Speaker, there are many problems within the health care 

reform and the health care system yet. There are long 

waiting-lists for acute care. And I’d like to touch on a problem 

that I had brought to the attention of the minister this last week, 

and that’s dialysis. And the $11 million I would hope somehow 

a little bit would get to address that problem that we spoke on. 

Because in a situation like the East Central Health District has 

and the hospital in Yorkton, that if a machine is there or in 

Saskatoon with their name on, it really doesn’t matter. There is 

no capital outlay to have this dialysis machine put in place. All 

we are lacking is funding for someone to operate it. 

 

And when I have, and many others within here, both on the 

government side and on the opposition side, have people 

driving, in some cases in my area, 600 kilometres three times a 

week, either that’s into Regina or into Saskatoon for dialysis 

treatment, is very, very expensive and time-consuming for these 

people. 

 

The one lady that I talked to last week said their whole life 

revolves around her husband’s treatments. And you can see 

why, because if three times a week you’re driving from 

Churchbridge to Regina, Kamsack to Regina, there is no time 

left to live. And these in many cases are seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  This is completely a ridiculous situation 

and one that has to be addressed. It cannot be overlooked, and I 

would hope that the minister would give that serious 

consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, another problem within our 

health care systems — and many of us have seen it in rural 

Saskatchewan — is that if you go to an emergency room at 

night for any problem you may have, it’s nothing to sit there 

three or four hours. I am totally amazed when I come into 

Regina here in the wintertime and if you have a reason to go to 

a doctor in one of the medi clinics here, quite often within 10, 

15 minutes you can talk to the doctor, have a prescription, and 

be on your way. 

 

That doesn’t happen out in rural Saskatchewan and I can 

understand why the people in Regina and Saskatoon and the 

bigger centres sometimes feel that we are fear mongering by 

saying that health care in rural Saskatchewan is inadequate. But 

I can see why, by the service I had in here, it would be easier 

for even them to have that understanding of it. It is not the same 

in here as it is out there. And it is far from perfect in here — 

don’t get me wrong. 

 

I have the case where a constituent, Mr. Speaker, had the 

misfortune of her husband passing away, had the funeral, got 

home, and received a tremendous bill for medication when she 

got home. 

 

So I don’t think the members opposite have to look at us and 

holler about a two-tier health system because with things like 

this happening, everything is not rosy in the health care system  



416  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

as they let on. 

 

An Hon. Member:  That’s a no tier system. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  That’s right. 

 

I’d like to touch on education for a minute, Mr. Speaker, and 

the $7 million that we are being told that is being put in 

education. And we all know that that doesn’t anymore than 

address the increase that teachers had last year that the 

government stepped in and negotiated with teachers. And I’m 

not saying that teachers shouldn’t have had a raise, but this 

increase does no more than fund that . . . And it goes back to 

last year — that this was created for school divisions to handle. 

 

We must go back to ’91 since the cutting started in education. 

And I believe to this point, this government has cut $60 million 

from education. So $7 million is actually a drop in the bucket. It 

is a start in the right direction, but we have a long, long way to 

go — $7 million will not address the five school closures I have 

in my constituency; $7 million will not address the four school 

closures my counterpart from Kelvington-Wadena has. These 

schools are still going to close and there’s many more in rural 

Saskatchewan slated for the same future. 

 

Our teachers are becoming overloaded with a larger number of 

pupils in the classrooms. The students are rising . . . riding 

farther and farther everyday on buses due to the school closures. 

And with inflation, school divisions are finding it harder and 

harder to make ends meet with the downloading that has 

happened from this government. 

 

I would like to talk on one of the subjects that’s near and dear to 

my heart, Mr. Speaker, and it’s municipal government of all 

kinds — urban, rural . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Who would have thought? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  And that’s right, who would have thought? 

Because who in this province has been dumped on as bad as 

municipal governments? The same people that have kept their 

houses in order out there, have not deficit financed, and now 

those same people are being punished by the government 

opposite for keeping their house in order because they are easy 

targets. 

 

The perception over there is let’s dump on these people because 

they’ve kept their house in order; they can pass it on. And pass 

it on they are going to do because their mill rates are going to 

have to start to jump, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reassessment issue, Mr. Speaker — although it had to be 

done and was 30 years since the last main reassessment — has 

created many problems for municipal governments and for the 

local taxpayer. 

 

The problem I see, Mr. Speaker, was the same as actually with 

health reform. Let’s jump in, create health reform, and find out 

what mistakes we made later and look at the mistakes. We see 

many and far afield and now we’re trying to address them. And 

we have made the same mistake all over again with  

reassessment because we have brought it in without knowing 

how the rules were going to be applied — what rules were 

good, what rules were bad. And municipalities don’t even know 

all the rules yet. 

 

If we’d a took our time, give the municipalities a year to look at 

the tools they had, they could have told the government and 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), let’s 

change this, let’s add this, let’s delete that, and we could have 

done away with much, much of the confusion that’s out there 

and the distortion in the shifts in taxes that’s happening out 

there. 

 

We have caused frustration in every end of the province. This 

isn’t a rural issue. It’s not an urban issue. It’s a Saskatchewan 

issue. 

 

The education shift is just another part of this, Mr. Speaker. To 

start with when the 70 per cent was put on to use, it left a shift 

in education tax that went to the rural taxpayer. It should have 

been 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and it would have been much 

closer. And this goes back to what I said if we’d a took our time 

we would have realized this. 

 

So to address the problem, the Minister of Education and the 

Minister of Municipal Government have come up with this 

concoction of .84 factor. So what have we got now? We’ve not 

only got mad farmers out there, we’ve got mad urbanites 

because we took part of that education shift, dumped it back on 

the urban so that anybody with a new house whose taxes have 

already skyrocketed, we’re saying to them, whoops, we’re not 

finished, here; here’s a little more education tax. 

 

By hurrying into this, we have created a monster once again. 

We’ve got it in health care; now we’ve got it with reassessment. 

 

We have to remember too that this is the same government that 

in the last session backed off on the service district Act from a 

lot of pressure from a lot of places. But what that was to do was 

to force municipalities to amalgamate. Well now what we have, 

Mr. Speaker, is urban governments and rural governments in 

many areas barely speaking, let alone sharing services. 

 

(1600) 

 

So we’ve gone from trying to force them to share services to 

saying to them through the memorandum of understanding, let’s 

talk and start to share services. And they thought that was a 

good idea. 

 

But now we’ve created another monster that has said this isn’t 

going to happen in the near future because we’re mad as hell 

about what you’re doing and they’re mad about what we’re 

doing. The worst thing we could have done is cause dissension 

between the different levels of government out there when we 

need them to share. I agree — it’s a great idea. If there’s money 

to be saved, we should be doing it. 

 

I’d like to touch on, too, another problem created by the 

government and that’s part of the downloading that we’ve had 

since ’91. In many cases, municipalities have been cut up to 50  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

per cent of the revenue sharing to this point. Now we’re going 

to cut another 25 . . . Oh, no, no; it’s up now again. It’s not 20 

million — it’s 29. So now it’s another 30 per cent we’re going 

to cut municipalities out there. 

 

We took the $17.6 million health levy and instead of picking 

that up when the province is doing better, we said, well no, 

what we’re going to do with that is we’ll take it off but we’ll 

deduct it from the revenue-sharing pool. So municipalities 

really gained out of something that was really supposed to be 

temporary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the infrastructure money that the minister 

announced today jointly with the federal government — they’re 

great programs. We’re need more of this. We need more money 

from the federal government so that the province can back up 

their talk and put in their share. The problem being with the 

infrastructure program is the downloading from this 

government on municipalities. Many municipalities that are in 

need the most cannot afford to put in their share so cannot 

afford to take advantage of this program. 

 

I’ve noticed in the Estimates for the budget too — and I find 

this a little bit actually hilarious because this is the government 

across that continuously bashes the feds — and in the Estimates 

it says that this government is going to spend $23 million plus 

for the infrastructure program. But when you get looking into 

that, part of that money is $11 million of federal money. 

 

So when the benefit comes along from the federal government, 

we are right there to slip it into our numbers and say, well look 

at us — $23 million. But no, no, no, no. It’s actually 11 million 

from the feds and 11 million from the province. So let’s get our 

numbers straight. 

 

I think what that shows, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

across are masters of deception. We see it more and more every 

day. Distort the numbers, don’t tell the whole truth, and let the 

public be deceived into believing what a good government we 

have here. 

 

I’d like to touch on the member for Regina Victoria in his 

beautiful oratory yesterday that seemed . . . well it seemed, Mr. 

Speaker, like it would go on for ever, but it didn’t. But I find it 

a little bit hypocritical on his part to be condoning what the 

government is doing, being that he’s a past alderman from the 

city of Regina. I would wonder if his counterparts on council 

here are quite as happy here as he is with the budget and 

reassessment and all the other things that are probably going to 

keep about three-quarters of these people from being re-elected 

again. I don’t think they share in his enthusiasm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also would like to touch on highways where the 

Finance minister said we’re going to put $30 million in, and I 

appreciate that because highways are one of the main areas in 

this province that definitely need an injection of money. I might 

add that now I know where the $29 million that we cut from 

municipal government is going. We’re putting it into highways, 

plus the extra million dollars. 

 

One thing we should note with the highways: that we still are  

not putting up to 40 per cent of the gas tax back into our 

highways. And I find that shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of highways 

that I could spend — out in my area — the $30 million in one 

constituency. I‘ve got No. 80, No. 8, 15, 9, 22; the list goes on 

and on and on. 

 

Should you try on any day — and worse in the spring — drive 

from Kamsack to Churchbridge to Spy Hill, or a short piece of 

road from Atwater to 22 — I could just keep listing them, Mr. 

Speaker — you take your life in your hands and you could 

wreck your vehicle on any given day. 

 

Now with spring thaw coming, we’re going to be back to where 

we were last year. And the potholes are just about . . . Well I 

can’t even count how many per mile there is out there, but our 

pothole patrol are phoning us and telling us every day about the 

bad situation. And it’s only going to get worse. So the 30 

million is appreciated; 300 would have probably been much 

closer to what we needed. 

 

Jobs, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to touch on for a minute 

because of this government’s dismal, dismal record. We have 

heard before and I would like to compare again, the province of 

Alberta in 1996, 31,000 jobs created; Manitoba, 24,000 jobs; 

Saskatchewan, a puny 1,000 jobs. 

 

The overall interest rate is down — that probably created some 

jobs in itself. The oil and gas industry is booming — that 

created some jobs. So the government’s good planning on that 

side actually probably lost jobs. It couldn’t have created any 

because we only had a thousand. Now since the end of ’96, 

Manitoba has created another 20,800 jobs, and we’re at 7,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that we are falling behind 

consistently in job creation. So I think someone on that side, 

whether it’s the Minister of Economic Development, should go 

out and take another look at the plans he’s got for job creation, 

because they’re not only dismal but they’re failing. 

 

I’d like to just touch on, Mr. Speaker, the thing on Statistics 

Canada that shows that industry money that was invested from 

1996 shows Manitoba had an investment increase of 75 per 

cent; Alberta had an investment increase in manufacturing 

money from the private and public sector of 6 per cent; and 

from ’91 to ‘96, Saskatchewan lost 82 per cent of what we had 

at that point. 

 

So once again it shows the dismal record of this government on 

job creation and bringing investment into this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been slammed on this side for our federal 

cousins and the Crow money and the money we lost, and I 

agree with them. As a farmer, the Crow money loss hurt me 

deeply, and it’s still hurting me. Every time I pick a grain 

cheque up and I see what my handling charges are and my 

freight charges, it makes me furious, along with every other 

farmer out there. 

 

But the Crow money, the Crow is gone and I can’t help it and  



418  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

the other farmers can’t help it. But maybe it’s time we quit 

using our blinders here and turned that into an advantage and an 

opportunity. Because it is an opportunity. It is the greatest 

opportunity this province has ever seen. Let’s create jobs in this 

province to do with agriculture and bring our kids back from 

Alberta, B.C. (British Columbia), Ontario, to work in our 

province, instead of sitting here and blaming the federal 

government 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have 

said before that the government across has forgot about 

agriculture in this province, and I think the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) fiasco was the first indication of that, and 

there’s been many since then. 

 

I have noticed in this budget that that hasn’t quit, because 

through the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) money, 

farm income stability, we have cut another $55 million from our 

agriculture budget in this province for 1997. It’s very close to 

the point that we will be putting no money into agriculture in 

this province. 

 

So priority for agriculture, I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. And I 

have heard on that side many times that agriculture is the 

backbone of this province. I agree with that statement. Well 

let’s start putting our money where our mouth is and put 

something into the programs, to find a stabilization and help the 

federal government, in this case — in case of a rainy day — 

find some kind of a stabilization program that’s going to help 

and not all the money be ate up by administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  One other area I’d like to touch on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and it was regional parks. And I happen to 

have one at the town of Saltcoats, and have sat for three years 

now waiting for an agreement with the regional park authority, 

and they kept being told, well we’re coming up with something 

new, we’re coming up with something new. Well they did. 

Funding dropped for regional parks from $219,000 to $75,000. 

So there’s the something new for all the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan that were waiting for new contracts. You just 

got used to no funding for three years so it’s a good thing 

because now you’re going to get nothing. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the reasons I give, I cannot support 

this budget. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Good afternoon. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to . . . or 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take this opportunity to enter into the 

budget speech debate. 

 

I want to take a moment first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to first of all 

recognize a number of people who are in around the Legislative 

Assembly this year back at the session. 

 

I first want to take this moment to recognize the pages that are 

back, Mr. Speaker —this is my first opportunity to speak and  

want to welcome them here. 

 

I also want to take this occasion to welcome the member here 

from North Battleford. I know that in the last couple of weeks 

I’ve watched him in his performance here in the House, and 

certainly as a very credible member, I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, to this Assembly, and know that he has added a 

tremendous amount of stability, I would suggest, to the Liberal 

caucus upon his arrival. I would wish him well over the next 

couple of years and expect that we’ll have somebody on this 

side of the House representing that constituency, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, after the next election. 

 

I also want, at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to recognize the 

work of the new deputy . . . or the new Leader of the 

Opposition, who hails from our part of the world, and to 

recognize the fact that he’s in a tough position being second to 

the person who calls the shots in this province. 

 

And I’m reminded a little bit, Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of a comment that he made about health boards and 

called them puppets. And I think, Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded 

that puppets are really stuffed sort of animals that are at the end 

of a string, and I would view the new Leader of the Opposition 

now as being the person who dangles at the end of the string of 

the new leader, who is now Mr. Melenchuk from Saskatoon. 

 

I want to also at this time, also extend my appreciation to the 

work that Mr. Speaker is doing around the province, as I know 

that he’s been out to many of the schools around Saskatchewan 

talking about the democratic process, talking and speaking 

about the value of this Assembly, the work of this Assembly, 

enhancing the role of political leaders across this province and 

their work. And I want to take this occasion to recognize the 

work of the Speaker in his new role across the province. 

 

I want to also thank the constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

Yorkton. Any occasion that I get to speak about our 

constituency, I always talk about it as being the third largest 

trading centre in Saskatchewan and want to remind members of 

this Assembly and across the province that Yorkton still is the 

third largest trading centre in the province, followed only by 

those two other larger cities in the province. I forget — memory 

escapes me, Mr. Speaker — which they really are . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . They may be Estevan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to indicate that in the last couple of years we have 

seen significant growth in our part of east-central 

Saskatchewan, continue to see the farm machinery 

manufacturing prospering there in that of the Morris rod weeder 

company and the Leon’s manufacturing. I want to pay a special 

tribute this afternoon to the work of Mr. Propp and his meat 

processing, Propp’s meat processing out of Yorkton, which are 

now serving parts of the United States based on the tremendous 

marketing abilities and skills and value added that he’s 

providing on behalf of our province. 

 

Also want to recognize the work of people within our health 

centres, our regional offices, because we have all of the 

provincial regional offices in our community, and without a 

doubt the tremendous work that’s being done by a retail sale  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

community, which currently are prospering under the 

conditions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had the opening of the 

business resource centre in our community, which is a 

compilation of a number of municipalities that have come 

together and developed a REDA (regional economic 

development authority). This new business enterprise centre is 

creating an environment for many, many small businesses, 

which are in the process of course of educating, training, 

developing entrepreneurial skills for new business leaders in 

Saskatchewan and will find them setting up their establishments 

not only in our constituency but in various parts of the province 

in the near future. 

 

(1615) 

 

Recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a new tourism chamber 

office in our community. And to demonstrate the kinds of 

confidence that investment and business have in this province, 

we’ve just seen the announcement and recent growth in 

development of the ConAgra, who have just spent $10 million 

in our community putting up a new inland grain high 

through-put facility. This will create somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of about 80 jobs over the next year, and at the 

same time will provide new opportunities for long-term value 

added in our area. 

 

I also want to recognize the work of a new company, that of the 

Image wireless cable, which I talked about just a couple of days 

ago. They have just established a new wireless cable facility in 

our city. They will employ somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

30 to 35 jobs, will be providing a new technology throughout 

this province, which is another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 

kind of confidence that Saskatchewan business has in our 

province. 

 

What’s significantly important for me today, Mr. Speaker, is 

that I’m pleased to see the kind of development and growth that 

we have in Saskatchewan and the distance that we’ve come in 

just five short years in this province. And my colleagues who 

have spoken before me, and I know that my Liberal friends 

across the way, have alluded to this from time to time, that we 

have now in the province some of the most prosperous retailers. 

Retail sales are up here in Saskatchewan significantly. 

 

We have a number of new vehicle dealerships in our province, 

in our city. They tell me in a recent discussion that I’ve had 

with them that their sales are up by over 16 per cent, are busy 

looking at providing new vehicles in the future for those of us 

who may need them in our business and certainly within our 

operations. Housing starts are up in this province. And certainly 

I can go on talking about all of the good, positive things that are 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

But more important than that, Mr. Speaker, is today I have the 

opportunity to participate in a budget debate that demonstrates 

what happens in a province, what happens in a community like 

Saskatchewan, when people make a decision that they’re going 

to work together in partnership, in cooperation, they’re going to 

make some sacrifices. And through the efforts of a great deal of  

compassion and energy we have today, Mr. Speaker, a budget 

that I am extremely proud to be a part of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I can remember, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 

when we first took government and as a private member who 

sat in the back benches, as was described earlier by the member 

from Saltcoats . . . what a definition of a back-bencher might 

be. And as he was speaking I jotted down just a short note of 

what I think a Liberal back-bencher might be, like the member 

from Saltcoats. It seems to me that a back-bencher like the 

member from Saltcoats would be a member who begins his 

political career behind the leader but never moves, while his 

colleague moves in front of him. 

 

And there’s I guess the previous House Leader, who’s moved 

so far to the right I think he’s sitting back in his constituency in 

Wood River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to pay a special tribute to our 

Premier who had a vision about Saskatchewan in 1991; who 

said that we could reconstruct this province with the kinds of 

commitment and effort of Saskatchewan people. And around 

him in 1991 he assembled a group of cabinet ministers and a 

team of caucus colleagues who said that we could reach a level 

in Saskatchewan that would again make this province leaders. 

 

And with the help of able people like the member from Regina 

Dewdney, and certainly our current member the Finance 

minister from Saskatoon Idylwyld, and the efforts of all 

Saskatchewan people, we’ve been able to construct a budget 

that provides tremendous initiatives and incentives for us as we 

move into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  And recently, Mr. Speaker, I was at a 

meeting at my constituency as late as yesterday, which the 

Deputy Premier attended with me. We had somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 125 people who were there — who were all 

chamber of commerce types — who said to us that we have 

finally provided a budget for Saskatchewan people that is 

strong, that continues to enhance the future direction of this 

province, and that people are proud of. 

 

Recently I attended the brokers’ convention in Saskatoon where 

there were over a thousand people, Mr. Speaker, and they said 

to me that they were in disbelief that the government of the day 

would bring in again another balanced budget, and would also 

reduce the taxes at a time when we were mid-term within our 

budgets. 

 

This speaks, Mr. Speaker, to the kinds of conviction that this 

government has had to the people of Saskatchewan, the kind of 

a trust that we have demonstrated throughout the course of the 

last five years. 

 

I was interested, Mr. Speaker, in a few of the comments that 

were made earlier today, and I want to reiterate the themes that 

are important, I think, in this budget. 



420  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

We’ve talked about making sure that we provide opportunities 

for young people in this province through the job initiatives that 

we have, and I’ve demonstrated and indicated just a couple of 

things that are happening in my constituency that provide 

opportunities for young people in Saskatchewan into the future. 

But what’s most important and gratifying for those of us who sit 

on this side of the House, and those of us who are New 

Democrats across this province, recognize the fact that we’re 

again giving something back to Saskatchewan people, building 

on the social programs, education, and health, and highways. 

And certainly making sure that into the future, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t see any of the financial difficulties that this province had 

endured throughout the reign of the Tory years. 

 

In respect to the health care budget that we have in this 

province, certainly on many times over we’ve heard the 

members opposite talk about the fact that health care in this 

province has seen reduced levels of funding, which couldn’t be 

further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. Throughout the course of 

the last five years, this government hasn’t reduced one penny in 

the health budget in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve back-filled the entire $112 million that we lost 

from the federal government over the last year. Every penny of 

that, Mr. Speaker, we put back, back-filled it all. 

 

The other, Mr. Speaker, is that we talked about and I heard 

earlier today, the member from Saltcoats talking about the fact 

that a number of the hospitals in Saskatchewan were converted 

and that people were not happy with that process. I don’t 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve ever heard people say in this 

province that they don’t understand the fact that we needed to 

convert hospitals in this province, the fact that we had too many 

of those facilities that were underutilized. 

 

We all know that, and people in rural Saskatchewan and urban 

Saskatchewan know that. What’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we see today a Liberal Party that talks about redoing or 

reconstructing the health delivery system in this province. I 

heard the member from Canora talk about, as I mentioned 

earlier, the fact that we have puppets who sit as board members 

on district health boards around the province. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I have on my health board 

in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, East Central Health District, the 

mayor of the city. The mayor of our city sits on our district 

health board. He was elected by a huge majority at the last 

municipal election, and I expect if he runs again, Mr. Speaker, 

will get re-elected again. And he serves on our district health 

board as a major participant and decision maker and policy 

maker on the direction of health care. This individual, Mr. 

Speaker, would be offended, would be offended to learn that he 

is recognized by the party opposite of the Liberals as being a 

puppet. 

 

I have sitting on my district health board, Mr. Speaker, an 

individual who sits on the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association. She’s been elected now for the second time to the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association board of directors 

and also serves in various capacities around the community. 

She’s also the chairperson of the district health board. Mr. 

Speaker, this person would also be offended gravely to learn  

that she would be viewed as a puppet by the Liberal Party. 

 

I’m pleased this year again, Mr. Speaker, that we’re able to 

provide some additional revenues to the district health boards, 

and the $51 million that goes into the district health boards 

across the province will be a tremendous injection to help them 

with the work that they’re doing in facilitating quality health 

care around the province. 

 

The importance of the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), Mr. 

Speaker. I know that on the east side of the province and 

certainly the south-east side of the province, making your way 

to Saskatoon for an MRI is a long trip on many occasions. 

 

The announcement in the budget to have a new MRI in Regina 

will certainly facilitate and more expedite the kinds of services 

that are required for our people on east-central, south side of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m very excited, Mr. Speaker, about the 

announcement that we made in October . . . or of November of 

last year when we introduced to the province a brand-new air 

ambulance. The air ambulance service, Mr. Speaker, falls 

within the responsibilities that I hold as the minister responsible 

for Saskatchewan Property Management. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  This new aircraft, Mr. Speaker, will 

provide tremendous enhanced services to those of us in rural 

Saskatchewan, will be able to provide quick access emergency 

services. This aircraft will be able to land on any airstrip that we 

have in this province, will be able to take those people to the 

major centres, base centres in Regina and Saskatoon and 

provide excellent transportation service for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I was interested in the member from 

Saltcoats comment a couple of days ago where he talked about 

strength . . . the role of the regional health care . . . regional 

hospitals in Saskatchewan. And I was pleased to hear him state 

that, Mr. Speaker. And he was talking about the need for a 

dialysis machine in the regional hospital of Yorkton. And it’s 

that kind of support that is important for those of us who are in 

regional centres to ensure that that happens. 

 

Unlike, which surprised me a little bit, Mr. Speaker, of the work 

that was done by the member from Canora about a year ago, or 

last fall, where you had a buzz of activity in the communities 

that he represents where they talked about the concern about the 

growth of regional hospitals and the value of regional hospitals, 

and the fact that regional hospitals were taking away from the 

services that they provide at the local level. 

 

And I think that the member from Saltcoats and the member 

from Canora need to get together and work at ensuring that 

regional hospitals in this province are sustained and built, and 

we ensure quality care services as opposed to taking them apart. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

And I was interested of course in the comments of the new 

Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Melenchuk, who talked about 

the need to consolidate even further the health care services in 

this province. And if that were to be the case, as he puts it, Mr. 

Speaker, which is the Australian model, we’ll find little value or 

need for regional hospitals in this province. And I would 

suggest that we need to work closer to ensure that we have 

strong regional health care centres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’m disappointed as I review some of the 

relationships that exist between the federal Liberals and the 

provincial Liberals, Mr. Speaker. The $112 million of revenue 

sharing in this province that disappeared last year. 

 

And what do we hear from the Liberal members opposite? That 

really it didn’t happen; that this is some sort of mirage; that it 

isn’t real. And they don’t support the provincial government in 

their efforts to try to secure and back-fill the entire $112 

million, as we did for health and social services and education. 

 

Well we talked about the Crow loss here, the Crow rate, the 

Crow loss in Saskatchewan. And I was pleased to hear the 

member from Saltcoats today say that he didn’t support that, as 

an individual farmer, producer, didn’t support that. And neither 

do I as an individual farmer, producer in that part of the world, 

because it’s included, it’s included tremendous freight rate costs 

on my commodities that I ship from my farm today. 

 

But what does the Liberal Party say about the Crow rate? Mr. 

Speaker, they were silent on the Crow rate. They were silent on 

the Crow rate. And what about the national highways program 

that we talked about before and the need for a national 

highways program in this province? Not much support from the 

Liberal Party across on ensuring that we have a national 

highway program. 

 

And most disappointing, Mr. Speaker, of course, is the child 

benefit program. What’s happened here is that the federal 

Liberals have adopted the Saskatchewan package in principle 

but they haven’t put any money into it. And what’s happened of 

course, Mr. Speaker, is that for the last couple of years the 

member from Eastview I believe, who was the previous 

minister of Social Services, began some of this work and now 

being piloted by the member from Wakamow. And we’ll have 

soon in this province, with the new budget that we’ve just 

delivered, an additional child benefit program that will assist us 

to deal with poverty and poor kids, and have the action plan 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1630) 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, we witnessed again the Liberal Party, 

when it came to the barley vote, no support from the Liberal 

Party as it relates to the Canadian Wheat Board. And certainly 

no comment today, no comment today on the barley vote. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party opposite, in my 

opinion, is so far under the covers with the federal Liberals that 

all that’s visible here, in my opinion, is a group of lumps. Just a  

group of lumps, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that in the last couple of 

months we’ve been approached, we’ve been approached by the 

federal Liberal government who said to us that, we’re 

abandoning Saskatchewan by and large; we’re moving out of 

Saskatchewan. And you see it in a number of areas, as I’ve 

outlined. 

 

They’ve also reduced a number of the human service centres 

around the province. Unemployment insurance offices have 

been reduced in staff. They’ve cut post offices in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. But then they come to the provincial government 

and they say, we want to partner up with you so that you might 

be able to manage our property management . . . our properties 

that we own here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so they’ve come to us as the sole source, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ve taken on the responsibility of managing the properties for 

the federal government in this province because they had 

confidence in the work that we do at Saskatchewan Property 

Management. And as a result of that, through our intervention 

we’ve been able to save jobs in this province and we’ve been 

able to generate a greater degree of supply for the federal 

government — partnership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I was interested yesterday in listening or reading to a 

comment that was made, I believe by my member . . . by the 

member from Melville, who talked a little bit about the role of 

Mr. Goodale in 1996. And I’m not sure where the member from 

Melville had received this information from or whether it had 

just been whispered to him by one of his other colleagues. But 

he talks here about the only person recognizing in 1986 the fact 

that we had a deficit problem alerting here in Saskatchewan . . . 

emerging, was Mr. Goodale. Well I know that throughout the 

course of . . . throughout the course from 1996 to ’91, NDP 

members of the opposition strongly criticized the Devine 

government of the kinds of expenditures that they were making 

in this province. 

 

And of course what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, today, after the 

kinds of perseverance and the commitment and the sacrifice and 

the cooperation and the partnership that Saskatchewan people 

have taken on, we’ve accomplished three major tasks, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s been led by our Premier and our Finance 

ministers. 

 

And we are, Mr. Speaker, the first province ever to bring a 

balanced budget to this country —the first province ever to 

bring a balanced budget. We’re the first province to reduce the 

debt in Canada, the very first province. And we’re also, Mr. 

Speaker, the first government to reduce taxes anywhere in 

Canada. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of governance that you’ve 

seen in Saskatchewan under the leadership of Premier 

Romanow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to further reiterate, Mr. Speaker,  



422  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

that . . . and I would be remiss if I were to proceed or to 

eliminate or to stop before I made a short comment about the 

VLT program, because I hear lots about what’s happened to the 

revenues of the VLT program in this province. And I want to 

reiterate again for the members opposite that every penny, the 

entire $112 million that we took in last year from the VLT 

program, all went back to Saskatchewan communities — into 

health, social services, education. Every penny of it went back 

into the coffers of the . . . into the communities, into 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Now you might want to draw the parallel, Mr. Speaker. We lost 

$112 million last year from the federal government. If the 

provincial Liberals are looking for a place to learn where the 

$112 million went from last year’s VLT program, we could say 

to them that what it did is it went to back-fill all of the federal 

program losses to Saskatchewan people last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is about investing in people, investing 

$117 million to build a made-in-Saskatchewan training system. 

This budget is about directing $23 million to new municipal 

infrastructure programs. And the member from Saltcoats talked 

about the fact that municipal governments have been at the 

brunt of some of the reductions in the province. 

 

And he also talked about the fact that reassessment wasn’t 

necessary in Saskatchewan. I can’t believe that after 35 years 

. . . And the municipal governments, both urban and rural, have 

come together and said to the member opposite that we need to 

reassess . . . we need a new reassessment process in 

Saskatchewan. And what does the member from Saltcoats want 

to do? He wants to wait for another 35 years, is what he said, in 

order to implement this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also talks about reducing the 

provincial sales tax from 9 to 7 per cent. And I want to tell you 

that on the east-central side of Saskatchewan, this is a welcome 

announcement. Yesterday people told us about the importance 

of this, the kinds of importance this will generate to the retail 

trade in east-central Saskatchewan. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, provides an additional $57 million to 

building our stable, secure health systems; increasing school 

operating grants by 22 million over the next two years, and 

increasing capital funding in this province by over $40 million, 

and doubling funding to 25 million for the award-winning, Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve already talked about, the action plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by just 

making this comment about Saskatchewan people, and to say 

that Saskatchewan people have come a long way together. In 

five short years we’ve confronted a financial crisis. We’ve 

inherited . . . we inherited a large deficit and a growing debt, 

rising interest costs were devouring dollars that could have been 

invested, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 

 

To overcome this crisis Saskatchewan people have turned to 

their traditions of cooperation, of compassion, and community. 

Everybody in Saskatchewan has pulled together, Mr. Speaker,  

and we now have a Saskatchewan community. Everybody has 

pulled together and started paying down the debt so that the 

mortgage for our children will be paid off over the next several 

years. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this government, in 

participation with the Saskatchewan people, are working to 

benefit each other for the future of all of our children. And I 

want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I will be voting 

in favour of the budget later on in this week. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, times 

are changing. As I recall, many years ago the New Democrats 

used to be called Liberals-in-a-hurry. Now what I understand 

from that is, the point back then was that the feeling was that 

Liberals and New Democrats shared a similar commitment to 

using the power of government to advance social justice, 

especially on behalf of more disadvantaged members of society. 

But New Democrats were called Liberals-in-a-hurry because 

sometimes they seemed to react and respond more quickly than 

what the Liberal government did. 

 

Well now what’s happened? In 1995, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal 

Party in this province suggested a 2 point reduction in the 

provincial sales tax. At that time the NDP said this was 

irresponsible and would wreak devastation and havoc on the 

province. 

 

Well now two years later, the New Democratic government 

fortunately has introduced some of the Liberal program, and I 

congratulate them for that. Therefore my theory is that now 

New Democrats are slow Liberals. They are people who have 

adopted some of the Liberal programs, not as fast as they 

should have, not as fully as they should have, but they’re 

coming along in the right direction and I give them full marks 

for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another example of the position of this 

government as slow Liberals, I think, is shown by their 

initiative in child poverty. Last week the Minister of Finance 

said Saskatchewan is leading the fight against child poverty. 

Well let’s look at some of the facts, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not 

talking about “Fact Man” here — I’m talking about the real 

facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province has the second highest level of child 

poverty in Canada. We had the highest suicide rate among our 

young people; we have the highest rate of youth incarceration in 

North America, the highest rate of teen pregnancy, one of the 

highest levels of school drop-out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t much of a record after nearly half a 

century, after nearly half a century of social democratic 

government in this province. Is this really the best we can do? 

 

Far from leading the fight against child poverty, the truth is  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

Saskatchewan has been bringing up the rear. But fortunately our 

federal government has launched a new initiative to deal with 

the problems of child poverty. Now the provincial government 

can come along and try and take credit for it. I congratulate 

them though for joining with our federal government in trying 

to grapple with the issues of child poverty. I congratulate them 

for being slow Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same principle applies to employment and 

women’s issues. While this government continues to trumpet 

itself as being in the vanguard of social and women’s issues, the 

reality is somewhat less positive. Saskatchewan has the highest 

rate, the highest percentage of women locked in part-time and 

low income, minimum wage jobs of any part of Canada. Sure 

they create call centre jobs, fast food jobs, which so many go to 

women. But where are the real jobs, the meaningful jobs that 

allow for dignity and advancement? Not only is the number of 

jobs created in this province pitifully small, but in so many 

cases the quality of those jobs is not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see though that the government has 

addressed the issue of some of our disadvantaged workers in 

this budget and I’m referring to the men and women who work 

in our group homes, our sheltered workshops, and our safe 

shelters. They were poorly treated by this government, Mr. 

Speaker, typically with wages at or near the minimum wage 

level and with few or no benefits. And I’m delighted that these 

people have been considered in this budget. 

 

In most cases the boards which supervise these people are 

sympathetic. They wanted to do more for them but were unable 

to. In many cases the board members of these organizations 

found their energies being zapped by trying to keep their 

agencies afloat while organizing bingos and raffles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this government was in opposition they 

promised the staff of these organizations, of these NGOs 

(non-governmental organization), that they would be given 

parity with the public service. They would be treated like other 

civil servants. Today we find that the disparity in wages is as 

high as 60 per cent. Mr. Speaker, wages and benefits are so low 

that in some cases, the clients of sheltered workshops get a 

higher salary than the staff of the group homes and the 

workshops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, working in shelter workshops, group homes, 

women’s shelters, and other related fields is an honourable 

career and deserves to be treated with respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more remarks on the budget. 

However, at this time and in honour of our women’s curling 

team, I would ask that you call the clock. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being near the hour of 5 o’clock, the 

House will stand recessed until this evening at 7 o’clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 403 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 403 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 403 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 408 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Kelran Microbiologicals Expansion 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

 Legislative Building Repairs 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 394 

 Froehlich Floriculture 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 394 

 Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Expansion 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 394 

 Tourism Saskatchewan Awards 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 

 Museum Volunteer Honoured 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 395 

 Two Traditional Events Held in Lloydminster 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Health Reform 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 

 Health District Elections 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 396 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 396 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 396 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 397 

 Barley Marketing vote 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 397 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 397 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 398 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 398 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 398 

 Gaming Addictions 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 398 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 399 

 Farm Fuel Rebate 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 399 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 399 

 Child Prostitution 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 399 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 400 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Canadian Wheat Board Vote 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 400 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 400 

 Thank you to Sask Water Employees 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 401 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 401 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 402 



 

 Infrastructure Works Program 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 402 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 402 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 403 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 211  The Gambling Addiction Accountability Act 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 

 Bill No. 210 — The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement Revocation Act 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 410 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 415 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 422 

 


