



















































Hansard: March 17, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 239 

 March 17, 1997 

 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

thank members of the legislature for allowing me to introduce 

some guests who are joining us in the gallery before we get 

going here. 

 

Tonight I am pleased to have, from south Regina, a group of 

Scouts who are joining us in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

you’ll notice them here in their traditional Scout uniforms. They 

are here obviously to witness the proceedings of the Assembly 

tonight, and I note that they are accompanied by Brian and 

Kathy Black who are chaperoning them. I think that the Scouts 

are in for an interesting listen tonight to the member from P.A. 

(Prince Albert) Carlton who I know will be resuming his 

remarks shortly. I unfortunately will likely leave during those to 

go and meet with the Scout troop once they’ve had a chance to 

listen. 

 

So my apologies to the member for P.A. Carlton that I won’t 

hear the last of your remarks. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Procedural Matter 

 

The Speaker:  Before proceeding, I wish to advise the House 

of a procedural matter. 

 

The hon. member for Prince Albert Carlton, after 4:59 this 

afternoon in the course of his remarks on the debate of the 

motion in response to the Speech from the Throne, had 

indicated that he wished to move adjournment of debate. I wish 

to advise the House that the motion to adjourn debate was 

received in error by the Chair. 

 

This being the fifth day of the debate of the motion for an 

address to His Honour, the House cannot adjourn without 

putting the question on the amendment to the main motion. 

However given the timing, the motion was moved by the hon. 

member for Prince Albert Carlton, was received in error by the 

Chair and then, the clock being what it was, at 5 o’clock, 

declared the recess. 

 

So I wish to correct this error at the earliest possible moment — 

which is now — and to advise the House that the motion to 

adjourn debate was received in error and shall not be considered 

to be operative because there is a standing order under rule 

14(3) which requires that the amendment would have  

to be voted on before we can proceed. And the House, without 

granting leave, cannot operate by ignoring the requirements of 

rule 14(3). 

 

Therefore the motion will continue . . . excuse me, the debate 

will continue on the main motion moved by the hon. member 

for Swift Current, seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  So thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank you 

for your ruling and I want to join with my colleague, the 

member from Regina South, in welcoming the Cub pack to the 

legislature . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Scout troop. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Scout troop to the legislature. And I hope 

you make the member from Regina buy you some drinks after 

you’re done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was making my remarks later this afternoon, I 

was noting that many of our people had gone . . . more 

members who had spoken before me were expounding on the 

theme of the government and the government’s throne speech, 

and that is the theme of Investing in People. 

 

And I was also making note of the fact that there were many 

times in the last two, three weeks as I’ve been in my home 

constituency or going to events, that the mood that was 

conveyed to me by citizens, constituents that I’d met with and 

talked with, in general, they were saying that they felt an air of 

optimism that has not been felt in this province for a long time. 

And I want to say that I also feel that myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to, before I went any further, to 

congratulate the member from Swift Current and the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast who were the first two to respond to 

His Honour’s address. And I was impressed with what they had 

to say. And not only with what they had to say, but in the 

manner in which they said it. You can clearly tell, Mr. Speaker, 

that those two constituencies are very, very well represented by 

those members. 

 

I was making some remarks with respect to the health system in 

general and with respect to the health system in Prince Albert, 

Mr. Speaker, and I was using some examples of what the health 

renewal system was doing for Saskatchewan and for people in 

my town of Prince Albert. I have a couple of more remarks that 

I want to make in that regard. 

 



240  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Health Board, together with 

SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat), 

the government department of SIMAS, is investing in people in 

another way that does not cost more money, but in a way that 

will also pay great dividends. They have agreed to a protocol 

which will lead to more aboriginal employment in our health 

system. Under this new strategy, the Prince Albert Health Board 

has agreed to hire, first of all, the best people they can, but 

while doing so, to make a special effort to be certain that trained 

people in the aboriginal community are advised of job openings 

and of training opportunities in the system. 

 

This is not exactly an affirmative action program because there 

is no quota system, Mr. Speaker. None of the parties wanted 

that. It is a positive agreement to avoid what is known as 

bureaucratic patronage, and to avoid missed opportunities due 

to poor communication or poor publicity of any job openings 

when they arise. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all in all the health system in Prince Albert, 

having gone through considerable changes over the last two 

years, is now better coordinated, it is better integrated and more 

modern than ever, ever before. Money is being spent where it is 

most needed and people are getting the care they need when 

they need it. And more and more people are taking 

responsibility for their own health and using preventative 

practices to stay healthy. 

 

At this time I want to acknowledge a recent decision by the 

Saskatchewan college of physicians and surgeons. And that 

decision is to expand the scope of physician practice into 

alternative forms of health care. For several years many people 

have been experimenting with health care methodology other 

than that which is conventionally used by western medicine. 

 

Many people, through self-education and experience, wanted to 

be able to use other treatments, but they also wanted to be able 

to consult with their own physicians while they did so. 

Chelation treatment is a case in point. Hundreds of 

Saskatchewan residents testify to having benefited from this 

treatment out of province and wanted to be able to receive the 

EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) chelation right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, thank you to the newly established protocol, this will be 

possible in Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan college of 

physicians and surgeons, our Department of Health officials, 

and our Minister of Health deserve a strong commendation for 

leading the way — leading the way in this alternative medical 

practice. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, this is a milestone policy change. And I 

predict it will serve as a model for Canada and across the 

continent. And that particular model is that trained physicians 

will be able to provide alternative therapies and that they will be 

following established, recognized practices to develop even a 

healthier population than we have now, and all at an affordable 

price. On behalf of the many citizens of Saskatchewan then, Mr. 

Speaker, I once again congratulate and extend my gratitude to 

the Minister of Health and the college of physicians and 

surgeons. 

This too, Mr. Speaker, is a new path — not a path made for us 

by someone else, but it is a new path being created by the 

people of Saskatchewan, and it is an investment in the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to turn now to the topic of education. Mr. Speaker, 

almost all new jobs being created in Saskatchewan now are in 

the information or in the technology areas. This implies that 

there are jobs for people who have an education or who are 

trained. And conversely, those who are not able to access 

education or training have a very difficult time providing for 

themselves and for their community. 

 

I am very pleased that our government is staying in close 

contact with the education community and is responding 

positively to directions needed, as suggested by parents, as 

represented by school trustees, and as well as our professional 

educators as represented by the Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation. 

 

Our K to 12 education system is a model for other provinces to 

follow. The path we are creating enjoys a broad base of support 

from the Saskatchewan public. Teachers and school boards are, 

and have been, very diligent in implementing modern 

curriculum. Much has been learned about teaching for common 

essential learnings, and much has been learned about 

diagnosing and prescribing programs for special needs students. 

And with parental involvement and dedication, we are finding 

that our students continue to graduate from our public schools 

with a very, very high standard. 

 

With the new program supplied to the students with special 

needs, many students are now encouraged to come back to 

school to complete their education. This bodes well for our 

young people and for the province, and I commend those who 

work within the education system who, even when they were 

asked to do more and more, pitched in to help our province. 

 

And I commend our Minister of Education for fighting for our 

teachers and not offloading our budgetary problems on their 

salaries as happened in other provinces. Madam Minister, you 

showed that our theme of Investing in People was lived up to 

for our youth, a clear distinction from the direction taken by the 

Tory governments of Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our post-secondary education system faces a 

tremendous challenge to meet the evolving needs of our 

workforce and our businesses and our service sector. And not 

only because of the ever-changing needs to respond to a 

changing economy, but also to be able to accommodate the 

withdrawal of federal Liberal government funding to 

post-secondary training. 

 

I believe this to be wrong, Mr. Speaker. I believe that when our 

post-secondary training and education trains and educates 

people, it does so for the entire nation, not only for the 

province. In fact many of our Saskatchewan trained people end 

up filling important, strategic, responsible roles internationally 

as well as nationally. And I believe the federal government 

should be increasing their role in post-secondary education, not 

withdrawing from it. 



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

 

(1915) 

 

Now our province can provide some programs excellently and 

probably better than many other programs; for example, 

post-secondary training in areas like agriculture. However, we 

find it difficult to offer top-notch programs in all areas. We 

should be sharing our expertise with the provinces, and we 

should be sharing this across the nation, and it should be 

coordinated federally. Immense damage is being done to our 

nation with the feds pulling out of the post-secondary education 

system, not only in funding the system directly, but also 

funding it indirectly, Mr. Speaker. A withdrawal of some $24 

million from the unemployment insurance program, now 

ridiculously called the employment insurance program — 

which as my colleague, the Minister of Health, relates is 

another Liberal cut-back, and he has had to cope with enough of 

the Liberal cut-backs in the health field. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that leaves — with the federal government 

pulling out of post-secondary education — that leaves it up to 

us to provide for post-secondary education. But I am pleased 

that our government will not just leave a gap, but will work 

with the education partners in Saskatchewan. We will work 

with businesses; we will work with educators in communities to 

develop a Saskatchewan training strategy. The throne speech 

mentions that we will be involving SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology), we will be 

involving the regional colleges, we will be using innovative 

programs like JobStart and Future Skills. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we will also be continuing in the K to 12 

area to expand our community schools. I found, Mr. Speaker, in 

my teaching career that there . . . before I went into politics, 

before I came to the legislature — that I thought that there were 

two great innovations in Saskatchewan in the ‘70s. One was the 

establishment of the regional community college system, the 

other were the community schools. They have lasted and they 

have passed the test of time. Mr. Speaker, it is the community 

schools and the regional community colleges that need to be 

emphasized into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech has identified reducing child 

poverty as a high priority. Now that we have pulled together to 

achieve financial stability, I believe it is time to make 

adjustments so that all people in our communities benefit into 

the future — especially Saskatchewan children. 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy is doing well: our growth was the 

best in Canada last year; we have the lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada; we’ve paid off 1.8 billion from our accumulated 

provincial debt; retail sales are up; housing starts are up; farm 

receipts are up; resource revenue is up. 

 

Now the statistical indicators tell us that most of us are better 

off than we were five years ago and the prospects for the future 

look good. Now buoyed by this positive outlook it behoves us 

to take a look at what can we . . . what we can do collectively to 

help those who are most vulnerable — those who have 

benefited little from our recovery. And I speak of the children 

within poor families. Their future is not assured. Free trade, 

deregulation, global marketing, is leaving them with less, not  

more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As mentioned in the throne speech, the Conference of Catholic 

Bishops point out that almost one Canadian child in five lives in 

poverty in one of the richest countries in societies in world 

history. A damning indictment from the present socio-economic 

order. And it’s a damning indictment because we have prided 

ourselves in developing ways where we can share our riches. 

But the mechanisms that we used in the past to implement the 

sharing are being eroded. 

 

Canadian social programs in health, education, and welfare, 

used to be guaranteed by federal funding. But they have pulled 

out of the Canada Assistance Plan, they’re pulling out of 

education, and they’ve reduced payments for health. 

 

Now we have local casualties right in Prince Albert, and one 

was on the newscast this evening, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

Children’s Haven, which used to receive $227,000 from the 

federal government, and their payments have gone down to 

96,000. Pardon me, the one that was on the news today was the 

mobile crisis centre. They have been cut by $16,000 from direct 

federal sources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this emerging Canada . . . In this emerging 

Canada, these programs are being left to the provinces. That’s 

irresponsible and it won’t be long before there will be greater 

interprovincial disparity in these areas, and it’s the children of 

the poor who will be the hardest hit. 

 

In Saskatchewan our provincial taxes were used to fill the holes 

left by federal cuts to health and education. Thanks to the 

combination of good fortune and good management, our health 

and education systems, albeit under stress, are functioning well. 

 

We made a commitment to our Saskatchewan children through 

the Saskatchewan action plan for children two years ago. Under 

this plan, services like early intervention preschools, 

community school programs, and integrated children’s services 

are being provided province wide. It’s a small beginning, but it 

served to bring this issue to a national level and I commend and 

I congratulate our Premier for putting it on the national agenda. 

 

Last November our province, Saskatchewan, received a national 

Champions for Children Award from Canada’s Child Welfare 

League for the unique Saskatchewan action plan for children. 

We are the only province so recognized. 

 

Our Premier, as I mentioned earlier, has spoken nationally for 

the need for a child benefit. I was momentarily very pleased to 

hear the federal government profile the national child benefit 

plan in their budget and then I was disappointed when the 

budget details revealed that it would not be implemented until 

July 1998. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a strong voice to continue to speak for 

Saskatchewan’s children. I’m afraid that that federal 

announcement may well go the way of the Liberal promises to 

eliminate the GST (goods and services tax) and to eliminate the 

20-year patent protection on drugs and the election promise to 

implement . . . will go the way of those two items, Mr. Speaker. 



242  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

We need a national child benefit plan with federal standards and 

federal financing. It is the singular new positive thing the 

federal government can do to assure access to schools and 

health for all Canadian children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our young people are being asked by the federal 

government to dig deeper so that we can all benefit from the 

Canada Pension Plan. In turn, we older folks should be willing 

to support a child benefit so that every child in our country has 

a chance to make it in life. That’s the Saskatchewan way. Let’s 

make it the Canadian way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I am pleased that the path being taken by 

our government in this area has been set out in the throne 

speech. And I know it also from the throne speech that our 

government plans to introduce amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act and to accommodate a 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. In addition to that, I am 

pleased that a provincial training allowance will be 

implemented to help low income individuals enrolled in adult 

education programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to talk for a few moments 

about jobs and the economy, another one of our priorities 

outlined in the budget. 

 

It’s a good feeling that to date we can record that we have, in 

Saskatchewan, a strong economy which has resulted in 11,000 

of the 30,000 new jobs created . . . of the 30,000 promised jobs 

already created in Saskatchewan. This did not come easy, Mr. 

Speaker. It came as a result of good planning and, in some 

cases, good weather. And some of it . . . Not to say that the 

interest rates didn’t help, but, Mr. Speaker, I tell you that 

without good planning, this would not have helped. 

 

Within Saskatchewan, the jobs that came were as a result of a 

strong economy. Our agriculture and resource sectors are 

strong. For example, StatsCanada estimates that our harvest of 

wheat was 46 per cent greater in ’96 than it was in ’95. 

 

The Saskatchewan Energy and Mines tell us that the total 

expenditure in mineral exploration will reach $33 million, 

which is a 16 per cent increase from ’95. The potash industry of 

Saskatchewan has posted its third consecutive outstanding year. 

Saskatchewan became the sole uranium producing province in 

Canada in 1996 and is currently supplying 30 per cent of the 

world’s total uranium. A near record number of wells and 

licences were issued for people in the oil and gas sector, Mr. 

Speaker, and it appears that this coming year will be even 

better. 

 

Now based on this excellent resource environment, we find that 

there are other areas that are also doing well. Retail sales were 

up 8 per cent in the first 11 months of ’96, new vehicle sales 

were up 12 per cent in the first 10 months of ’96, and residential 

housing starts were up a whopping 56 per cent in the first 9 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these statistics tell the story in mathematical  

terms, but I want to also give you some other examples of 

positive things that are happening in this area. 

 

Locally in Prince Albert, under the leadership and under some 

extra effort put out by the department of forestry, there have 

been a record number of permits issued for the cutting of 

burnt-out forest. As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, we had 

tremendous forest fires some two years ago. This wood will rot 

or be wasted within three years. Ordinarily 3 to 4 per cent of the 

wood is recovered. This year, after making inquiries, and I’m 

pleased to advise the members of this House that there are over 

a thousand people right now employed in that industry. They 

have made an opportunity out of a disaster, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s government flexibility, extra work on the part of the people 

within the department for issuing the permits and working on 

roads and access to the forestry region, that has helped. And it’s 

people like Carrier Lumber and Clearwater who’ve made 

investments in the people, made investments into this industry, 

who are leading the field amongst others, many others, who are 

in the forests taking this burnt wood. 

 

On the local scene, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand here a 

clipping describing what has happened in the co-op, Prince 

Albert Co-operative last year. It’s an announcement that was 

made to the paper by the general manager, Wayne Pearson, and 

what he tells here, Mr. Speaker, is that sales in the Prince Albert 

Co-op increased about $4 million last year or roughly 8 per cent 

from 1995. And there was a . . . as a result of this increase, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a decision by the association to pay cash 

allocations to all its members for the fifth year in a row. These 

allocations will total $2.1 million which will be recirculated 

back into the local economy. 

 

Our businesses are not static, Mr. Speaker. In the case of the 

co-op, they did venture into some new areas. They put up a new 

service station and they expanded their home and agro centre 

about a year and a half ago. It’s meeting the new market. They 

are meeting the new market and they are an example of a 

business who is looking to the future and is joined by other 

businesses in the province and in the district in their endeavours 

and helping us with our tremendous recovery. 

 

(1930) 

 

I did keep a few other clippings, Mr. Speaker, and I just want to 

bring to your attention some of the headlines to show that it’s 

not only happening . . . these things aren’t only happening in 

Prince Albert, but are year round. 

 

I have a clipping here which says, “Tremendous year for Upton 

Resources,” where they indicate what’s happening in the 

oilfield. People in the implement manufacturing field: here’s a 

headline from The Western Producer, 1997, “Implement dealers 

enjoy a big boom.” Here is a headline from January 10 of ’97 of 

the Leader-Post, and it says here, “The hotel industry is vibrant 

in the province.” 

 

Last fall, following last fall’s harvest, the Leader-Post had a 

headline in December 6 and the headline is, “Harvest 

outstanding.” As some of the follow-up, some of the value 

added that’s being done, Mr. Speaker, here is a headline from  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

 

the Melville Advance. It says, “Ribbon cutting officially 

launches Big Sky Pork.” Mr. Speaker, there are dozens and 

dozens of examples like this. 

 

These things do not happen by accident. People will open 

businesses and jobs will be created if they trust the government 

and if they are confident that the government will not spend in 

excess, and that the government will spend where the priorities 

of the people of Saskatchewan are. That is happening right now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to mention very briefly a little bit about 

another one of our priorities, and that is the development of an 

integrated transportation strategy. Our transportation system 

faces unprecedented pressures. It seems that even though you 

may have the most miles of highway of any province in the 

country, and the most grid roads, and at one time perhaps the 

most railways, things do change. And at this stage, having faced 

the elimination of the Crow rate, facing the prospect of 

additional rail line abandonment, and knowing that there will be 

new inland grain terminals constructed, and there are changes in 

trade patterns, we know that our transportation system has to be 

adapted to meet those changes. 

 

And I am pleased that the minister responsible for Highways 

and Transportation is working now with all the partners to 

introduce a comprehensive, integrated transportation strategy. 

 

My final comments, Mr. Speaker, will be on the topic of fiscal 

responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that 

provincially our finances are solid. We do not have excesses, 

but they are solid. 

 

Through hard work we have increased our credit rating. We 

have not yet attained triple A status but we are going in the right 

direction. And by the end of the current fiscal year our 

accumulated debt will be $1.8 billion lower than it was in 1994 

and $327 million lower than it was projected in the last budget. 

 

Perhaps a figure that is most telling is, if all goes well, 

according to our present projections the total debt load for 

Saskatchewan will drop from a staggering 68 per cent of our 

GDP, our gross domestic product, to 44 per cent of the GDP. 

Mr. Speaker, with that kind of drop that will provide us with 

$100 million more to put into programs rather than into interest, 

and that I believe to be very, very significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was reminded just a week ago how important it 

is to have your fiscal house in order when I watched a television 

program that described what was happening in Washington, 

D.C. (District of Columbia) right at this very time. Washington, 

D.C. — something like New York — it has the best in the 

world, but it also has the worst of some of the things in the 

world. 

 

And one of the things that are really bad in Washington, D.C. is 

unemployment, and with unemployment comes a high crime 

rate. When the police of Washington, D.C. were interviewed on 

this particular program and asked how come there were so few 

police cars on the road, their answer was, well we can hardly 

take the cars on the road if they’re in disrepair and if they have  

no gasoline in them. Policemen in Washington, D.C. were 

finding that they were having to take money from their own 

pockets to buy gasoline to go on patrol in a vehicle. And other 

policemen were finding some of their time being used 

cannibalizing some of their cars to take parts from it to make 

other cars operable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what happens when the pressure on the tax 

dollar is exceeded by the amount the people can pay, and also 

when people lose trust in paying for their taxes. It comes 

through using an American system where instead of using a 

majority of elected members to decide on a program, they have 

turned to a referendum system. 

 

And in a referendum system, unless everybody is able to take 

the time to look at all the information available, they will go for 

the common denominator — they will vote taxes out of 

existence. And when you vote taxes out of existence in a 

country, you vote your standard of living out of existence. Mr. 

Speaker, that is not the path we are taking, and that is not the 

path we are making. 

 

And I want to quote one more time from the throne speech the 

statement made by futurist John Schaar, which says: “The 

future is not some place we are going but one we are creating. 

Paths are not to be found but made.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be able to support this throne 

speech. I believe that it is very positive; I believe it is full of 

hope. I know that our province is on the move again. We are 

investing in people, we are investing in jobs, we are investing in 

our communities, and we are building Saskatchewan together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My remarks this 

evening will be somewhat brief because, of course, it is a reply 

to the throne speech. And I guess I’ll direct my initial 

comments on exactly what I see in this throne speech in 

comparison to other throne speeches. 

 

I think there has been, oh, what? I guess seven or eight throne 

speeches that I have taken part in in one form or another, and 

this one was rather short with very little in it. Now we can say, 

well you know, maybe they’re not supposed to be filled with a 

lot of detail and usually they aren’t, but I look at past throne 

speeches and see what we’ve gotten from them. 

 

In fact I think it was probably back in 1992, when in that throne 

speech there was a promise made in that speech — the direction 

of the government of the day was to do away with child poverty 

and child hunger. And they were going to do it the first term, 

Mr. Speaker. And where are we at today with child hunger and 

child poverty? Well we see more people on welfare — a lot 

more people with young families on welfare — food banks that 

are . . . the usage at food banks is at an all-time high. 

 

And I think probably some of the trouble that we find the 

youths in today are as a result of not just the economy — I 

don’t want to blame everything on the economy — but I think  



244  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

in that bigger picture with all the troubles that society is in 

today, and it seems to follow through and flow through into the 

children. 

 

And so, using that as one example of what we hear to be in a 

throne speech and what actually happens in government policy, 

whether it be in that given year or the years that follow, never 

seems to jibe from, well obviously from an opposition party’s 

point of view. 

 

We’ve also heard — and this is dating back a few years also — 

where the care for the elderly, those in need, the pioneers of 

Saskatchewan, those that built this province and made it what it 

is today, there was going to be ample monies made available to 

ensure that their quality of life in their golden years was 

something that they would cherish. They would feel very 

comfortable going into their retirement years and their golden 

years. 

 

But what has happened, and what I hear day after day when we 

travel throughout these constituencies, especially, Mr. Speaker, 

when, you know, I spent a couple, three years as the health care 

critic in the opposition . . . and so it brought me into a lot of 

communities and a lot of these facilities where the elderly are in 

fact needing care. 

 

But the fear, the fear in their eyes. They had no idea. Many of 

these people don’t. And it’s not good for any politician, 

government or opposition, to build up those fears and we don’t 

try and do that. Actually what we try and do is, you know, have 

all our scrapping and our fight in here so that we don’t have to 

go out to those people and actually build on their uncertainty. 

But to look in their eyes and to see the uncertainty that they 

have, the fear of their future. Where are they going to be in a 

year or two or three or four, five years down the road? And they 

don’t know. And they pose those questions to us. And what are 

the answers? 

 

I mean as people in government we seem to have less of an 

idea, from our perspective, of where this is going to end. Maybe 

the government members have a better idea of where it will all 

end, but if they do, they should pass it on to some of these 

people because the concern is very real and there is a great deal 

of fear out there. And I think I’ll get into some of that a little 

later on again when I talk about some health care concerns. 

 

But we also have heard in past throne speeches how the 

government of the day is going to ensure that there is equality 

among all Saskatchewan residents, and this is something else 

that we see the split today from urban to rural. What’s 

happening is, I think . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  It’s getting wider and wider. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well you’re absolutely right; it’s getting 

wider and wider and it’s shameful. 

 

If we take a look at some of the services that we need out in the 

rural areas, even . . . whether it’s bussing. Do you know how 

many meetings that I’ve attended in the last year of — and there 

again it’s mostly elderly, rural communities — people that are  

afraid that they are going to lose their bussing in some of these 

communities? 

 

And perhaps if you live in a city of a couple hundred thousand, 

you don’t appreciate, you don’t appreciate what an STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) bus would mean to 

your community. It means everything. It means everything if 

you’re 70 or 80 years of age and there is no modes of 

transportation in and out of that community; you become 

hostage to the community. And when we see other services that 

they utilize all the time, health care, dental — I could go on and 

on and I won’t do that — but especially health care services 

leaving . . . And I may go on and on after awhile, Mr. Speaker. 

But when they see these services being pulled and being taken 

away from their community, that bus is the lifeline for them, 

Mr. Speaker. It is what . . . it is perhaps what makes the 

difference of whether they can remain in rural Saskatchewan or 

not. And so we’ve seen this threatened. 

 

In fact as I speak, in my home town of Shaunavon there’s been 

a few meetings. We’ve had, well I guess now we’d call him the 

past president of STC, into the community to, I guess to 

alleviate some of the fears and concerns. That definitely didn’t 

happen. I can tell that by the amount of articles that are still 

showing up in our local paper. People are afraid. Now bussing 

may not mean that much to some but it means everything if you 

live in a small rural community. 

 

If we look at care homes, well if you’re living in a community 

of a hundred thousand or much less, I guess you could be 

talking 10, 15,000, a community the size of say Swift Current 

. . . maybe that’s even unfair because they just went through 

some personal care home battles like no other. But at least 

there’s some opportunity. There’s some chance that, if you 

can’t remain in your own home . . . And you agree with many 

of the other elderly that are your friends that home care is not 

picking up the slack, picking up those people that are falling 

through the cracks, well then it’s a real concern because if 

you’re living in a community of 200 or 300 or 1,000 and you 

don’t have those kind of services . . . and you don’t have the 

kind of care homes necessary to remain in your own 

community. 

 

Now some may say, well you can’t have everything. You know 

if you can’t have a balanced budget and also at the same time 

provide everything to all people. But people don’t ask 

everything for all people. There’s certain things, Mr. Speaker, 

that I think people — especially the elderly, especially the 

people that put their lives into building this province — could 

and should expect from those that are now in sort of the control 

of their lives. That is, should they not be able to live their last 

years among their family and friends? 

 

(1945) 

 

An Hon. Member:  You’d think they’d be treated better. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well absolutely. They should be treated 

better because here we are asking that they remain in their 

homes longer, asking that their family members take care of 

them, the community take care of them. But as soon as they  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

 

reach that one stage where it becomes impossible to be taken 

care of easily by family and friends, there’s nothing there for 

them. There’s not that step. And that is really putting some fear 

into the hearts of people. They don’t know if they come to 

Regina if there’s going to be a home available here. I don’t 

know that. 

 

Also when we take a look at the difference between urban and 

rural centres in regards to health care, not just senior care, but 

health care . . . And I know I’ve went on and on in other past 

sessions about health care situations, but it hasn’t let up, not a 

bit, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I see. I’m 

sorry; I didn’t notice my light was out. Okay, but we have such 

a discrepancy between the cities and the rural as far as the kind 

of services that they can expect in health care. And that I’m 

going to get into in a moment also. 

 

But I think what we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is not what 

has been promised in the past throne speeches — and never 

acted upon or never delivered upon — but what should be in a 

throne speech. You would think that a government, a 

government that was being fair to all people, would . . . well 

they’d put in a throne speech that they were going to provide a 

quality of life to all citizens, of course to the children. If you’re 

going to promise that you’re going to do away with child 

poverty and child hunger, it can’t be that big a problem. I accept 

what is happening today with the thrust now from the federal 

government that we better get up and get at this problem. 

 

Now I know this provincial government . . . I see a lot of people 

starting to look up and wonder, but no, it wasn’t the Premier of 

this province that initiated the federal thrust. Even though you 

would like to take some credit, it wasn’t. Because you had six 

or seven years to do it since it came out in the throne speech, 

and you never acted upon it once . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And obviously I see the Minister of Health is more than anxious 

to get into the debate and I’d love nothing better than to stand 

and have one with him but . . . Once he stops heckling, Mr. 

Speaker, we can get on with it. 

 

What we have to look at, you know, what’s in a throne speech 

in the way of strategy to provide a better quality of life to all 

residents, not just the urban but to the rural as well. We have to 

look at the strategy that should be there; should have always 

been there as far as, what do our elderly deserve, what do the 

kids deserve, the students, all of those in need. And I don’t see 

any of that. I haven’t witnessed it in past throne speeches; don’t 

see it in this one. I’m just saying that’s what should have been 

there. 

 

When I take . . . I’ve listened to some of the speeches in here, 

especially this evening, and I believe the member — is it the 

constituency of Biggar? — talking about some of the 

transportation issues. Well those I find most interesting. And 

another one, the member from P.A. Carlton, talking about 

health care issues, health care issues in Prince Albert as though 

it were something that could be used as a comparison across the 

province. And he mentions that health care is under stress. 

What does under stress mean? 

 

I can’t help think that perhaps under stress would mean 

completely underfunded. Because when I take a look at the 

paper out of the community of Shaunavon — and, Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t want to use this as a prop in any way — but here, about 

six papers: health facilities threatened with closure; its attempt 

to recruit new doctor; local physician . . . It’s every one of them. 

So you talk about under stress. Under stress is when every 

week, every week, there’s an article on the front page, of people 

that are afraid of health care in their own community, health 

care disappearing. 

 

Who would have ever thought that a community of say 2,000 

— 2,200 people — would have these sort of problems in health 

care. Well now they fully expect it from the government, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s because it just never seems to end — it never 

ends. 

 

This has nothing to do with health reform. You can reform 

health. I guess it takes what, a year or two? Maybe that’s what 

the government thought, that in a year or two the problems 

would have gone away. 

 

I’m glad to see the Health minister moving a little closer so I 

can hear his heckling better. But this has gone on now for what, 

six, seven years that we’ve had this under-stress health reform? 

When will it end? 

 

You know what has happened since the last session, since we 

were in here last debating some of these issues? Well we’ve 

witnessed this horrible doctor crisis in the community of 

Shaunavon. But that’s not the only community. I know places 

such as Coronach have been trying for some time to recruit a 

new doctor. I mean I’ve had doctors in from Shaunavon to meet 

with the Health minister, and I appreciate those kind of 

meetings to try and alleviate some of the concerns. I’ll give him 

credit. He acted upon it and he’s got to do that more and more 

and more. 

 

It’s tough though when it takes for a community to have to 

know that the way to get into government minister’s office to 

get action done is to know the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and know that he has the ability to get into that 

office and make the case heard. Not every community has that 

luxury and I guess that’s why there is still this crisis going on 

out there. 

 

I also know that past summer we had another situation on the 

east side of the Wood River constituency in the communities of 

Rockglen, Willow Bunch, Mossbank, Assiniboia, Lafleche, 

Kincaid. They were all attacked pretty much at once because 

they had a new CEO (chief executive officer) come in and he 

was going to show the people out there, I guess the country 

bumpkins, exactly what it’s like to run health care. And of 

course everyone in here would remember him. He’s Dale 

Schmeichel; he used to work for the Premier. But I’ll tell you 

those so-called country bumpkins showed Mr. Schmeichel that 

he didn’t have all his homework done, not by a long shot. 

 

In fact we started, Mr. Speaker, having some meetings out in 

some of the communities, asking whether or not they were 

going to support the initiatives of the board, of the South  



246  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

Country Board of Mr. Schmeichel, which really what it was 

doing was taking communities, taking communities such as 

Rockglen and Lafleche . . . well they’ve got newer facilities and 

they were going to privatize them. They were going to take the 

services, the lab services and such out of Kincaid. I think 

they’ve written the community off. They were going to 

downsize and privatize Lafleche, Rockglen. What were they 

going to do with Mossbank? I can’t remember. Oh, take their 

service as well. And they were going to make large changes at 

the level 1, level 2 care home in Assiniboia. 

 

What they don’t realize is that when you go out to these 

communities . . . And I challenge the board, and I challenge a 

lot of government members to do this. Go out to these 

communities and actually go from room to room to room. See 

who’s in there. They’re not just people. Go and read the name 

tags and such. Talk to them. 

 

You will find that most of them, by and large, are not even level 

3. They’re level 4 and level 5. Of course they need 24-hour 

care, and they’re going to privatize them into level 1, level 2 

care homes. They never could tell the people, never would or 

could, what they were going to do with the present people in the 

facilities. I mean the thrust of the government has been to get 

away from level 1 and level 2. So-called home care was going 

to take care of all these problems. And yet it’s fine to privatize. 

Well we know that once they are going to be privatized, they 

could also forget about having the acute-care component of that 

health centre remaining as well. 

 

The game was simple from the government’s point of view. 

They thought they had the right man in to do the right thing for 

the board, and we’d all just accept it. The trouble is there was a 

committee that was formed and happened . . . well I enjoyed, as 

well as the member from Thunder Creek, of being part of that 

initial group that got it together. It’s called PUSH: People 

United to Save Healthcare. 

 

And you know, what’s interesting is that it’s not as though it’s 

Conservatives or Liberals. Nobody talked politics at these 

meetings. And there is no doubt there was people from all 

parties. But I’ll tell you they all had one goal in mind, and that 

is to save their health care in their communities. Enough is 

enough. 

 

And I ask you, if you’re ever travelling down 13 . . . and not 

many of you will take that highway, and we’ll get into that in 

awhile. But if you travel down 13, take a look when you’re 

passing by Lafleche. And it doesn’t matter which entrance you 

use into town. There’s a . . . what size are those signs? They 

must be . . . Oh they’re a lot, 8 by 12. They’re at least 8 by 12 

— People United to Save Healthcare. 

 

What a statement for a government to be seeing these kind of 

signs put up as a community effort. Now they can’t say, well 

everyone in the community is Liberal. Well it just so happens 

most of them are down around my area. That has more to do 

with what you people have done than what anyone else has 

done. But when you see these kind of signs up in a community, 

or go down Main Street in Assiniboia when they rented those 

yellow flashing signs . . . and I think there were six in the  

community of Assiniboia, going down Main Street and the 

other main drag, and they were all the same thing — People 

United to Save Healthcare; stop the Romanow government 

from killing our hospitals . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member knows that 

it’s improper to use the proper names of members of the House 

and that members must be referred to by the positions that they 

hold in the House, unless making a direct quote. And I’m sure 

the hon. member will . . . being an experienced member, will 

recognize that and will continue the debate following the rules 

and proceedings of the House. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I meant it to 

be a direct quote and I hope it came across . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Now the hon. member will also know that it’s 

improper to be commenting on the Speaker’s ruling, and I’ll 

just simply ask that he continue his debate following the rules 

and proceedings of the House as he normally does. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I 

guess obviously the point was made, and I think it’s been made 

well, that people, people are uniting. And it doesn’t matter of 

the political stripe; it matters of what they have in their 

community and it matters to them what exactly it is that they’re 

going to pass on, if anything, if ever, to their children; whether 

there can be a life out in rural communities. 

 

That’s the point that is being well made time and time again at 

these meetings, whether it’s to save their schools, their 

hospitals, their buses. It never ends. 

 

But I do want to congratulate all those people from the RMs 

(rural municipality) and the towns affected in the South Country 

Health District who got together, who banded together to fight 

for a common good. And it was good to see because all too 

often we come to the legislature and I sometimes wonder, what 

is the public good any longer? I think it gets clouded in here, 

and when you get out into your own communities and you 

watch people fight for survival, it comes very clear, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One other thing I’d like to touch on tonight is the highways and 

the roads of this province. And I hear a lot of moaning and 

groaning already and perhaps that’s just some carry-over from 

days when you’ve been out travelling in rural Saskatchewan on 

some of those highways. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Backs hurt. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, some back pain perhaps? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the budget, the 

budget of this past year, the government’s taking in about $430 

million. They’re going to spend approximately 32 per cent of 

that money back into the highway and road system – some 168 

million. 

 

I think for the longest time people found that somewhat 

acceptable. They would say well, you know, there’s a fiscal  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

 

problem that the Conservatives — and it would be great if they 

were in here tonight, any of them, to partake in the debate, but 

they’re not and . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Now the hon. member will also be well aware 

that it is improper, in the making of a point in his debate, to 

refer to the presence or absence of other hon. members. And I’ll 

simply ask him to be attentive to that and to withdraw . . . I 

won’t ask him to withdraw on this occasion, but to restrain 

himself from repeating that violation of the rules of the House. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be 

much easier to comment on the third party when they are here, 

there’s no question. It’s just that I don’t have that option often 

enough. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now the hon. member will also 

be aware that he’s not permitted, by rules of the House, to . . . 

Order. Not permitted to do indirectly what he’s not permitted to 

do directly. And having just advised him of the error, in 

reference to presence or absence of members, and having 

repeated that, I will ask him to withdraw that remark and 

continue his debate. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I’ll 

withdraw any comment about the absence of the third party. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I will . . . Order. I’ll ask the hon. 

member just to simply withdraw the remark without any 

inference and then just continue with the debate. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the 

comment. 

 

And to go on, we’ll talk about the budget. I guess that’s where 

we left off. The 32 per cent of the $430 million that this 

government raises through fuel taxes and motor vehicle 

licensing fees . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  How about the zero per cent that Ottawa 

puts in? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  And we’ll talk about that, Mr. Minister, 

but when we take a look at what’s happened over the past five 

years, we’ve got $1.23 billion surplus, monies that they’ve 

taken in, plus what they’ve spent on the highway and road 

system. 

 

And as I was saying, people were more than prepared to wait 

while the government got the fiscal situation that they were left 

in from the former Devine government under control. And 

everyone did that. They were very patient. I mean there’s 

certain things that we fought for that I don’t think can be let go 

for a year or two — such things as care for the elderly, health 

care, and such — but other things that we could be more patient 

on. I think we were. The people of Saskatchewan were. 

Highways was one of them. And now that the fiscal situation 

has been taken care of as of a year ago, now it’s time for the 

government to start to direct some of the taxes that it collects in  

each of these areas, for example fuel taxes, to where they are 

supposed to be going. 

 

Now some of the members opposite are hollering, well what 

about the federal government and the fuel taxes they collect? If 

they would have been paying attention a few weeks ago when 

we first started to talk about the monies required for our 

highway and road system, they would have known, noticed, that 

in fact we made the comments. I made the comments about . . . 

the people were patient with them while they got their fiscal 

situation in order, and I think we’ve got to do the same for the 

federal government. After all we are all federal taxpayers as 

well. 

 

In a few years, they will have their budget deficits taken care of. 

When that’s arrived at, then I encourage them to spend the 

monies from their fuel taxes back into the highway system. I 

mean in the interim, I was as disappointed as anyone that there 

wasn’t a national highway program at least for those 

interprovincial highways. 

 

I thought that would have perhaps come. Give it a year. But 

let’s not forget who or which level of government has a 

Highways minister . . . is this provincial government. They raise 

a great deal of money: 1.23 billion. 

 

If I take a look at just certain areas of the province — I take a 

look at the south-west; I’m very familiar with it of course — 

and look at the amount of money that is raised not just in fuel 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, but how much money was raised through 

the sales of land leases to the oil companies? It was hundreds of 

millions of dollars that were sucked out of south-west 

Saskatchewan, and they were brought into the general coffers in 

the government here in Regina. Is that fair? 

 

Now you have to take a look at whose roads are being harmed 

the worst by having that heavy, oil-truck traffic on the roads. I 

think it would have only been right that if we — the 

government, not we — the government would have taken a 

good percentage of just that money alone and put back into 

those areas. I mean what has happened here is very unfair 

because it’s as though they don’t care at all about the region 

where they are making the dollars from. 

 

If we also take a look at theses taxes that we talk about, the 

$430 million mostly of fuel tax, where is it coming from? Is it 

coming from the communities that are 5 or 6,000 and more? Or 

is it coming from mostly, I think, the farming population? I 

know on my farm what I spend for fuel. It’s in the thousands 

and thousands of dollars. It’s a lot more than some of the urban 

members here that would fill up their vehicle maybe every 

couple of weeks. 

 

So who’s really paying the tax? And should that not be broken 

down and somewhere shouldn’t the government be saying, well 

yes, out of the 430 maybe 300 million is actually coming from 

rural Saskatchewan. And is it only up to rural Saskatchewan to 

take those surpluses, take those surpluses . . . maybe of the 1.23 

billion, perhaps a billion of that came from rural Saskatchewan. 

Why is it that we have to do away with the services but we also 

have to be the ones to pay down the debts and deficits. Because  



248  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

that’s what is becoming apparent to the people that live out 

there. 

 

And I think it’s about time that there is some equality. I would 

have to ask the government members, and I know I did this last 

year and the year before, if you’re not absolutely certain of what 

I say, please take me up on an offer. I’ll take each and every one 

of you out into my constituency and we’d take a drive down 

these highways, whether it be 13 or 18 or 4 — take a drive out 

on some of these highways and see what it’s like. It’s absolutely 

shameful. 

 

I’ve put that offer to the Minister of Highways only some weeks 

ago and of course . . . and I appreciate the response that I got, a 

timely response it was. And in fact I have it right here. The 

Minister of Highways and Transportation, and I’m going to 

quote: 

 

I drive extensively in all areas of Saskatchewan. As a 

result, I’m fully aware of the condition of most highways 

in our province. In addition, my officials provide me with 

updates on road conditions on a regular basis. 

 

I would love nothing better than to be in on one of those 

meetings when they come in to update him. Like what could 

they possibly say? What could they possibly say that would be 

shocking to say. Oh, I can’t believe this. Let’s spend some 

money. And then they wonder why we come up with some of 

the ideas such as the provincial pothole patrol program. It’s not 

to make light of the highways; it’s to bring some awareness 

from the government of what the people out there are facing. I 

can only tell you that if that government found as much success 

in rural Saskatchewan as the provincial pothole patrol program, 

well I’d like to see the polls immediately after they were to do 

one of those. 

 

Other than that, Mr. Speaker, I happened to listen to the 

member from, I believe it’s from Biggar, out in that area, talk 

today about transportation issues. And I found it to be 

somewhat interesting. I guess it’s through his perspective on the 

positions he takes. But I recall a week ago, about a week ago, 

that there was a motion, emergency motion, brought forward in 

the House, and different members have spoken here in the last 

few days about this motion, and how great it was that we could 

all come together and support the same thing. 

 

Well let’s make sure everyone understands that we didn’t 

support the same thing because we brought forward an 

amendment. And it didn’t change the thrust of the motion 

much, Mr. Speaker, but it did say, let’s put some onus on the 

railroads. Both New Democrats and the Conservative parties 

said no way, we’re not supporting that. Which brings one to 

wonder how much they get donated to at election time. Like 

who are the friends of the railroads? And I’ve heard some 

members over there . . . I think it was the member from Regina 

Dewdney, Regina Dewdney, the one that’s heckling me now. 

He was the one that earlier today was talking about railroads 

and carrying on about railroads. Why didn’t he support the 

amendment? Totally beyond us. 

 

But yet I do want to give credit here this evening to something  

that I’ve been fighting for, and we now have an MP (Member of 

Parliament) from Saskatchewan doing the same. Instead of 

sticking the farmers with the demurrage, with the costs of grain 

that is not moving, let’s put that charge onto the railroads. And 

it’s not supported by anyone over there, or that third party, or 

Tory party, or whoever they are; they’re never here. And it’s 

not . . . It makes you wonder how much the donations must be. 

But I do give a lot of credit to Bernie Collins, the MP for 

Souris-Moose Mountain, for bringing that forward. 

 

It seems to have raised a lot of interest, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

sure that some of the members opposite will really want to join 

in and tell us what their position is, so I’ll leave them have at it. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great pleasure to stand in my place in this great institute and 

take part in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, firstly I want to join with my colleagues that have 

spoken before me and welcome the new member from North 

Battleford. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, I also want to say thank you for the hard 

work that’s done by my constituency assistants, Joanne, Connie, 

and Linda. They are the front-line people in my constituency 

while I’m here in the Legislative Assembly. I also want to say 

thank you to my wife, Georgina, and family for their support in 

the past several years. 

 

As the member from Melfort-Tisdale said earlier, being an 

MLA changes your life drastically, Mr. Speaker. But the event 

that he talked about earlier on December 1 when he became a 

grandfather, I certainly can relate to that because on January 12 

I also became a grandfather for the first time . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  . . . when a young lady by the name of Rachel 

Lauran entered the world and joined in for our family. I have a 

feeling, Mr. Speaker, that there’s two very small girls out there, 

Hayley Dawn and Rachel Lauran, that have two fairly big 

grandpas wrapped around their little fingers. I would think that 

they very much control what goes on in our lives and it’s kind 

of nice to be that way. So I certainly welcome Rachel into the 

family. 

 

I also want to commend you, Mr. Speaker, on the great job that 

you’ve been doing in your outreach within the students of 

Saskatchewan. People will certainly have more respect for us as 

politicians and for this institute if they understand the workings 

of it and where it originated from, and certainly I want to thank 

you for doing what you have been doing in that area, especially 

in the two high schools that we visited in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, Wynyard, and Strasbourg. 

 

As I said earlier, it gives me great pleasure also to stand here, 

and it does tonight especially, to say hello to the people of 

Wynyard who are able to watch the proceedings of the  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

 

Legislative Assembly for the first time in their own homes on 

Image Cable, channel 23, which is going into some 500 homes. 

And I welcome them to their Legislative Chamber. And I say to 

their Legislative Chamber, Mr. Speaker, because although we 

are the ones here making the laws and the speeches and 

governing the province, I believe as an MLA I am but an 

extension of my constituents. 

 

There was an old fellow in Last Mountain-Touchwood — 

maybe I shouldn’t say that old — was trying to teach me 

Icelandic so I could speak to the people in Wynyard in their 

proper language, but bilingualism is not my cup of tea. I’ll just 

stay with the English, anyway. 

 

I also want to congratulate the mover, the member from Swift 

Current, and the seconder, the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, on a job well done. Mr. Speaker, it is a special 

privilege for me to speak on a throne speech that starts with 

lines as, and I quote, “one of the most hopeful times in our 

province in many years.” And another line, “Today, through 

co-operation, community, and shared effort, Saskatchewan is 

back on its feet.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a speech that also talks of hope and opportunity 

for the future — opportunity for our farmers, for the workers, 

for our students which are our future leaders, for the children 

who live in poverty and for people who need the health care 

system. And I want to take a few minutes to talk on each one of 

those. 

 

(2015) 

 

This government’s top priority is jobs — jobs for all people in 

Saskatchewan — good, secure jobs so that people can plan for 

the future; so they can buy a house, buy a car, raise a family and 

be productive members of society. 

 

We all know that Saskatchewan’s economy has been very 

reliant on our agricultural sector, not only in the growing of the 

produce, including all grains for export, but we have come to 

realize that we are losing dollars, and more importantly jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, by simply being exporters of raw goods. When we 

export our grains and produce, we leave the processing and the 

manufacturing to someone else. And this is a part of the food 

chain that provides the most jobs. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we all know, and we know all too well 

the challenges that we face are to reduce the reliance we have 

on raw commodities and natural resources if we are ever to 

compete in the 21st century. We see a great deal of evidence 

throughout our province that people are making the shift from 

home-grown, value added, food processing companies to 

international agro-biotech firms, from farm implement 

manufacturers to software developers. We are seeing a rapid 

growth in Saskatchewan’s grain power industries and along 

with it new ways of employing our God-given blessings for the 

benefit of more and more people. 

 

To show that it is working, Mr. Speaker, I want to show a few 

statistics. And these figures are as of October 1996 as compared 

to the same period in 1995, and the figures show: retail sales up  

nearly 8 per cent, making this the fourth consecutive year of 

impressive growth in the retail sector; new vehicle sales up 

nearly 12 per cent; housing starts are up more than 56 per cent, 

fairly even distributed amongst rural and urban centres. And the 

best of all of this is that these jobs are being created across the 

province in both urban and rural. Since 1992, 11,000 new jobs 

have been created in this province. 

 

Is it enough? Well never, Mr. Speaker, and if you’re the one 

person out there that’s still walking the street looking for a job, 

there’s never enough until you find that job. We know it’s not 

enough and that’s why we are committed to the targets set out 

in the Partnership for Growth strategy because, Mr. Speaker, 

we believe in investing in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to prepare the people of Saskatchewan to 

fill the jobs being created, we have to provide them with the 

best education and training at every level that we can. In 

elementary and secondary education we have to provide 

educators in our schools with better schools to support learning 

in the classroom, and we will do that. We have to encourage 

school divisions’ restructuring as the needs are locally 

determined, to improve the efficiency and quality of our 

education system. And we will do that. We will invest in 

people’s education and future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next point I want to talk about is something 

very dear to me. Not that the rest aren’t, but child poverty 

should hit home to everyone. And as the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland and from Saskatoon Northwest spoke 

about earlier, in 1995 the Canadian Conference of Catholic 

Bishops said this: 

 

To think that almost one Canadian child in five lives in 

poverty in one of the richest societies in the world . . . in 

the world history is nothing less than a damning indictment 

of the present socio-economic order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have all heard that Canada was rated number 

one in the world in which to live. And that according to a 

standard-of-living yardstick, number one by the United Nations. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that if one child goes to bed hungry, 

not of his or her own doing, in this country of so many riches 

and opportunities, it is shameful. It is shameful that the federal 

government puts the interests of large corporations ahead of our 

future leaders. 

 

What was needed? Well, Mr. Speaker, an action plan for 

children. And what happened? This government put forth an 

action plan for children that was recognized nationally and 

internationally, and I applaud our Premier and our Minster of 

Social Services for this initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  We need to continue to target child poverty by 

investing in child care in inner-city neighbourhoods, rural 

communities, and the North. We need to continue to strengthen 

child nutrition programs that, along with the best possible 

education and training and with jobs for everyone, will ensure 

that no child will ever go hungry in this country again. 



250  Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1997 

 

Mr. Speaker, the blueprint for welfare reform builds on the 

success of the action plan by advocating, among other things, a 

new child benefit, a break for working-poor families which, in 

effect, will move most children off of welfare. Hopefully the 

federal government will make this a national priority. If 

successful this will be a major step towards reducing child and 

family poverty. Once again, Mr. Speaker, investing in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for some five years we’ve been working very hard 

to change the direction of our health care system, because I 

totally agree with the Premier when he says what we had was 

an illness system. We waited for people to take ill and then sent 

them to buildings and repaired them. What we need to do is to 

prevent every family from becoming ill in the first place, 

because no matter how much money was put into the old 

system, there was never any changes — people still got ill, 

people still had operations and they went to hospitals and got 

treated. The only difference that I can see, was that they were 

operated on in bigger and better hospitals. 

 

So one has to ask, why would we not put more resources into 

keeping people out of hospitals, keeping them at home even if 

they’ve had some type of operation. They still continue to want 

to be at home amongst their loved ones with some professional 

help coming in on a daily basis. Better for the people, less 

costly for the system — win-win situation. 

 

We still have some improving yet to do, and we still have to 

work to improve our services and health security for our 

seniors. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work to strengthen 

partnerships with health professionals, communities and health 

boards, to build a better model of care, and ensure a stable, 

secure health system in a locally responsible way. 

 

As communities either grow or diminish, or change in 

demographics in relationship to age, wealth, and other forms, 

communities all over Saskatchewan are increasingly using the 

new health system for what it is meant to be used for — to stay 

well. It has not been easy to change people’s directions. The 

people are agreeing that we are on the right track — to end up 

with a caring, stable, secure health system, there when people 

need it — once again, investing in people and preparing for the 

21st century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are investing in the future to build a strong 

Saskatchewan for the 21st century. We must never forget the 

desperate province we inherited from the Devine Tories, nor 

should we ever forget the hard work and sacrifice on everyone’s 

part which has helped restore that same province to a leader in 

economic, social, and caring for all people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the future is not where we are 

going — it is what we are creating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to use an old parable about an 

old blind woman, renowned for her wisdom, and a young boy 

who decided to play a trick on her. The young boy went out and 

he captured a small bird, and he cupped it in his hands and said 

to her, if you are so wise tell me if this bird is alive or dead. If 

she said dead, he planned to set it free and prove her wrong. If 

she said alive, he planned to quickly crush the life from the bird  

and again prove her wrong. She thought for a moment and her 

answer was, the answer is in your hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our financial house is in order. We have a great 

deal of experience in dealing with change and coming out on 

top. I am confident that by continuing to cultivate partnerships 

to work together for the common good — the purpose of every 

government — we shall lay a firm foundation for stronger 

communities and a stronger, better Saskatchewan in the coming 

century by investing in people. What kind of future are we 

creating, Mr. Speaker? The answer is in our hands. 

 

I am looking ahead with hope and opportunity, as the throne 

speech speaks about, and it will be of great pleasure that I will 

not support the amendment but I will be standing in my place to 

support the throne speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 8:26 p.m. until 8:27 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 7 

 

McPherson Gantefoer Draude 

Osika Bjornerud Hillson 

Aldridge   

 

Nays — 22 

 

Flavel Shillington Mitchell 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Upshall Kowalsky 

Renaud Calvert Koenker 

Trew Teichrob Nilson 

Cline Stanger Murray 

Kasperski Sonntag Jess 

Murrell   

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I’m going to 

make a few comments and then I will ask the House to adjourn 

the debate and I’ll make most of my comments tomorrow. 

 

I’m not sure how far I’m going to get on this line of comment. 

But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that a pattern which developed 

in the last session is being repeated in this one. And that is there 

are . . . it seems to be only the official opposition and the 

government present for these votes. 

 

The Speaker:  Well it almost does not require a comment 

from the Speaker. The member, being a seasoned member and 

the Government House Leader, and predicting the response of 

the Speaker, he’s fully aware that he’s violated a reference 

that’s not permitted in the rules of the Assembly. And given the 

context, I would ask that the hon. member withdraw that remark 

and proceed with his debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I withdraw the comments. 

 

I want to bring greetings on behalf of the constituents of Regina  



March 17, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

 

Northeast. Parts of this constituency I have represented since 

1975, parts of it I have represented since 1991, and part of it 

was new in the last session. In all parts of this constituency I 

have very much appreciated the support of the public and I must 

say it has been a real pleasure to represent them. 

 

(2030) 

 

Parts of the riding are under fairly severe stress and I talk now 

of the downtown area which is the area I have represented 

continuously since 1975. There is a good deal to be said for the 

common sense and the shrewdness of those people. One of the 

things I might say is, it is an accurate statement that those 

people have been voting CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) and NDP (New Democratic Party) for over 60 years 

continuously, since 1934. They have never committed the 

grievous sin that other parts of the province have. It is sort of 

unfortunate that notwithstanding their . . . this remarkable streak 

of good sense, remarkably long streak of uninterrupted good 

sense, they’ve had to suffer along with everybody else. 

 

Parts of that area in the downtown is under real stress. And I am 

concerned about it and we have attempted to do what we can to 

assist them in dealing with the community problems — many of 

which, to be fair, do not really come under the jurisdiction of 

the provincial government but they tend to look to us for the 

solution to these things. 

 

I want to, before going on, congratulate the member from North 

Battleford on his election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I spent — during the by-election — I 

spent eight days in the riding campaigning. That might well 

have contributed to the election, I don’t know. I did make one 

observation when I was there which I want to repeat. And that 

was, my impression, that the vote on election day reflected not 

so much a judgement about the performance of the two political 

parties, the NDP and the Liberals, as it was a personal vote for 

the member who enjoyed, I think, a very good reputation in this 

community. So I congratulate you on your election and the 

reputation which led to that election. 

 

I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on the outreach which 

you have done. Many members have commented on this and I 

want to do so as well. I had the privilege of being present for 

one of those in a very unique setting, actually. We were in the 

Assembly. Students — grade 7 and 8 students of St. Gregory — 

were in the Assembly sitting in these seats. I was accorded my 

traditional seat but the rest were filled by some relatively new 

members. 

 

I want to say what other members have said, Mr. Speaker. I 

found your address thoughtful. I thought it was tuned to the age 

group. I thought they could understand it and I thought they left 

with a good impression of the workings of the Assembly and 

the workings of democratic government, and that is very 

important. It is very important that these young people 

understand the intrinsic worth of that which they have, which is 

this institution. Too often we take it for granted. So to the  

extent that you have contributed to a much better understanding 

I want to congratulate you and hope that you will keep up the 

good work in the years to come so long as you are Speaker. 

 

I want to congratulate as well the mover and seconder of the 

motion. I thought their speeches were excellent. Indeed I 

thought, Mr. Speaker, the quality of the debate this year has 

been really good. I think it’s been a credit to the members who 

have participated. It is not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  On both sides. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well yes, on both sides actually. The 

member from the opposition says, from both sides. I think that’s 

accurate. I think the debate has been a high quality. I think it 

reflects well on the members and on the Assembly. Without 

being too partisan and certainly not wanting to speak ill of those 

who are absent, the low estate . . . I think I did it again didn’t I? 

Well at least I won’t ask you this time if you think it’s in order. 

 

The whole estate of politics fell into disrepute during the ‘80s 

due to the activities of the government in office in Regina and 

the government office in Ottawa, and it really did. The 

reputation, standing, of politicians really sank to a new low 

during that period. It is like anything else. You can lose 

reputation very quickly. It’s very hard to win it back, but slowly 

but surely I’d like to think we’re doing that. I’d like to think 

we’re doing that by the manner in which members conduct 

themselves towards each other. We have very sharp 

disagreements between us. There is, I think however, no 

occasion for personal exchanges and I think that’s been absent 

to a greater degree — never completely absent — but I think 

it’s been absent to a greater degree in this session and in the last 

session than was the case in the past. I’d hope that continues 

because we really need to do something about the low estate in 

which our profession finds itself. And I want to congratulate 

members. 

 

I think with those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 

beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:35 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Procedural Matter 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 243 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 

 Recorded division (amendment).................................................................................................................................................. 250 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 250 

 


