



















































Hansard: April 08, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 663 

 April 8, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of citizens with respect to young offenders: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Balcarres, Lemberg, and Balgonie. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 

many petitions today of people in the province that are affected 

by big game damage. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, 

are pretty well all from the Blaine Lake area of the province. I 

so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present the 

following petition. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

And there’s a number of pages of signatures here and they all 

come from the community of Blaine Lake. 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 

petitions signed by citizens of Regina: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence; such task force to be comprised of members of 

the RCMP, municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

And your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid in the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program to provide reasonable 

compensation. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m indeed pleased this 

afternoon to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

Assembly, a group of 11 grade 12 students from the community 

of Lebret in the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley. I welcome them 

here today. I’ll be meeting them a little later on this afternoon, 

and I would ask all my colleagues to please welcome this great 

bunch of students to this Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Maidstone Trade Fair 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people take 

tremendous pride in their community spirit. They know the 

value of working together to make this province a model for the 

rest of Canada. Just as importantly they know, too, the value of 

coming together to have fun. 

 

This weekend, Mr. Speaker, the Maidstone arena played host to 

the 13th annual Maidstone Trade Fair and Silent Auction. The 

fair included exhibitors representing every facet of life in 

Maidstone, including arts and crafts, agriculture, recreation, 

beauty, and finance. 

 

  



664  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

There was musical entertainment on Saturday by the Miller 

family and on Sunday by the Olson family. Fans of our beloved 

Saskatchewan Roughriders had an opportunity to meet one of 

the province’s football heroes, running back Robert Mimbs, at 

the Team Health booth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, none of this would have happened without the 

time and energy put forward by so many enthusiastic 

volunteers. The Maidstone Chamber of Commerce and their 

president, Connie McCulloch, who is a friend and a hard 

worker for the community, deserve particular mention for 

sponsoring this year’s event. 

 

Another group worth mentioning is the Maidstone Historical 

Society, which uses the profits from the silent auction to fund 

the local museum and development. Mr. Speaker, I ask you and 

this Assembly to join me in congratulating the people of 

Maidstone and their community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Willowbrook Veselka Dance Club 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate the Willowbrook Veselka Dance Club, which 

attended the Tavria Ukrainian Dance Festival in Regina just 

recently. Willowbrook is a small community north of Melville. 

 

The dancers competed in 16 dances and collected medals in 13 

of them. In total the dancers brought home 50 medals. About 

750 dancers from 20 clubs participated in this event. 

 

The club should be very proud of their accomplishments and I 

would like to invite everyone to join me in congratulating the 

Willowbrook Veselka Dance Club on an outstanding 

performance at the Tavria Ukrainian Dance Festival. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Nipawin to Host 1998 Saskatchewan Winter Games 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, are renowned for their community spirit. 

Many times that spirit is demonstrated through volunteer 

activities. Recently the community of Nipawin was awarded the 

honour of hosting the 1998 Saskatchewan Winter Games. This 

event, like numerous others the town has hosted, will require an 

extraordinary number of volunteers to ensure success. 

 

This is the first time Nipawin has had the privilege of hosting 

the event since its inception in 1972. Competing against three 

other communities, Nipawin was chosen, in part because of its 

ability and reputation to successfully host local, national, and 

international events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the approximate 1,500 volunteers that are needed 

to stage the games illustrate the commitment and dedication of 

the community and its people to host such an event. Not only 

will the games enhance the community’s local economy, 

Nipawin will be able to show the rest of the province its many 

positive attributes which will lead to additional returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to 

congratulate the community of Nipawin and district for the 

success it has in achieving . . . in being chosen as the location 

for the 1998 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 

 

This community has proven in the past that it can successfully 

host such events. And I know that they will once again 

demonstrate their community spirit, pride, in hosting the 

upcoming winter games. And I know that I will see everyone in 

Nipawin in February of 1998. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trade Mission Benefits Schulte Sales of Englefeld 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

been a lot of talk lately in this House about the value of trade 

missions to other countries, particularly the recent trade mission 

to Africa by our minister for Economic Development. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one business, Schulte Sales of Englefeld, 

couldn’t be more pleased with that mission. 

 

Schulte manufactures large rotary mowers and rock pickers. 

Their president, Jim Carnago, estimates that the company 

exports over 60 per cent of their product. For that reason, the 

search for new markets is very important to the success of 

Schulte, and maintaining of the jobs for its 105 employees. 

 

On a recent trade mission, Schulte reached an agreement in 

principle with South Africa’s based Falcon Equipment to act as 

Schulte’s distributor in that country. Officials with STEP, the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, made the initial 

contact with Falcon on Schulte’s behalf, something the 

president of Schulte believes helped to speed up the process 

considerably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the success of this trade mission proves that by 

working together, Saskatchewan people compete with the best 

in the world, and I ask you to join me in congratulating Schulte 

Sales on their success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Regional Science Fair 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, one afternoon last month I found myself surrounded 

by creative, innovative, and ingenious people. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Here we are. 

 

Ms. Murray:  Right. Now you may think I was in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and those epithets certainly apply here, 

but actually I was at Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw 

attending the Moose Jaw regional science fair. Gathered there 

were young men and women from three school divisions — 

Buffalo Plains, Thunder Creek, and Moose Jaw public — to 

display their projects. 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Mr. Speaker, I think my colleagues would have been as 

impressed and delighted as I was at the creative genius of this 

group. In my school days my projects at science fairs involved 

white rats running around in mazes, but at this science fair, Mr. 

Speaker, the first display I visited discussed gravitationally 

interacting clusters. 

 

So my congratulations to all those involved in organizing this 

annual event, especially Rhonda Phillips from Lumsden High 

School, one of the principal organizers. 

 

And thanks to the sponsors, particularly Sask Education, 

SaskEnergy, and Prairie Coal Ltd.. And a very well done to all 

student participants. This science fair is truly a tremendous 

investment in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hip and Knee Replacements Available in the Battlefords 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, much 

has been said in this legislature about the availability of medical 

services for people in rural Saskatchewan. Today I am pleased 

to note that a service that once required a trip to Saskatoon for 

the people of north-western Saskatchewan will now be 

available at the Battlefords Union Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hip and knee replacement surgery is now available 

in the Battlefords. Having this procedure done locally does 

more than save patients a trip, Mr. Speaker. By having this 

surgery done locally, patients also benefit from a pre-operative 

therapy program, one which is started with the patient before 

the surgery and continues on once the patient is discharged. 

Pre-operative therapy programs ensure that the patient is trained 

in the exercises necessary for recovery, that they have the 

necessary equipment at home, and that discharge is timely and 

comfortable for the patient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pre-operative therapy is the kind of planned 

medical treatment that prepares people for a quick recovery. It 

gives people a real chance to ensure that they resume their 

normal lives as quickly as possible. Community participation 

through the locally elected district health board made this 

expansion of service possible. 

 

This is just another example, Mr. Speaker, of how health reform 

is benefiting the people of the Battlefords and all of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Prosecutions Review Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we now have the Martin-Wilson 

report, for which I thank the minister. However, it’s now clear 

that the mandate of the inquiry was so narrow that the inquiry 

was precluded from looking into the very problem cases which 

had spawned demands for the inquiry in the first place. 

 

Furthermore, because of the directions given to the inquiry, they 

spoke almost exclusively only to employees of the justice 

system. Victims’ rights groups, those wrongly accused in 

Martensville and other cases were not consulted. The general 

public was by and large excluded from the process. 

 

In view of these oversights, does the minister agree that some 

broader process is still needed in order to lay to rest the 

questions that the public has? Particularly as to why so many 

innocent people got caught up in allegations over Martensville 

which turned out to be baseless. Will the minister agree to a 

broader process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for the opportunity to respond to that particular question. This 

whole matter was set out very clearly in the mandate that we 

gave to Mr. Martin and Mr. Wilson. It was not an inquiry, it 

was an operational review of the prosecutions division. 

 

As the member well knows, as a lawyer, the matters are before 

the court and specifically the cases that he is talking about. 

Those matters are still before the court in a number of appeals 

and other pieces of litigation surrounding the various incidents 

and so it’s inappropriate for me to comment at all. And I think 

practically, the answer is that we are waiting for all of that 

process but we have no intention of setting up an inquiry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear from the report that at 

least some of the problems associated with our justice system 

are of the minister’s own creation. On page 80 of the 

Martin-Wilson report it states that when the minister made 

remarks to the effect that too many people were being 

incarcerated, that this created problems for our prosecutors 

because when they would request a prison term for an offender, 

the judge would ask them if they were going against the 

minister’s stated policy. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice comment and tell us what he 

intends to do about this perceived interference with prosecutors 

and their day-to-day work, and how they will be given a free 

hand to call and ask for sentences as they deem appropriate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m frankly quite surprised 

by the member’s question, given his long experience at the bar. 

But what I would say is that in this job I have worked to my 

utmost to make sure that the prosecutors have their complete 

independence. And I would challenge anybody to show 

otherwise or to make any comment about that. 

 

Now practically, what happens in the justice system is that the 

department of public prosecutions has a role to play in 

presenting the evidence to the court. And when they do that, 

they are doing that in an independent fashion, and they’re doing 

it in a way that Mr. Martin and Mr. Wilson have said is 

competent, very careful, and is of the match of any other   



666  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

prosecution service in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as one the people who was 

interviewed for this report, I concur with the conclusion that our 

prosecutors are by and large competent and professional. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — However we still have the problem that a few 

years ago reports coming out of our justice system led many 

people to conclude that satanic child abuse was a serious 

phenomenon and problem in this province. In the wake of those 

cases falling apart, we now have many lawsuits against our 

prosecutors. 

 

The report says that morale of our prosecutors is very low 

because there has been no clear, definitive statement that the 

Minister of Justice will stand behind our prosecutors and will 

save them harmless for any possible claims which may be made 

against them in any judgements which may be entered against 

them. Will the minister now publicly state in this House 

whether the government will back its prosecutors in the suits 

they now face, or will those prosecutors be left to hang out to 

dry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question on behalf of the government. I think the hon. member 

knows, as a member of the law society and as a member of this 

House, that in the execution of functions by any department, 

whether it’s the Department of the Attorney General or any 

department, in the absence of any evidence of gross, wilful 

malfeasance or negligence or some high act of impropriety, the 

government always stands behind its employees acting in good 

faith. And that is the case particularly with the issues that the 

member raises opposite. That has always been our position, and 

it is the position throughout the British parliamentary system. 

 

Before I take my place however, and the reason that I get up is 

on the question of political interference and the last question. 

Let’s be clear about the rules of this, Mr. Speaker. If in the last 

question the hon. member from the Battlefords gets up and says 

that because the Minister of Justice or some other minister has 

made a comment pertaining to a policy issue on the area of 

Justice, that that amounts to political interference, then be clear 

about it. Don’t get up and ask us questions about young 

offenders or people stealing cars or about the problem of child 

prostitution in the same argument — saying on the one hand 

that it not political interference if we respond, and on the other 

hand, when we do respond, saying that it is political 

interference. 

 

You’ve got to clean up your act. Stop political interference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, may I respectfully point out to 

the Premier that it was not me who said the minister’s 

comments were causing problems for our prosecutors, it was 

the Martin-Wilson report that said that. 

 

One of the items addressed in the report which has concerned 

me greatly over the years is the treatment of women who are 

victims of spousal abuse. And of course the report pointed out 

that if a woman reports abuse by her partner and then 

subsequently decides she does not want to cooperate with the 

prosecution against her partner, she is often the one who ends 

up to be charged by the justice system for mischief or 

obstruction or possibly perjury. So that while her partner goes 

scot-free, she is the one in trouble because of directives from 

the minister. And this report has said that that directive should 

removed. 

 

I’m going to ask the minister if he will now end that barbarous 

practice of turning the tables on women who initially charged 

abuse and then don’t cooperate; so that they will not be the ones 

in trouble. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As is quite 

clearly set out in the recommendations and responses that we 

have from the Department of Justice, all of the ministerial 

orders as well as a number of the head office policies, are being 

reviewed very carefully, including the one that the member 

refers to. 

 

And when I have received some advice from the department of 

public prosecutions as it relates to all of these various policies, 

then I will be making whatever appropriate decisions should be 

made. But at this time I cannot respond to your question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

has been reported that SaskTel has cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan some $16 million because of a botched 

investment in the United States. 

 

About two years ago the Premier announced with great fanfare 

the joint venture with NS Telecom Group, and now we find that 

they’re closing their doors in a form of receivership. 

 

On February 20, 1996, barely a year later, the government by 

order in council, converted $3.03 million worth of loans to 

equity. And in addition to that, after they should have known at 

that time that that kind of process generally spells trouble, they 

also then advanced an additional $6 million into equity to keep 

this company afloat. 

 

Will the minister explain how she’s now sent good money after 

bad and what the status of this investment is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to have 

the opportunity to provide an explanation. 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

This is part . . . the investment in NST was part of the 

diversification of SaskTel’s portfolio of investments made 

necessary by the decline in long-distance rates by 50 per cent 

since 1990. It was seen that there was a goal of reaching a 

certain percentage of income revenue from outside of 

telecommunications activities and we’re on track to reach that. 

 

We have, through the diversified portfolio, brought in almost 

$300 million worth of revenues through successful diversified 

enterprises into Saskatchewan as in the last 10 years. And this 

happened to be an investment which was not as profitable. 

There was a lot of activity . . . there was a great deal of activity 

in fibreing up the whole United States, but it’s very low margin 

and we felt that it was not a good investment of the taxpayers’ 

money — so we planned for an orderly shutdown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this is the first time that I’ve 

heard of a $16 million pill being called a less than an acceptable 

margin of profit, or a low return. I mean there’s no way around 

this, is that this government lost $16 million on one of their 

ventures. 

 

My question is, Minister, is there any recourse that you have to 

recover any or part of this investment that has been lost, either 

from your partners or from other avenues that you may have, in 

order to recover some of this $16 million that you blew? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, this is an 

investment by SaskTel in their diversified portfolio. This $16 

million would represent less than 10 per cent of the profit that 

was made on the LCL (Leicester Communications Limited) 

venture, for an example. 

 

We have written off in 1995, when there were start-up 

problems, some $2 million and we wrote . . . the balance has 

been booked and written off in 1996. So it has all been 

accounted for and the venture has now been wound down, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prosecutions Review Report 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions as well are to the Minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Minister, it appears you’ve adopted some of the Liberal 

leader’s advice. When you’re having difficulty, blame the 

media and the opposition. Just make sure you don’t take any 

responsibility yourself. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, blaming others for mistakes made in the 

prosecutor’s office will not make the questions or the problems 

go away. Mr. Martin’s review overall says that Saskatchewan 

prosecutors are doing a good job, and I agree with that. 

 

The problem, Mr. Minister, is that there are a number of high 

profile cases where our Justice department has dropped the ball. 

And, Mr. Minister, you didn’t see fit to allow Mr. Martin the 

opportunity to find out the reasons why our system failed in 

many cases. 

 

Mr. Minister, why didn’t you get to the real meat of this 

problem and tell Mr. Martin to look into specific cases, and how 

do you expect the people of Saskatchewan to accept an 

incomplete report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As for taking a 

page out of the Liberal book, it seems like this question is very 

similar to the first one that was asked previously. 

 

It was very clear when we went ahead with this particular 

operational review that we were not in a position to specifically 

examine the cases that the member refers to because the matters 

were before the court. And as I stated previously, these matters 

continue to be before the court, and so it would not be 

appropriate at this time either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, no matter 

how competent and diligent our prosecutors are, the fact 

remains that your department is being sued left, right, and 

centre as a result of cases gone bad. Adding a few prosecutors, a 

pre-charge screening program, some laptop computers won’t 

address the 180 charges that were laid in the Martensville case 

with only a couple of convictions. More money for 

communications and regional training for prosecutors won’t 

make the Latimer case go away. 

 

Mr. Minister, the public want answers to these specific cases, 

and I believe they deserve answers. Mr. Minister, will you 

allow an inquiry into cases like Martensville so we can once 

and for all clear the air? So we can find out what went wrong 

and why? Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, as I have said and as my 

predecessor said, there won’t be an inquiry about Martensville. 

These matters are before the court — the Court of Appeal. The 

Supreme Court of Canada in certain cases has been reviewing 

the cases mentioned by the member and we will wait until all of 

these proceedings are finished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Commission Contracts 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister responsible for Gaming. Madam Minister, if the 

news would have been good news, you would have been 

singing it from the highest hill. But it’s not. I hate to say I told 

you so, Madam Minister, but I think it’s time you and your 

government got out of the casino business altogether. 

 

According to the Gaming Commission’s annual report, your 

favourite bus company and Holland Casino consultants are 

raking in some pretty big money. We can’t say the same for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. A half-million dollars to Mr. Canada   



668  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

in three months for an untendered contract; over 2 million for 

software from Holland Casinos, plus a couple of hundred 

thousand dollars in salary and travel expenses for Holland staff; 

in addition to one and a half per cent gross in net profits for 

each; over $400,000 for your friends at Phoenix Advertising; 

about a million in vouchers to entice people to gamble — no 

wonder the casino isn’t making any money. 

 

Madam Minister, where’s the $20 million profit you promised 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? When are you going to stop signing 

sweetheart deals and sell the casino to someone who can run it 

properly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what 

you’ve illustrated by your comments is that again you can’t tell 

the difference between a good business deal and a bad business 

deal. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Eleven 

hundred direct and indirect jobs; 29.1 million to the GDP (gross 

domestic product) of the province; as recently as yesterday in 

the Leader-Post downtown merchants quoting the casino as 

contributing significantly to their bottom lines; hotel attendance 

at record rates; 500,000 to the city in taxes — the economic 

equivalent of two Grey Cups, seven Big Valley Jamborees. I 

don’t know of any business that would complain about these 

kind of results. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is also to the minister of SaskTel. What was 

touted by the Premier two years ago as SaskTel’s largest ever 

international deal seems to have turned into Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ largest ever bath, to the tune of 15 to $16 million, 

Mr. Speaker. It sounds like this project never made a profit 

ever. 

 

Madam Minister, you are responsible for a flopped deal in the 

U.S. (United States) that has cost taxpayers a bundle of money 

in this province. Last February when this project was losing 

money, Madam Minister, your government increased the risk of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers by throwing in another $9 million into 

the pot. 

 

Madam Minister, what were you thinking of? Why in the world, 

after you were already losing money, did cabinet pass those 

millions of dollars through orders in council so that you could 

own about 90 per cent of this company that was losing money? 

Why did you gamble even more taxpayers’ money in this 

boondoggle? Or are you just thinking about now trying to go to 

work and double your money in Guyana? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I find it really interesting 

that members opposite in the Tory caucus would ask questions 

about our financial management. The diversified investments 

that SaskTel has are held separately from the telephone 

company in a holding company. The holding company overall, 

Mr. Speaker, has delivered almost $300 million in revenue into 

this province. So 16; it’s reduced by 16. 

 

The order in council that was passed last year was a conversion 

of an investment into equity to give us a majority interest so 

that we could have access to the financial details, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

question for the minister. It seems, Madam Minister, that your 

government has got gambling fever. Now I assume that before 

risking millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money that you would 

have done some homework. I think that would be natural. That 

means that there should have been a feasibility study, some 

research and background that should be provided for the 

members of this Assembly so that we can find out exactly what 

went wrong with this deal. And something definitely did go 

wrong, Madam Minister. When SaskTel senior vice-president 

says there’s plenty of business available in the market yet the 

NST quickly turns into a high volume, low margin company, 

something went wrong. 

 

Madam Minister, I’d like a copy of the feasibility studies and 

the research that you have done in order to justify risking these 

millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money into this adventure and 

give us an explanation of how you lost all of these millions of 

dollars. How did you get snookered, for example, Madam 

Minister, by the B.C. (British Columbia) company that got you 

into 87 per cent of the risk and the loss, not just your original 

amount? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, some interesting lessons 

have been learned through this investment. And I find it 

amazing for the members from that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, would talk about $16 million when they spent a billion 

dollars a year more than they took in, leaving us with $15 

billion in debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Commission Contracts 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These issues involving 

public funds are too important to just let go without some 

answers and some reports that should have been tabled a long 

time ago. Now as far back as a year ago, I’ve been asking for 

information with respect to some of the secret contracts entered 

into with the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and some of 

the contracts they’ve let out. 

 

Finally, in 1995-96 annual report tabled yesterday, we do find 

some revelations. However, we can’t rely on that as being 

accountable, Mr. Speaker, considering we are already well into 

the 1997-98 fiscal year. Why has it taken so long? And I would 

like to ask the minister, how much in fact has been paid to Mr.   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

Canada Touring for 1996-97 fiscal year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member will remember, he did ask for the contract. We did tell 

him that that was privileged business information and the 

refusal was upheld by the province’s Freedom of Information 

Commissioner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we recall that the Mr. 

Canada Touring contract has been kept secret from 

Saskatchewan taxpayers who, by the way, are in fact footing the 

bill. This is a publicly owned casino, Mr. Speaker, and therefore 

the residents of this province deserve some answers. In light of 

the revelations of this recent report, will the government 

commit to tabling the 1996-97 annual report before the end of 

this session or will the minister finally release the details on all 

of the secret, exclusive contracts it has signed with 

out-of-province companies such as Mr. Canada Tours? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All of our 

reports are tabled as is required by the legislature . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  On time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  On time, duly accounted for, signed off 

by the auditors responsible. 

 

I’ll just say that Mr. Canada has more than delivered on what 

we expected from him. And I ask you to consider the very 

competitive nature of the gaming business, and you compare an 

ad for three days in sunny Las Vegas and three days in Regina 

in the dead of the winter that we’ve just had and I would say 

that Mr. Canada has done an excellent job of attracting people 

to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Political Donations Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday this government released 

a report on the Crown prosecutions branch after having the 

report in hand for almost one month. This House is now 

awaiting the release of another report, Mr. Speaker, from the 

province’s Chief Electoral Officer into political fund-raising 

practices. His investigation began after it was reported that the 

Progressive Conservatives had access to a two and a half 

million dollar secret trust fund made up of anonymous donors. 

Soon after it was revealed that Tommy Douglas House had 

contributed hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of 

anonymous political donations to the New Democratic Party. 

 

Given the fact that the Chief Electoral Officer is officially an 

employee of Executive Council, will the Premier indicate to this 

House whether a report on political fund-raising has been 

turned over to him, and if so, when will it be made available to 

the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, we have not received the 

report in question and we look forward to receiving it, as does 

the hon. member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Whistleblower Legislation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the debate over whistle-blowing 

legislation was rekindled a couple of months ago when the 

informant in the Tory fraud scandal indicated that he was afraid 

to come forward for fear he and his wife would lose their 

government jobs and be held to be in violation of their oath of 

confidentiality. 

 

Clearly there is a need for some amendments for the oath of 

confidentiality and the Minister of Labour and the Premier both 

indicated that they would support some changes. Later on today 

I will be introducing an amendment to the government 

whistleblowers’ Act legislation to amend the oath of 

confidentiality, which will provide employees with protection 

who report on illegal activity. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice indicate whether the government is 

prepared to support this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, we’d like to have a look at 

the legislation before we indicate whether or not we would 

support it. We have been doing some internal research with 

respect to this question. We did some a few years ago. I decided 

at that time not to proceed with it. The Premier has indicated we 

are considering it again and we will, but as far as the member’s 

question is concerned, I think that even he would agree — even 

he would agree — that it is manifestly unfair to ask us if we 

will support a piece of legislation that we haven’t even seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 218 — The Naming of Northern 

Municipal Airports Act 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 218, entitled The Naming of Northern Municipal Airports 

Act, be introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 219 — The Government 

Whistleblowers’ Act 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 219, The 

Government Whistleblowers’ Act, be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

  



670  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting a Collective 

Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and 

United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 

and by leave of the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 45, The 

IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890, 

Collective Bargaining Agreement Act, be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45  An Act respecting a Collective 

Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and 

United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the Bill 

that has just been given first reading. I’m confident that all hon. 

members will be able to support it. 

 

I want to thank the members opposite for agreeing to waive the 

usual notice provisions of this Bill and allowing it to proceed 

this afternoon. Their spirit of cooperation in moving this 

legislation through quickly is much appreciated, and I want to 

acknowledge it and say how important I think it is that we have 

this degree of consensus about this important piece of 

legislation. It’s a demonstration of how we can work together in 

this legislature for the benefit of the people of the province. 

 

My remarks today will be brief and my purpose in speaking is 

simply to provide members with some background on this Bill, 

describe exactly what the Bill does, and outline the benefits of 

passing this Bill. 

 

We are of course dealing with an exemption from section 33 of 

The Trade Union Act. In simple terms, subsection (3) of section 

33 effectively limits the length of collective agreements to three 

years. An employer and union may agree to a longer contract 

but either side can give notice to bargain a new agreement after 

three years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are particular circumstances that make the 

Bill before us most timely. IPSCO and the United Steelworkers 

of America have signed a five-year agreement. Both parties 

want a collective agreement that extends beyond three years. 

And the IPSCO-Steelworker agreement is contingent upon this 

legislature passing a Bill that will extend or make legal their 

collective agreement for the full term of the collective 

agreement. 

 

There are some very good reasons for us to pass this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, including if we uphold the IPSCO-Steelworker 

agreement by passing the Bill, it will trigger an immediate 

investment of about $25 million in capital projects at the Regina 

steelworks. And IPSCO will further invest an average of $17.5 

million in each year of the agreement at Canadian operations 

that are certified by the Steelworkers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more. The agreement provides a pay 

package in line with industry standards. It upgrades pensions 

and other benefits, and it will provide access to funding to assist 

employees relying on supplementary unemployment benefits. 

Of course for all this to happen we need to pass the Bill that is 

before us, because quite simply if we don’t pass the Bill then 

the agreement that I’ve just described will not go ahead. 

 

The Bill before us demonstrates our willingness, the willingness 

of all parties in this Assembly, to respond to the particular 

needs of the working community as they arise, and that we can 

respond positively to the needs of both parties at the labour 

relations table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agreement is a good deal. It’s good for the 

employer. It’s good for the employees. It’s good for the 

community. 

 

The employer, IPSCO, will benefit from a longer period of 

stability. It will have a competitive collective agreement. It will 

be able to reassure its customers that its steel supply is reliable 

into the next century. And it clears the way for IPSCO to make 

new investments in Saskatchewan. And I don’t think anyone 

here today would quarrel with that idea. 

 

As for the employees, members of the United Steelworkers of 

America, they will also benefit from a longer period of stability 

and will have more secure jobs. Their compensation package 

will be improved. The members relying on supplementary 

Unemployment Insurance benefits will be helped. 

 

By signing the agreement, the Steelworkers are showing that it 

too is more flexible and open to new ways of doing business. 

And again, I don’t think anyone here would take quarrel with 

that idea. 

 

For the community, Regina and Saskatchewan, this agreement 

brings benefits from new investments in IPSCO’s steelworks 

here, and benefits from being home to a more stable workforce. 

Other Steelworker certified Canadian operations at IPSCO will 

also see new investment as well. And surely no one in this 

Assembly would object to that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good deal for all concerned, and that’s 

why I’m confident that all members of the Assembly will be 

able to support this legislation. 

 

Now as regards the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, a few points need to 

be clearly understood. We are dealing here with just one 

collective agreement. And by passing this Bill we can all show 

our willingness to support investment and jobs in the province. 

 

In concluding my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to stress that the 

amendment before us contributes to labour relations stability in 

an important industry in Saskatchewan. It indicates our 

flexibility and our willingness in this Assembly to work   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

with both parties to the agreement. It is an example of how 

Saskatchewan is investing in working people by responding to 

their needs. And it shows our willingness to support jobs and 

investment in the province. 

 

This legislation will allow the five-year IPSCO-United 

Steelworkers collective agreement, which has benefits for all 

involved, to come into effect. And I don’t think that hon. 

members in this Assembly can quarrel with the intent of the Bill 

nor do I think there is a simpler way to get the job done. 

 

It is then, Mr. Speaker, my pleasure to invite all members to 

join together in support of this Bill. And in so saying, I move 

second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great 

pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to express my full support, and the 

support of the Liberal opposition, for the IPSCO and United 

Steelworkers of America collective bargaining agreement Act, 

Bill 45. This Bill will approve the five-year agreement between 

IPSCO and the United Steelworkers, local 5890, ensuring 

stability for the business and the workers. In this case both 

parties want this contract and both will benefit from it. 

 

As we all know, the Liberal opposition had raised some serious 

concerns with the amendments to The Trade Union Act as 

proposed under Bill 37. And those amendments would allow for 

extended contracts between unions and employers. But before 

such an across-the-board decision is made, more time would be 

needed to study those implications. But IPSCO and IPSCO 

workers don’t have that kind of time. They have a five-year 

contract on the table and the delays caused by the three-year 

contract limits imposed by existing legislation are hurting the 

workers and costing them benefits. 

 

As the Labour critic for the Liberal opposition, I’m happy to 

support a Bill that will secure a contract negotiated in good faith 

— a contract that is good for both the workers and the business. 

Seven hundred and fifty people will be covered under the 

IPSCO agreement. That means 750 secure, well-paid jobs. 

Workers gain significant bonuses, pension improvements, and 

pay increases. And, Mr. Speaker, I might add with respect to 

pension benefits, these are improvements to a fully funded 

pension plan as well. 

 

The company gains stable employee-employer relations. I’m 

told that the current trend in the steel industry is towards 

longer-term agreements and they need stable 

employer-employee relations in these circumstances. A 

five-year contract allows IPSCO to plan its future and take 

advantage of current market trends. And it’s not just IPSCO and 

the workers that benefit, a prosperous steel industry benefits all 

of Saskatchewan. That means significant spin-off effects for the 

rest of the economy. As we’ve heard the government mention 

this afternoon, the benefits are substantial to the province. So it 

truly is a win-win-win situation. 

 

We are pleased to see that the government has finally acted to 

approve the IPSCO contract. The Liberal caucus was concerned 

about the delays caused by government legislation. When 

IPSCO and its workers ratified the agreement in January, they 

were demonstrating the true Canadian values of compromise 

and understanding, while I might add since then they’ve also 

exhibited a good deal of patience. 

 

We’re glad that the NDP government is finally doing what 

IPSCO and its workers have long said needed to be done. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to thank 

representatives of IPSCO and local 5890 for their discussions 

with us in fully informing us of the impact of the situation. And 

I’d also like to commend them for those efforts. 

 

And it’s my pleasure to take my place at this time and allow this 

legislation to proceed without any further delay. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly agree with the opposition and the government in terms 

of this piece of legislation. We believe it’s good for the . . . 

good piece of legislation before the legislature today. It’s good 

for IPSCO, it’s good for their employees, and it’s certainly 

good for the province’s economy. 

 

It provides IPSCO with labour peace. We understand that they 

are going to embark on many new contracts and future 

investment within the province. And that certainly is good for 

all concerned. It will provide labour peace. And we certainly 

congratulate the government on listening to the management of 

IPSCO, on bringing this important issue forward. 

 

It also further illustrates that business and labour can make their 

own arrangements, further illustrating the futility of Acts like 

The Labour Standards and Trade Union Act, and one of the 

many reasons why those Acts should be repealed. 

 

Business and labour can manage their own affairs without 

having to have the likes of the government involved in them, 

and I think this is clearly an indication that that kind of thing 

can be done. You can have harmony in terms of labour relations 

between companies like IPSCO and their employees. 

 

So we fully support this piece of legislation and would want to 

see its speedy passage, and congratulate IPSCO on their future 

investment and congratulate the employees on their record of 

achievement in this regard as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 45  An Act respecting a Collective 

Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and 

United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890 

 

Clause 1 

 

  



672  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his official, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is 

Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of the department. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, may I formally and on 

the record thank the Liberal opposition and the Conservative 

opposition for the approach that they’ve taken with respect to 

this legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1430) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting a Collective 

Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and 

United Steelworkers of America, Local 5890 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Substitution Motion Ruled Irregular 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, the Chair has a 

ruling to provide to the House. Yesterday the Government 

Whip moved a motion proposing to substitute the name of the 

member for Regina Wascana Plains for that of the member for 

Moose Jaw North on the list of members composing the Special 

Committee on Nominations. 

 

Paragraph 566(3) of the sixth edition, Beauchesne’s, states in 

part that: 

 

It is the Speaker’s duty to call the attention of the mover 

and of the House to the irregularity of a motion . . . 

 

After reviewing the Journals for February 29, 1996, wherein 

the original five members were appointed, I find that the 

Government Whip’s motion is irregular — firstly, in that it 

purports to remove the member from Moose Jaw North despite 

the fact that he is not a current member of this committee; and 

secondly, in that the motion has the effect of increasing the 

membership of the committee to six in contravention of Rule 

94(1), which stipulates that the Special Nominating Committee 

shall consist of five members. 

 

I therefore rule that the Government Whip’s motion is irregular 

and inoperable and order that it shall be of no force or effect. 

 

Order. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the interest of open, 

accountable, and responsible government, I am pleased to 

submit the answer to this very penetrating question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. 1 is answered. The answer is 

provided. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Utility Rate Review Process 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

initiate the discussion on the seventy-five minute debate on the 

issue of the public utilities review process . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I understand that everybody 

would like to go home after we’ve had such a productive day 

and actually moved a Bill, and I recognize the feeling. But I 

have to tell you that it has been an agreement that the House 

Leader and I have had that we would use the time for private 

members’ day constructively and appropriately and allow 

members to have the time to debate issues that are before the 

province and this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the cornerstones of the whole issue 

about a Crown utility review process has been outlined in many 

times and on many occasions, including the former premier of 

the province, Mr. Allan Blakeney, who said in 1996 that the 

government not only must have a fair and open review process, 

that they must consider reorganizing how the current process 

works in charging fair rates to customers. 

 

It’s interesting to note that over the past short while in the 

review process that’s currently in place, there were, for 

example, six meetings held in the SaskEnergy around the 

province which involved no more than 70 people totally. And 

for the 1 800 information line that was set up in order to allow 

direct access by consumers, there were only 39 calls received, 

and there were two written submissions. 

 

People, public groups like the consumers’ association and the 

taxpayers’ association, have called the review process nothing 

more than spin-doctoring by the government. The sparse and 

short attendance that we have on this thing seems to indicate 

that indeed this attitude is shared by the public because there’s 

so little participation in the whole exercise. 

 

Clearly this process is open to government manipulation. 

Because it seems that it is totally unfair when a Crown 

corporation compiles and packages the results, conducts the 

information for cabinet, and is the initiator of the whole 

process. Clearly people have voted with their feet and have 

shown their contempt for this process by staying away from it 

and not participating in it and by not giving it credibility in such 

a way. 

 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

It further builds the people’s cynicism about this whole process 

when SaskPower president, Jack Messer, concluded that the 

public hearings were of no real value since there’s no mystery 

that the general public does not like price hikes. So to have that 

kind of contempt of the whole process illustrated by the 

president of SaskPower, whose corporation is in charge of 

doing the process at great cost, we end up very easy to 

understand that the process is bogus because it doesn’t do 

anything. 

 

Public input is meaningless unless it is informed. And public 

accountability is meaningless unless there’s a real possibility of 

changing the final outcome. The experience has shown that 

time and time again with this process, all that happens is we go 

through an expensive public relations exercise and at the end of 

the day the government simply rubber stamps what they were 

going to do all along. 

 

You know, I find it very concerning that over $600,000 was 

spent on the SaskPower review and that there was a further 

SaskEnergy review which also would have cost a significant 

amount of monies; and that this money should have been better 

spent in either, number one, having a better and fairer and more 

open and accountable process, or number two, it could have 

been spent better in the general revenues of this province where 

they’re sorely needed in many areas. 

 

The SaskEnergy vice-president of gas supply, Ken From, in 

response to a question at a meeting in P.A. (Prince Albert) 

about whether public comments would be noted by the cabinet, 

stated he did not know how much weight public consultation 

would carry with the cabinet. What cabinet does is beyond the 

control of SaskEnergy. So the question is, is why the Crowns 

are spending money to find out something they already know 

and have decided before they ever left Regina for consultation. 

 

It is interesting to wonder how long SaskEnergy and SaskPower 

are going to be out of sync with the rest of the industry. And we 

have to know if the figures and all the information that is being 

used in the calculation and justification of those proposed rate 

changes are indeed based on solid energy industry standards. 

 

The importance and competence of this is so critical to what 

we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, if we’re not only going to 

restore confidence of the people into our Crown corporations, 

we have to also know that the confidence of the people in their 

elected representatives is important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved through various different models of 

reviewing the rate hikes of the Crown corporations over the 

years, and I think that every government has struggled with 

what is the most appropriate way of doing this, recognizing that 

what we have with our Crown corporations is in essence 

government monopolies. And so it’s not that everything is 

operating in a free and open competitive environment, it’s 

operating in a monopolistic environment that makes things a lot 

more critical for the consumers of this province to understand 

how this should work and how it can be done fairly. 

 

We have to also recognize, Mr. Speaker, that some of the 

models of doing this review have proved to be very expensive 

and very cumbersome. And for that reason it is understood that 

we have to move to a system that recognizes the objectives not 

only of the government and the Crown corporations, but also 

legitimately recognizes the issues that have been brought forth 

and the concerns that have been raised by the stakeholders, the 

special interest groups, and the people of this province as well 

as the consumers of the services of the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) spokesman John Millar noted in the Leader-Post 

on February 12, ’97 that a review of Crown corporations in ’96 

“found a growing demand for public scrutiny of the utilities, 

and that the Crowns need to increase their transparency when 

setting rates.” 

 

I know that it is true that the Crowns always say that they’re in 

a competitive environment and that there has to be some 

discretion in terms of all the information that’s put on the table, 

and therefore we need to come up with a meaningful review 

process that recognizes the privacy and needs for discretion, but 

also needs to have that transparency occur so that people of the 

province recognize that there is a process of meaningful, true 

review of the requirements of a Crown corporation to request a 

rate adjustment. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we would like to propose, because 

the government is constantly asking us what we would do 

instead . . . and so in this debate we want to indicate what we 

would do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have existing people who have 

the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. They’re called 

the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and we represent every constituency, all 

parts of the province, and all political persuasions. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we have a good base about who should be 

empowered to review these rate hikes in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so what we are proposing is that there is a body to be made 

up of members of all parties of this Assembly to sit as a 

standing committee to review the rate hikes of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

We think in addition, that there should be members added to 

this committee from various interest groups — interest groups 

like the Consumers’ Association of Canada, the CFIB 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business), the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers, and the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour. 

 

We believe that this body could sit whenever rate hikes were 

proposed by any of the Crown utilities and could call, upon 

request, such experts and independent consultants as may be 

required, to recommend if a proposed rate change should be 

accepted or rejected. That’s the way the federal boards work, 

like the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission), Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



674  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

The recommendations that would be made by this independent 

body upon reviewing all this information and researching all the 

input and receiving meaningful dialogue from the consumers, 

the recommendation as to the appropriateness of the price 

adjustment, Mr. Speaker, we believe should be binding on the 

utility unless directly overridden by the cabinet. Such a process, 

we believe, Mr. Speaker, would go a long way to overcome the 

cynicism that exists about the current review process. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the government’s current 

45-day public review process for proposed rate changes for 

Crown utilities as nothing more than an expensive public 

relations exercise that lacks the confidence of the people of 

Saskatchewan; and further, urges the government to 

immediately establish a review committee consisting of 

members of all parties, as well as industry and consumer 

representatives, which would provide far more 

accountability than the current process. 

 

I’d like to move that, seconded by the member from Saltcoats, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion from the 

member for Melfort-Tisdale actually seems to have some 

assumptions built into it that are worth examining, so I am very 

pleased to be able to speak to this motion. 

 

The first assumption that he makes is that utility rates ought to 

be publicly reviewed. I agree. But I also want to emphasize that 

it’s not just publicly owned utilities that need to be under the 

spotlight. We’ve just come through a disastrous period of 

flirtation with so-called privatization, as if putting the profits 

and priorities of utilities into the hands of a concentrated few 

so-called risk takers is somehow going to magically solve all of 

society’s problems. 

 

The answer to that of course is borne out by the results. Here in 

Saskatchewan we’re faced with the very real possibility that our 

Saskoil Crown, reincarnated as Wascana Energy, may be 

bought up by a multinational. Thank heavens we have The 

Wascana Energy Act so that we can at least keep the head office 

here. 

 

We’re proud of Saskatchewan and we don’t want to become 

simply a branch plant for a multinational. Nevertheless, the 

experience with Wascana Energy should serve as a cautionary 

tale for privatization boosters. 

 

Similarly in Ottawa we have our former royal post office 

changing rates, services, and terms and conditions without 

public consultation. And in Britain a few former water company 

executives have become instant millionaires with little or no 

effort beyond schmoozing with a few political cronies. All the 

while, their customers are paying more and 

more for less and less. If that’s privatization, I don’t think we’re 

interested in it, thank you. 

 

But let’s start out with the assumption that the public, as 

purchasers of various utility services, have the right to demand 

greater accountability over rate setting of all utility companies, 

not just the publicly owned ones. Further, let’s make the 

assumption that greater public scrutiny is necessarily a good 

thing. 

 

That’s a great leap of logic, as members know, having watched 

the spectacle of the old PURC (Public Utilities Review 

Commission) process in the ’80s. That independent commission 

set rates that defied and denied the priorities of the government 

of the day. They set up a costly, cumbersome, litigious process 

that only let light shine in for a few consultants and experts. 

 

The public was effectively shut out because the whole process 

became bogged down in detail, jargon, and technocracy. 

Anyone who ever sat through a PURC hearing, as I did several 

times in the ’80s when I was on Saskatoon City Council, knows 

all too well the flaws and the wrinkles in the PURC process. 

 

That point was driven home to me graphically this past January 

when I attended a seminar in Washington. The seminar was to 

prepare utility companies — public, private, municipal, and 

co-op — for deregulation. These executives all agreed on one 

point: PURCs are costly and do not serve their original purpose. 

 

One private electrical utility executive told me that a PURC 

hearing added hundreds of thousands of dollars of cost to his 

company, simply to prepare for the hearings. And it delayed 

any rate increases or decreases by several months. In the 

meantime his competitors had swallowed up his customer base, 

and all the advantage that he should have had by being nimble 

and flexible in the private sector was gone. 

 

PURCs don’t work in the States, they didn’t work here, and we 

should be very leery of turning back the clock. The current 

motion implies that the current 45-day review process is an 

expensive public relations gesture. Nothing could be further 

from the truth. It is a genuine attempt — a genuine attempt, I 

say to the members opposite — to recognize that the public 

both wants and deserves greater accountability and transparency 

in the rate review process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  It’s experimental as yet. Only two utilities, 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy, have gone through the process. 

But we’ve already learned valuable lessons from the effort. The 

45-day process is dramatically less expensive than the old 

PURC process. It is dramatically more accessible to the general 

public. Instead of formal hearings in closed, stuffy, smoke-filled 

hotel rooms that intimidate the average utility customer, there 

are easily accessible telephone concern lines. 

 

There are four public hearings held during the 45-day process. 

There are public notices in daily and weekly newspapers. And 

there are numerous avenues available to the public to review   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

the rate proposals and make comments. 

 

After that the recommendations go to cabinet for final approval. 

The public has considerable opportunity to complain; the 

Crowns have considerable opportunity to explain; and the 

politicians have considerable opportunity to balance conflicting 

concerns and priorities in a way that reflects all sorts of agendas 

and goals, not just the narrow ones of the Crown utilities. 

 

The process may still be imperfect. It’s experimental, and it 

may need more refinement, but members opposite should give 

it a chance rather than running around pretending they’ve 

somehow found the Holy Grail. Their current proposal is no 

more a perfect solution than any that have preceded it. 

 

If the ultimate goal is to simply freeze utility rates so consumers 

are always happy, then just say so. But if the goal is to have a 

healthy and forward-looking utility company that provides good 

services to the public, is fair and balanced in its rate structure, 

and provides the people of Saskatchewan with a reasonable 

return on investment, then we need to consider very carefully 

the process by which we review utility rates. 

 

This current notion speaks to a LURC, a legislative utilities 

review commission. Curiously, that’s exactly the notion that the 

third party put forward in the last session. I assume that the fact 

that the Liberals are now sponsoring this motion means that we 

can look forward to more instant wisdom from the Grits that is 

actually nothing more than recycled Tory notions. That’s 

me-too politics with a vengeance. Where’s the leadership? 

Where’s the vision? 

 

And what would this so-called LURC accomplish? Well for 

starters it would likely end up being just as cumbersome and 

expensive as the old discredited PURC. It is näive, members 

opposite, it is näive to think otherwise. You can’t set up a 

formal process like a rate review commission without also 

going the whole 9 yards and making sure the process is 

reasonable. There will be a duty to have a fair hearing, not just 

for consultants and experts, but for the little guys. There will be 

costs involved and the difficulty of choosing industry and 

consumer representatives in a fair and open matter. 

 

There’s a great danger that a LURC will become even more 

cumbersome and legalistic and consultant-driven, rather than 

consumer oriented. And it may simply become an opportunity 

for scoring political points rather than ensuring that we have 

healthy, competitive, public utility Crowns. 

 

Now I’m not totally dismissing the motion from the members 

opposite. I think it has some merit, but I want to note that 

government is currently involved in a larger, more 

macro-oriented Crown review process. They’re reviewing all 

options to keep the Crowns healthy and vibrant with a view to 

ensuring that the people of Saskatchewan get the best possible 

return on their investments regardless of ownership structure or 

challenges. The Crown review process is considering all these 

factors, and the matter of utility rate review is only one of those 

factors. 

 

So I thank the members opposite for their suggestion, and I say 

it is a suggestion but it’s only one. There’s many others — 

there’s PURC, there’s son of PURC, there’s LURC, there’s 

even JURC, a judicial utility review commission. 

 

There’s still more options. We could refer the whole process to 

the existing Crown Corporations Committee. We could have 

more public meetings in the 45-day review process. Or we 

could have regular utility rate increases tied to the CPI 

(consumer price index). Even, heaven forbid, we could adopt 

the notion of privatizing everything and letting the free market 

decide how much consumers will pay for utilities. All options 

need to be considered. 

 

So it seems to me that the best thing that this Assembly could 

do today with this . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member’s . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I will allow an amendment to be put, only if 

it’s put directly now with no further debate. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I would make an amendment: 

 

That we strike all the words after “this Assembly 

recognizes that” and substitute the following: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes that various options to 

provide greater accountability and public control over 

utility rate reviews have been experimented with, including 

the costly and cumbersome Public Utilities Review 

Commission; and that this government is to be commended 

for looking at alternatives to this process; and further, that 

this Assembly looks to the Crown review process for 

suggestions and ideas to provide even greater transparency 

and public involvement in the utility rate review process 

than is achieved through the current 45-day review 

process. 

 

I move that, seconded by the member from Regina Sherwood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak to this very 

important issue and, more directly, to speak to the amendment 

by my hon. colleague, the member for Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

My remarks this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, will deal with this 

issue first from a historical basis, talking a little bit about the 

past historical developments in this area. I’ll then talk a little bit 

about the current process that’s in place. I will also, if time 

permits, talk a little bit about some . . . be talking about 

Saskatchewan Crowns review that took place and their 

comments on this issue, and go from there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan . . . First of all, in history, 

Saskatchewan has experimented with PURCs, types of PURC 

— mechanisms — in the past. 

 

In March of 1982 the government of the day appointed Chief 

Justice Culliton, a one-person commission, to review 

SaskPower’s gas and electricity rates and to consider   



676  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

opportunities for public participation in rate setting. 

 

(1500) 

 

The commission was just becoming operational when the 

election occurred in that year, and the commission was put on 

hold. And later in the year, after the election, it was replaced by 

a comprehensive Public Utilities Review Commission, chaired 

by Judge Ernie Boychuk. 

 

This Public Utilities Review corporation, Mr. Speaker, was an 

independent body with the responsibility of overseeing rate 

changes proposed by the monopoly utilities in the province. 

 

The government in place at the time hoped that the existence of 

such a regulatory board would oblige Crown corporations of 

Saskatchewan — mainly Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

SaskTel, and Saskatchewan Government Insurance — to be 

more accountable for their rate changes to the people and at that 

same time, Mr. Speaker, provide an opportunity for the general 

public to express their concerns regarding any proposed rate 

changes. 

 

Previously, as we’re all aware, rate proposals were approved by 

the provincial cabinet which, according to the government, 

allowed for much political interference in the business of the 

Crowns. It was believed that the public wanted some kind of 

reassurance that rate setting was justifiable, and demanded to be 

more involved in the process. These public concerns resulted in 

the establishment of PURC, in the PURC that I’ve just 

mentioned. 

 

Judge Boychuk, along with members of the commission, 

listened as the Crowns presented their cases and ruled on 

whether to accept or reject the Crown corporations’ applications 

for rate changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decisions made by PURC were originally 

intended to be final. However, as early as seven months after 

the first review meeting came into being, the government was 

already attempting to overrule decisions made by this Public 

Utility Review Commission. At least six times during PURC’s 

existence, cabinet either overruled decisions made by the 

commission or ordered that specific rulings be made regarding 

the Crown utilities. 

 

With this type of arrangement in place, government could 

blame the commission for decisions such as rate increases, and 

yet they could also step in and impose their power if public 

pressure became too strong. 

 

Aside from these concerns regarding who had absolute 

authority over public utility decisions, Mr. Speaker, there were 

other problems that were beginning to become apparent as well. 

 

The Consumers’ Association of Canada, Saskatchewan Branch, 

expressed concern over the complexities of the process by 

which the Crown proposals were reviewed. The review process, 

Mr. Speaker, was meant to bring the public closer to the 

process. However, it did just the opposite. The proceedings 

became so complex and they were basically . . . that they were 

basically inaccessible to members of the public. 

 

Large customers who could afford the legal fees had an 

opportunity to get their views heard by the commission, but the 

average residential and farm customer was unable to participate 

in these public hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another major concern was the rapidly increasing 

costs of the review process itself. In a letter to the chief of staff 

to the minister responsible for PURC, the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation president at the time, George Hill, estimated that 

since the establishment of the commission, direct and indirect 

costs to the corporation, that is SPC (Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation), were approximately $5 million, Mr. Speaker, not 

to mention the productivity lost to senior executives’ time at 

attending meetings and other related activities. 

 

For some time prior to the legislation being passed, the 

government had been suggesting that a regulatory board be 

established in order to protect consumers from the monopoly 

utilities. 

 

However, after a brief rate freeze in 1982, some utility rates 

increased at a rate that was as much as two or three times that of 

inflation, Mr. Speaker. This did not fare well in the public eye, 

but of even more concern to the government was that the Public 

Utilities Review Commission had a very different objective 

than they would have hoped. 

 

Early on in its existence, Mr. Speaker, it became apparent that 

one major intent of the commission was to bring revenue to cost 

of services ratios as close as possible to the ratio of 1:0 — one 

point zero, pardon me. PURC was attempting to move the 

province away from cross-subsidization, whereby power bills of 

farm and residential customers were being subsidized by larger 

industrial customers. 

 

These policies were not something that the government could 

publicly advocate, Mr. Speaker, if they wished to maintain the 

support of the electorate. In other words, the government had 

created a commission that was making policies the government 

itself could not live with, and it became time for change. 

 

In the spring of 1987, as we know, Mr. Speaker, after 

approximately five years of existence, Bill No. 43 was 

proposed, An Act to repeal The Public Utilities Review 

Commission Act. There was little debate, Mr. Speaker, as to the 

future of rate regulation at this point. And in 1987, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister responsible for PURC, Gary Lane, announced the 

rescinding of the commission. 

 

Lane stated the increasing costs and complexity of the review 

process as causes for this. Chairman Ernie Boychuk was given 

the responsibility of wrapping up PURC by October 1987. It 

was indicated shortly thereafter that the government would 

revert back to the previous rate-setting process, whereby cabinet 

reviews all rate proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of PURC was not a good one, or the 

experience of PURC was not a good one. Let’s compare that 

with the current 45-day review process, Mr. Speaker, that   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

currently has been adopted by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment of the current 45-day review 

process requires Crowns to notify customers in advance before 

they can change utility rates, and provide at least 45 days for 

comment before the government can then make a decision on 

their rate applications. 

 

This policy, Mr. Speaker, is one that also has other minimum 

requirements. These requirements require SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 

that they shall notify the public of proposed increased utility 

rates at least 45 days in advance. The process shall also be 

applicable to all general, across the board rate increases for 

non-competitive services; i.e., those services where rates are set 

by the corporations themselves and are not negotiated to the 

consumer. 

 

Public notice has to be given. After the corporation has reached 

the approval of the board for the rate increases and it has 

received CIC board approval to issue the notice, public notice 

shall consist of at least a public announcement by the Crown 

corporation, notices in the daily Saskatchewan newspapers and 

appropriate weekly newspapers, and notice, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette. The corporation applying for the 

increase shall be responsible for explaining to the public the 

reasons for the rate increase being requested. 

 

The applying corporation shall also make appropriate 

provisions for receiving comments from the public about the 

rate proposal; respond, Mr. Speaker, to these comments, 

provide a report to the CIC board and to cabinet which 

summarizes the comments of the public and the corporation’s 

responses, and make this report in turn available to the public. 

The current process, Mr. Speaker, also requires Crowns to hold 

at least four public meetings during the 45-day review process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any rate review process should meet some 

minimum tests. They should be low cost, they should be 

accountable, they should be accessible to all stakeholders, and 

they should be timely, Mr. Speaker — that is, decisions should 

be made rapidly. 

 

The current process meets these criteria; however it is not 

perfect — however this process is not perfect — and if talking 

about Saskatchewan’s Crown Committee report takes this into 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. Debate will continue. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter debate today because perhaps as the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast says, we are searching for the Holy Grail. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t need Sir Galahad to wander all 

around England because we have the solution. We have the 

Holy Grail here. 

 

I’m very pleased to see that the members of the official 

opposition are proposing this particular piece of motion because 

it’s an exact copy to Bills that we have presented to this House 

for the past three years. Although, Mr. Speaker, I think you 

have to recognize that a copy is never as sharp as the original. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the 

original. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our proposal which the members of the official 

opposition have picked up on is to provide a legislative utility 

review commission because there is definitely a need for the 

public to have direct input into the operation of government . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member says that we have 

to have accountability — the member from Regina Sherwood 

— accountability, and that under the previous PURC, which 

was disbanded in 1987, that they were not accountable, that 

they were trying to make government policy while not being in 

the government. But under the LURC proposal that we have 

presented, Mr. Speaker, in legislation before this House three 

times, the accountability would be in place because, Mr. 

Speaker, we are talking about MLAs being the committee, a 

majority of which would be government members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So perhaps their Premier does not have the comfort and 

confidence in his back-benchers to not follow government 

procedures, that they would be going off in some direction as 

rugged individualists, which the member for Saskatoon 

Southeast likes to use for a term — rugged individualism. 

Perhaps that’s what the Premier is afraid of — that his 

back-benchers will somehow, Mr. Speaker, become individuals, 

will speak up for their constituents and for themselves and not 

follow the party line. 

 

I can understand that, if that’s what the Premier is concerned 

about — that he might actually have some people on the back 

benches who think for themselves, you know. And if that’s his 

concern, then perhaps he is right to feel that way. I’m not sure 

that he has any of those, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps he does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor agrees that there is a great 

deal of concern to be expressed about the operations of the 

Crown corporations and their accountability and the methods 

they use to setting up their rate structures. The member for 

Rosetown put in place this 45-day review process as the head of 

CIC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly, everyone in the public, 

and everyone in the Crown corporations know and recognize 

that this is simply a sham. It is a false front on the decisions that 

have previously been made by the cabinet. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Southeast says that it goes from 

the public to the Crown corporations to the cabinet for a final 

decision. No, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how it works. It goes from 

the cabinet. The cabinet says: Jack Messer, we need some more 

money out of SaskPower. Now here’s how you’re going to do 

it. You’re going to go out there and you’re going to raise 

SaskPower’s rates. 

 

And so Jack then says, well I guess I got to do it. Crown 

corporations . . . CIC, needs a bigger dividend. 

 

So he goes out and says, well we have to equalize rates. We   



678  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

have to raise up rates for residential, we have to raise up rates 

for farmers, we have to raise up rates for small business; so that 

we can bring in more money to pay a larger dividend to CIC 

which in turn rolls it over to the Consolidated Fund of 

government. It doesn’t come from the consumer, Mr. Speaker. 

It doesn’t come from the corporation. It comes from cabinet. 

And the corporation takes it to the public in their 45-day review 

process, and they don’t say, what do you think of this. They 

say, here’s a number to phone and we won’t tell you why we’re 

doing this. Don’t ask us any questions. We can’t answer 

questions, but we won’t tell you how you’re going to do this. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, when SaskEnergy had their 45-day 

review process just a few scant months ago in Regina, — 180 to 

190,000 people — they had 9 people came out to the meeting. 

And I happen to know one of the people that attended the 

meeting, and that person only wanted an opportunity to talk to 

the president of SaskEnergy — nothing to do about the rates. So 

it was not, Mr. Speaker, any sort of an exercise of public input 

and public consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the LURC process would allow members of this 

Assembly, who are already on the government payroll, who 

already understand the implications, who are responsible to 

their constituents, Mr. Speaker, to review the processes, to be 

able to ask questions related to the Crown corporations before 

they raise the rates, not after. Not a year later, not two years 

later, but before the rates are raised, Mr. Speaker, which is 

timely. That is timely — not two years later. 

 

The Crown corporations would have to come before the 

committee and explain why they need the rate increase, and 

simply because their putting $31 million down a tube in Guyana 

is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. Or because they lost $16 

million in a cable venture in the U.S., Mr. Speaker, is not a 

good enough reason for raising the rates in Saskatchewan to 

Saskatchewan consumers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says that 40 per cent of the 

government’s expenditures and budgets are not represented in 

this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, if there was a legislative review 

committee, I believe the members of this legislature would have 

an opportunity to review that 40 per cent before those rates are 

increased. And that’s way, Mr. Speaker, this particular 

committee . . . this particular institution is needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that a LURC would do, Mr. Speaker, would 

be to prevent the government simply raising the rates for 

revenue generation as it goes into an early part of a mandate, a 

four-year mandate, and then lowering those rates, or balancing 

those rates towards the tail-end to utilize . . . or make the public 

feel more comfortable about what is happening because they 

haven’t had a rate increase for a year or so. 

 

It reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of the SGI situation where the 

minister for SGI said, three years with no-fault insurance; we 

won’t raise the rates. And then the minister is looking at raising 

the rates now, after two years — oh well, you have to include 

the time that we were thinking about it, Mr. Speaker. Well I’m 

not sure if he was. If that was the situation why we didn’t get a 

rate increase the next year. Perhaps the minister doesn’t think 

very long before he implements programs . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . As the member from Regina Victoria east, 

university area, is commenting, that was before the comet came. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, but 

I will be supporting the original motion. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to follow up where the Conservatives have left off 

because I think it’s important that we put things back in 

perspective. 

 

Now I appreciated listening to the member opposite talk about a 

LURC, and I have to tell you, when it comes to lurking, that’s 

one thing I have come to understand the Tories are good at. 

Whether it’s lurking in the back rooms, the dark alleys of 

politics, they know something about this, but when it comes to 

protecting consumers and utility rates, I am not prepared to 

accept their advice, thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me address the motion proposed, which the 

member from Melfort has put forward. And I’m going to stay 

extremely positive today as I address the good things that this 

government is doing to protect consumers. But it is important 

for us to take a look at what the Liberals’, and I would say the 

Conservatives’, alternative is here. 

 

The Liberals are proposing a review commission consisting of 

representatives from three political parties, industry people, and 

consumer groups. Well this is a worst-nightmare scenario with 

this original LURC proposed by the Tories. It’s based on the 

assumption that the public lacks confidence in the current 

45-day review process. I don’t believe that’s true. 

 

Let’s just take a look at this. The argument the member for 

Melfort puts forward is that, because people do not come 

forward, they are not somehow confident in the process. Well 

how does this work? How can that be true? Is it not simply that 

maybe they accept that the decision is a good one? Is it perhaps 

what we call tacit consent? Or is it . . . I can even accept there 

may simply be a lack of interest. Lack of confidence, I don’t 

buy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons why the Liberals want 

to put this forward — and certainly we know why the Tories 

would — is simply for political grandstanding. This legislative 

review . . . utility review commission would be nothing more 

than a political soapbox for opposition members to stand up on 

and play partisan political games with. 

 

They say that the reason we have the current process is because 

it serves the government’s objectives. I challenge any members 

opposite to find a single government member that is happy 

about raising utility rates. There isn’t one, not one. And when 

we support an increase in rates it’s because it is in the best 

interest of the corporation that is run for the benefit of this 

province. 

 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Mr. Speaker, I think that what we are dealing with here is not a 

problem with the process; what we’re dealing with here is a 

problem that the Liberals and Tories have — been unable to 

score political points in terms of utility pricing in this province. 

 

So what does their solution do? Well let’s look at how they fix 

this. Accepting that they put forward this recommendation, I’ll 

tell you what it does. The member from Melfort says that his 

process in fact will correct the spin-doctoring this government 

does. It will simply replace it with the witch-doctoring that the 

members opposite want to do. Because this committee will 

provide us with absolutely no new or credible process to deal 

with rate increases — not one. 

 

What it does is it politicizes the process, for starters. It adds 

more politicians into the process, which I ask, how does that 

improve the impartiality of this committee? How does it 

improve transparency by giving Liberal representatives and 

Conservative representatives a soapbox? Well it doesn’t. It has 

nothing to do with that. How does it improve accountability? 

How does providing an opportunity for the members opposite to 

stand up and grandstand improve accountability? 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing that we heard time and again during the 

Crown corporation review that the member for Regina 

Sherwood spoke of, is people throughout this province said they 

wanted to depoliticize this process. They wanted to depoliticize 

the way the Crowns are dealt with in this province. 

 

I tell you that it is the most strange logic to say that the way you 

depoliticize the process is to add more politicians into it. Now 

how, by adding partisan representatives into a review process, 

do we depoliticize it? That is the twisted logic of the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now they may say well, you know, but we’ll counterbalance 

our own negative influence — the negative influence of the 

Liberal Party and the Conservative Party — by adding in 

industry and consumer groups. Okay. I simply wonder though, 

by adding in the very opponents, special interest groups that we 

would have in this, by adding them onto the committee, are we 

not simply putting forward a mechanism where rather than 

dealing with what is necessarily right, in terms of a pricing 

structure, we will end up coming out with some sort of a 

compromise or a negotiated result that is simply politically 

correct. 

 

Doesn’t it simply put forward a scenario where we’ll do more 

horse-trading, in terms of sorting out what the pricing should 

be? Or is it simply one where they’ll stack the committee so 

we’re constantly dealing with a minority report? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposals put forward by the members 

opposite simply don’t work. They’re not particularly logical in 

terms of the arguments they’ve laid forward. Beyond that, I 

don’t think they meet the tests laid out by the member for 

Regina Sherwood. 

 

The key things that we have to look for in terms of utility rates, 

and the rates in particular, is they must be fair and equitable. I 

think they must be affordable and they’ve got to be sustainable. 

An Hon. Member:  Justifiable. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  And as the member for Saskatoon Southeast 

says, justifiable. Agreed. Certainly justifiable. So let’s take a 

look at how this impacts on two of our most significant Crowns 

that are involved in the process right now. 

 

SaskPower is facing deregulation of its market. The members 

opposite may disagree. We know the Tories agree with it 

because they’re the ones who have set it in motion. 

Deregulation has meant, in order to get ready for that, we have 

to deal with what was always one of the pillars of the reason we 

had the Crown corporations, and that was cross-subsidization. 

Mr. Speaker, because of this situation moving towards 

deregulation, cross-subsidization has to be reduced. 

 

Now let’s just remind people what that is. We are dealing with a 

situation that for every dollar it costs to create the power, farms 

are paying 77 cents for a dollar’s worth of power; residences are 

paying 85 cents; but the large commercial users are spending as 

much as $1.20 for every dollar of power that they use. That’s 

the problem that has got to be corrected. 

 

This is the inequitability. This is the unfairness of the system 

that has got to be straightened out so we can get ready for 

deregulation; so we can get ready to open up our market; so we 

can get ready to allow ourselves to compete in this new global 

market. That’s the basic situation. 

 

What we’re talking about here also is a situation where we need 

to make sure — and I know the members opposite don’t agree 

with this — but we need to make sure SaskPower remains a 

profitable Crown utility. Now the Tories would certainly, I 

think, prefer a model like we saw in Manitoba, which is where 

the Crown corporations are not allowed to run profits. They’re 

essentially operated just as a non-profit organization. 

 

It has led to a situation which simply means privatization. 

Because if you do not allow a Crown corporation to operate in 

the normal business environment, if you don’t allow it to 

capitalize and recapitalize and put money away now, it will 

have to be privatized to go out to the market to rebuild its 

infrastructure. This is a simple concept; a simple concept. 

 

And if you . . . You may say it’s not so. Simply take a look at 

Manitoba and what’s happened with Manitoba Tel, I say to you, 

Mr. Speaker. Because that is a situation they found themselves 

in, with not enough money to recapitalize and as a result they 

had to privatize themselves. That was the Tories’ alternative 

and I would argue that’s the Liberals’ alternative. 

 

SaskTel’s in much the same situation as they’re moving into 

competition in their pricing structure. And I think it’s 

interesting to look, to say, well what we need to do is to set up 

this legislative review committee because we can’t trust the 

Crown corporations to be properly priced. Well SaskTel’s doing 

a pretty good job if you ask me. They’re doing a good job of 

looking after consumers. And we’ve seen that. 

 

I think it’s also a good sign that in fact our public utilities can 

compete in a competitive environment and I think we should   



680  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

take a look at that as we start examining SaskPower’s situation 

and SaskEnergy’s more closely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other question which the members opposite do 

not address is if they are going to set up a utility review 

commission, does it simply deal with Saskatchewan’s 

provincially owned Crown corporations and Crown utilities or 

does it also deal with all public utilities? Are we going to start 

calling the city of Saskatoon in before this to explain their 

pricing structure? Are we going to call in Swift Current? Are 

we going to call in every municipality to explain to us what is 

happening in terms of their water pricing? Or are we going to 

call in Williston electric when they start to sell power into this 

province? I’d like to know, what is the scope of this committee? 

 

This is yet another half-baked Liberal idea which has not been 

thought out, which cannot be . . . It is simply as the member for 

Saskatoon Southeast said, it may be environmentally friendly 

because it’s been recycled from the Tories, but I don’t think that 

it is any better than it was when it was initially proposed. It’s 

not workable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say . . . and I think the member for 

Saskatoon Southeast put this well — she said our approach to 

Crown corporation pricing is a macro-oriented approach. I 

would say to you that the opposition is putting forward a 

mackerel-oriented approach because it is a red herring that they 

are attempting to drag across the trail to detract from the real 

agenda, which is privatization. It is a privatization agenda 

they’re putting forward. And if there is any doubt of it, I simply 

need to remind the Liberals of their leader and yet another of his 

excellent statements, the good Dr. Melenchuk, who says that he 

supports . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. Debate continues. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

pleasure to enter to this debate and in particular to the JURC’s 

proposal from across the floor along with the PURC’s proposal 

and all those urky ones that we’ve heard about. 

 

So of course we all realize that this 45-day review scam was 

started shortly before the last provincial election as an election 

ploy, along with several other things, Mr. Speaker, such as the 

hurt-is-over scenario in the health care system. We heard the 

Premier and the candidates around the province talking about 

that. We also heard about the balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, but 

what the government didn’t tell us then either was that it would 

be the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) money from the 

farmers of $188 million would indeed balance the budget. 

 

So as with those scenarios, Mr. Speaker, the 45-day review 

process wasn’t very well thought out and there was no 

guidelines for it. Here we are some two years after the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, and still there are no guidelines and the process is just 

as meaningless as it was when the Premier announced it some 

time ago. Absolutely nobody, Mr. Speaker, is satisfied with this 

process, except of course the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

caucus. Cabinet certainly doesn’t want to have a change 

because what the process boils down to, Mr. Speaker, is now 

that cabinet rubber-stamps the decisions that have been taken 

before the reviews even start. So that in itself creates the sham 

and the people of this province have seen through it a long time 

ago. 

 

Since 1995, Mr. Speaker, three Crowns have increased their 

rates. In August 1996, SaskTel announced it would start 

charging for directory assistance, Mr. Speaker, if you can 

imagine. Just another indirect tax on the people of this province. 

This change raised an extra $4 million annually, Mr. Speaker, 

on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan. Yet it was not 

subject to the 45-day review process, because in the 

government’s view and in their words, these were special 

charges and were never intended to be reviewed. Very 

interesting. 

 

No wonder the NDP did not issue any guidelines for the process 

when they made the promise in 1995. They wouldn’t want any 

guidelines. This way the government is free to interpret and 

manipulate the process as it sees fit and as its interests dictate. 

 

(1530) 

 

The first actual encounter with the review process involved 

SaskPower, which in 1995 wanted to raise electricity rates by 

11 per cent for residential customers and 14 per cent for farm 

customers so it could lower the rates for selected industrial 

customers. Once again, what this government has done there, 

Mr. Speaker, is it’s pitted residential, farm customers against 

the industrial customers. 

 

And of course we all know what happened in that process. 

Everyone was at each other’s throats, to provide the 

environment for uncomfortable debate by many of these groups. 

 

The first thing that we learned about this process, Mr. Speaker, 

is that it would be conducted by the proponent of the rate 

increase — a lot like, let the fox guard the chicken scenario, Mr. 

Speaker. SaskPower decided who would be consulted and what 

questions they would be asked. It was then up to SaskPower to 

compile and package the results for cabinet consideration. 

 

Now I’m sure when SaskPower came to cabinet and said well, 

if you want a nice tidy profit on the backs of the taxpayers of 

the province, then you’d better let us raise the hikes here and 

we’ll get on with this . . . Don’t worry about how the 

corporation is operating, Mr. Premier, Mr. Cabinet Members, 

just raise the rates and we’ll get on with this. 

 

The next we learn was that the term, public review, should not 

be confused with public consultation. SaskPower President Jack 

Messer concluded public hearings were of no real value since it 

is no mystery that the general public does not like rate hikes. 

Well the purpose of a review to me would be that if the public 

is to say we don’t want our rates to go up, then let’s not put 

them up. Mr. Messer says no real value to those comments. The 

public doesn’t want it; they just don’t understand the process. 

 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

This came from a public servant who stated that as president of 

a multibillion dollar company he has more important things to 

do than insure compliance with government disclosure 

requirements. He should maybe have talked to the Premier and 

the cabinet before he made that comment and saw what 

direction the people that have been elected by the citizens of 

Saskatchewan really wanted. 

 

Instead of public hearings, SaskPower launched a massive 

advertising campaign to persuade the public about the virtues of 

rate re-balancing and invited feedback by way of a toll free line 

and questionnaires mailed to customers. It asked if people 

agreed if the corporation had a responsibility to prepare itself 

for the arrival of competition in the year 2000. 

 

Well what a question to ask, Mr. Speaker — of course any 

corporation shouldn’t have to ask its shareholders if it wants 

them to be ready to move into an new era. 

 

Unfortunately, the company didn’t bother asking whether we 

would prefer to have our 11 and 14 per cent increases phased in 

or imposed immediately in order for the NDP to avoid any rate 

increase in the second half of its mandate. If you have rate 

increase early in the mandate, nearing an election you don’t 

have to have the uncomfortable situation of having rate 

increases. 

 

The purported SaskPower review also taught us not to put too 

much faith in those who offer assurances that no decisions have 

been made. SaskPower minister, the SaskPower minister or the 

minister responsible for SaskPower said this is not a done deal. 

But 45 days later cabinet approved the deal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this process, the review process for 

SaskPower, cost the taxpayers of this province about $660,000. 

Now at the end of the review, Carole Bryant, the same Carole 

Bryant who received a 26 per cent raise in salary over three 

years, announced that the process would cost only $500,000. 

Now there’s a slip there of $160,000 — about a 32 per cent 

difference. 

 

Now how can people have any faith in a corporation that can’t 

even figure what a simple half-million dollar survey is going to 

cost? How would they have any faith in those people running a 

huge corporation that takes in billions every year, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in North America that 

does not have an independent public utility review. And the 

question . . . it begs the question, Mr. Speaker, what makes 

Saskatchewan so unique that there is no need for an 

independent review. Surely it is not the Crown Corporations 

Committee, which the NDP caucus seems to believe is the only 

guardian of the public interest necessary against predatory 

utility rate increases. 

 

But listening to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I wonder 

what the alternatives are. We’ve heard many proposals. We’ve 

even heard the member from Saskatoon Southeast talk about 

maybe even considering supporting our motion, but very 

quickly moves an amendment; so I guess that’s out. But what 

the members opposite need to understand, Mr. Speaker, is that 

they are badly out of touch with reality. They are out of touch 

with what the people in the province want. The people in this 

province want services provided to them in an efficient and 

timely manner, and the members opposite don’t seem to 

understand this. 

 

So I’d ask the members to swallow their pride in the interests of 

the people and establish an independent body, which 

incidentally, Mr. Speaker, was advocated by the former premier 

of this province, Mr. Allan Blakeney. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

stand and enter this debate today in support of the amendment 

that has been put forward by the government side that basically, 

summed up, says that various options have been tried with 

respect to public review of utility rates, and that we will keep 

looking for ways of better involving the public and of better 

bringing on more transparency. And after all, that’s what this 

legislature, I think, is all about here today, and certainly it’s 

what we have been trying to do. 

 

And it’s in many ways a tough task, particularly when you have 

the public that understands that the job of the cabinet members 

and government in running the Crowns is to run these Crowns 

as efficiently and as effectively as they possibly can on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan, in the interests of those very 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What this question is really all about is process. And if the goal 

is to get more effective public input, there’s just two points that 

I wish to make. One, we have a process in place now that very 

much is attempting to do that. Secondly, with Saskatchewan 

Crowns we additionally have the accessibility of MLAs and 

cabinet ministers with respect to any decisions that those 

Crowns make. Not that cabinet ministers are ready to leap into 

the fray of daily decision making, but it is certainly a point of 

contact and ultimately we — that is, government, we 

legislators, we people of Saskatchewan — have the ultimate 

responsibility for how our Crown corporations operate. 

 

Interestingly I haven’t heard a single opposition member talk 

about petroleum prices or gas prices. And I wonder why there 

isn’t a call for some sort of a public review agency into gasoline 

prices. This is a question that my constituents are concerned 

with, people all across the province are concerned with. I know 

farmers are just heading into seeding, and I would be astounded 

if the oil companies don’t follow the same pattern that they 

have for a number of years now, and that is a boost of 3, 4, 5 

cents a litre in the price of diesel fuels, gasoline, and oil 

products. 

 

But not a peep from opposition members about the oil cartel 

and about their gouging; not a peep about their buddies. It just 

strikes me as very odd that when we have a transparent, open, 

democratic process with respect to Saskatchewan Crown 

corporations, there’s a big cry. And it’s good that we should 

want to be more open and more transparent, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s always a good idea. But it strikes me that with this 

balance we should also be pointing where there is real 

problems, where people are in fact being gouged on a daily day. 

 

  



682  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my pleasure to briefly participate in 

this, and as I understand it, we’re about to head into question 

period which I’m going to be delighted to enter into. 

 

Some of the questions that come to mind is, you know, exactly 

who is going to be on this committee? I see the member for 

Melfort in his motion . . . and I read the motion very carefully, 

and it looks incredibly vague to me. Who’s going to be on the 

committee? Who’s going to pay the salaries or the expenses or 

the retainers? What will this cost? And who will they report to? 

 

We set up a handy-dandy committee. Well who does the 

committee report to? 

 

An Hon. Member:  The House. 

 

Mr. Trew:  The House, I hear the answer. The House. Well 

who does the cabinet ministers report to? The House. We have 

in Saskatchewan the most democratic process . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The hon. member’s . . . 

the time for the 65-minute debate under rule 17 has now 

expired, and the House will now entertain 10 minutes, up to 10 

minutes of questions and comments by members. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the member from Arm River. I listened to his comments with 

interest but I didn’t understand — does he support the 

continued cross-subsidization and pricing scheme of 

SaskPower? And if not, if he wants to support the removal of it, 

what is his strategy to help do so? 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member opposite for the question. The thing that I do not 

support is the sham 45-day review process that your 

government has entered into. 

 

It’s proven that it doesn’t work. The numbers of people 

responding to your survey indicate that the process is flawed 

and doesn’t work, and the people see right through it. Six public 

meetings held around the province last month, it says in this 

article from the Regina Leader-Post, attracted about 70 people 

— 70 people, Mr. Speaker, is all that this process attracted. So 

what I don’t support is this sham of a 45-day review process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet if I may take the 

opportunity to ask the member from Saskatoon Southeast a 

question. If I was allowed to do that, Mr. Speaker, if I was 

allowed to do that, Mr. Speaker, I would have a good question 

to ask her and maybe . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member’s time has expired. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Minister, I too would like to join in the 

question and answer period, and although we do get an 

opportunity to ask questions in question period, I hope that the 

members opposite will feel some of the frustration about not 

getting the answers they want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South made a point that 

I found just a little bit disturbing. Given the fact that we had the 

good fortune of spending approximately a year together on a 

legislative committee, he made the comment that a legislative 

committee is nothing more than a forum for members to 

grandstand, or something of that nature, in it. 

 

And I do take some exception to that because we conducted a 

very extensive process in the Public Review Committee and the 

Public Accounts Committee that did not do that, that we 

operated very effectively. And I ask the member, how does he 

justify his remarks and his accusations given the record that we 

had on, for example, the Public Accounts Committee? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

answer that question. I was in fact quite pleased with the strong 

chairmanship shown by the member from Melfort. 

Unfortunately the member for Thunder Creek was seldom able 

to contain his partisan bias as he probed into these issues and 

used the committee for his own soapbox. So I simply base . . . 

in fact I do base my comments on that evidence. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to 

the member from Melfort. Who exactly do you see paying for 

this public review committee that you have proposed? Where 

does the buck stop? About how much will this review 

committee cost? How do you see their expenses? Or are we 

going to have a number of people doing it out of the goodness 

of their heart, volunteering this? What’s it going to cost and 

who signs the cheque? Where does the buck stop with this? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Chairman, thanks for the question. I 

think that in my remarks the comments were very clear. The 

buck always stops in the democratic process in the legislature of 

the jurisdiction, and so the buck would stop with the provincial 

Assembly, as it does in other issues. 

 

And when we propose that this be a committee of the provincial 

legislature, it would be comprised of . . . mainly of MLAs who 

are already, if you like, on the public payroll in terms of their 

remuneration being covered. And what we have to only 

consider is what additional funds over and above what would be 

required already by the members on both sides of the House 

being part of this committee. 

 

We’ve suggested that there would be representatives from 

consumer groups, the oil and gas industry, and stakeholders of 

that nature. And there would have to be a remuneration for 

those type of people. And that is only in comparison to the 

$660,000 that is already being spent on this process right now. 

We submit it would be a more effective and less costly 

experiment than what we have right now. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is directed to the member from Regina Sherwood 

who seemed to be left out in the questioning, so I didn’t want 

him to feel out of place. 

 

I attended the Crown corporations review committee panel that 

was held at the University of Regina here last fall. And it was   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

very interesting to note the comments made by Allan Blakeney, 

former NDP premier of this province. And while a number of 

times in debate in this House the members opposite rattle 

Tommy Douglas’s bones, for somehow in this particular debate 

they ignored Mr. Allan Blakeney. 

 

Mr. Member, how do you respond to Mr. Blakeney’s comments 

that either a LURC or a PURC was indeed not perfect but 

needed in this province to review the operations and the utilities 

rates of the Crown corporations? 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  I thank the hon. member for the question. I 

think in my remarks on the subject I would like to respond this 

way. That it’s important to remember that any public review 

process of rates has to be low-cost, it has to be accountable, 

accessible to everyone, and timely. I think those are issues I 

raise . . . I think those are issues that have to be carefully 

considered when we do this. And in my remarks I made 

reference to the fact that the current review process meets most 

of these. 

 

This is not to say, however, that this is not a perfect process that 

might not need some revisions. And I think during the task 

conference that the hon. member from Cannington talked about 

there were some issues and some suggestions raised about rate 

transparency and other things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My point is that this can be done without going to — back to — 

a full public PURC type commission and can be done 

cost-effectively. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak to the 

point raised by the member from Melfort where he makes a 

fundamental error, and a fundamental error in . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I must remind the member not 

having participated in the debate, he is permitted to put a 

question but not to make a comment. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question of the 

member from Melfort with respect to his fundamental . . . a 

fundamental error that I believe he has made with respect to 

assuming who it is that is responsible for the affairs of operating 

the government. 

 

Would you not agree, Mr. Member, that it is the — within the 

British parliamentary system — that it is the people in this 

Legislative Assembly that make the laws and who then bear the 

responsibility by their virtue of their elected position. But when 

it comes down to the operation of the budget and the operation 

of the clowns . . . the Crowns, that under those conditions . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  The clowns? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Not just the clowns on that side, Mr. 

Speaker, not just the clowns on that side. The operation of our 

Crowns that that responsibility lies solely with cabinet, solely 

with cabinet who is then responsible to this legislature. And 

therefore your LURC, your proposed LURC would not be able 

to be responsible in any way because they cannot be 

accountable to anybody. 

 

It is the Crown who is responsible, the Crowns are all 

responsible to the cabinet. Would you not agree with that? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to answer questions. Ultimately in my opinion — and I 

don’t really want to get into a parliamentary debate — but 

executive council is in addition answerable to this Assembly. 

All 58 of us ultimately are the Assembly who are answerable to 

the people of this province. 

 

And so there is no way in my mind that you cannot ultimately 

say that this Assembly is ultimately responsible. And by 

making this committee a part of the Assembly, answerable to 

the Assembly, we would then be in a position to make sure 

that’s done right. 

 

The recommendation of the committee would be binding unless 

the cabinet directly overturned it. That was proposed in my 

questions as well so it allows for that ultimate executive 

decision making in order to overturn the decision of the 

committee if that was necessary. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to pose a 

question to the member from Arm River whether or not his 

remarks in the Assembly on this particular motion were not 

supporting his leader, Melenchuk, in basically suggesting the 

sale of the Crown corporations, and has very little to do with the 

actual pricing of the product being delivered. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, thank you for the question from 

the member. Mr. Speaker, the debate in here today is really 

about the public review process and how indeed it is a flawed 

one. We’ve talked about the cost of the SaskPower fiasco, I 

guess, to the tune of $660,000 of taxpayers’ money to do what, 

Mr. Speaker? To have the people tell SaskPower they don’t 

want their rates increased and then go ahead and do it anyway? 

So I think the whole process is flawed and the debate here is 

about what’s to replace the process of the 45-day review. 

 

And I haven’t heard the members opposite give us any concrete 

ideas as to what will replace that sham, and the people of 

Saskatchewan would probably like to know what’s going to 

happen. 

 

The Speaker:  The time for the rule 17 debate has expired. 

All hon. members will be encouraged that we’ll be able to do 

this again in two weeks. 

 

Before proceeding I do want to correct a procedural . . . an 

advice in procedural error that I made when the hon. member 

from Prince Albert Carlton stood. The hon. member . . . I 

advised the hon. member from Prince Albert Carlton that 

because he had not participated in the debate he would not be 

able to make a comment, and it was the Chair’s error in doing 

that. 

 

Under rule 17 all hon. members may make a comment or ask a 

question, but questions can only be directed to those members   



684  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

who had participated in the 65 minute debate. And I want to 

clarify . . . Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. All hon. 

members’ comments are appreciated, but not at this moment. 

 

I do want to advise all hon. members that His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor is here to provide Royal Assent. Order. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 3:53 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 45 - The IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890, Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Act 

 

His Honour: — Under Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this 

Bill. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:55 p.m. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

very pleased today to put forward a private members’ motion 

dealing with the area of a national transportation policy, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s sadly lacking in this country, Mr. Speaker. I will 

be putting forward a motion that will be seconded by the 

member from Weyburn-Big Muddy after the end of my 

speaking this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that I would like to go into the discussion of why we 

need a grain transportation policy, or a national transportation 

policy. I want to focus in the area today, Mr. Speaker, in the 

area of grain transportation. And when we get into the 

discussion of grain transportation, Deputy Speaker, the 

questions always arise as to what’s happening now, and dealing 

with the things that are going on, as an example, with the 

slowness of grain transportation in the western Canadian 

provinces right now. 

 

But I think it’s important when we come to talk about why we 

need a transportation policy, is to review the history of what’s 

gone on in the area of particularly grain transportation, Mr. 

Speaker. And I have had the opportunity, I guess, over my brief 

career in terms of being involved in farming, to be involved in 

farm organizations that have been involved in the discussion of 

grain transportation. 

 

In the discussion when we talk about it, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy 

Speaker, is a question of philosophy. It is a question of 

protection; protection of grain producers who move the 

commodity. What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, over the ’80s and 

into the ’90s is a move towards deregulation. And I say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a move towards no protection for producers. 

 

When one looks back historically, and I go back to the Crow 

debate that took place in the early ’80s and the discussion there, 

and I don’t know if members can remember what took place 

then in terms of the discussion, but at that time, the Liberal 

government at that time, under the federal minister of 

Transportation, Jean-Luc Pepin, proposed major changes to the 

Crow program that was established in perpetuity in 1897. 

 

Under the recommendations that were taking place at that time, 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, was a change to the system by 

which we would have deregulation. At the same time there was 

a move afoot to take away the protection in the area of branch 

lines; to take away that protection. And one has to note that in 

the ’70s the protection to the branch lines occurred and were 

protected to the year 2000. And that was a recommendation of 

the Hall Commission report in 1974. So these are very 

significant things that are going on simultaneously. 

 

Dealing with the Crow debate at that time, we had a system by 

which farmers were protected on a distance-related rate to move 

their commodities from western Canada. And it was good 

protection in terms of moving those commodities. I grant it 

things have changed since then, but that was what existed at 

that time. 

 

The discussion then was, where do we go from here? Well the 

Liberal government took it upon themselves to deregulate the 

system. By opening the door, by taking away that protection, 

when they did that, by taking away the protection, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that with that farmers were faced with the doors 

coming open, with the discussions on whether there should be 

variable rates and how those variable rate discussions should 

take place. 

 

(1600) 

 

The question of method of payment which we’ve had recently 

in terms of the final decision by the federal government in 1994 

and ’95, those discussions took place initially at that time, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And involved in those discussions was also the 

question of protection of the railways and who was . . . the 

question of penalties and moving of grains and things like this 

and who was responsible. 

 

I remember that discussion very well. When the federal 

government at the time under Jean-Luc Pepin brought down 

their final draft legislation at that time, what they talked about, 

talked about variable rates, is that we would move into a 

variable rate system. It talked about method of payments to 

producers and it talked about where would we go bases the 

branch lines in terms of deregulating them at the same time. It 

was the start towards the lack of protection for prairie 

producers. 

 

And I don’t know if people remember at that time what was 

taking on in the province of Saskatchewan in 1983 in terms of 

those discussions. I don’t know if anyone remembers the slogan 

that was used at that time when we’re entering in the 

discussions of the Crow debate. The question . . . The slogan 

that was used at that time was: keep the Crow, let Pepin go. 

 

And at that time producers were very fearful of these changes, 

particularly the question of the method of payment to   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

producers. That was deemed at that time in history, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that if you went to the method of payment to 

producers, farmers would lose their protection in terms of 

moving those commodities. That was always the argument — 

always the argument — and that argument continued to 1994, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The interesting thing is is when we did change the method of 

payment that was changed by the federal government that the 

producers face, is now we have the deregulated system. And I 

don’t want to say any more in terms of the condition by which 

grain is now moving in Saskatchewan, which is absolutely 

terrible. 

 

So when we move into this area when I was talking about, 

before I digress, is at that time when they talked about the 

method of payment of producers, producers and people in the 

province of Saskatchewan rose up against that. There were 

petitions signed around the province by people in small 

communities, by farmers or whatever. And do you know how 

many individuals in this province signed that petition, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? — 115,000 people signed those petitions. 

 

I had the opportunity, I had the opportunity at that time to be 

part of a group of individuals who flew down to Ottawa to 

present those petitions to the federal minister of Transport at the 

time. And at the same time when we flew on that plane, Mr. 

Speaker, it was very interesting to know who was there 

representing the political parties. At the time a member of the 

Tory caucus, a Mr. Hepworth, was attendance by the Tories; by 

the NDP official opposition at that time, it was a Mr. Engel, was 

representing the NDP. And do you want to know who was 

representing the federal Liberals . . . or the provincial Liberals 

at that time in terms of that discussion? The representative of 

the provincial Liberal Party at that time was Ralph Goodale, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And in the confines of those, in the confines of those 

discussions that took place where we had discussions with the 

minister at the time, Jean-Luc Pepin, and when the petitions 

were presented, all three parties also spoke at the same time, 

and all three parties spoke against the method of payment to 

producers. They all said the same thing, because it would take 

away the protection of grain producers in Saskatchewan. They 

were all saying the same thing, particularly the leader of the 

provincial Liberal Party at the time, Ralph Goodale. Now that’s 

very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I was happy to say, with the petitions, it changed the 

government’s mind of the day, federally, not to make the 

method of payment change. So there was a small victory that 

occurred at that time which maintained protection for farmers in 

grain transportation. 

 

So after that we came with the new Act. And the interesting 

thing too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister that finally put 

through the legislation in the House of Commons was Mr. 

Axworthy, now the present Minister, Liberal Minister, of 

External Affairs — another Liberal connection. 

 

Now we move into the Tory years, both federally and 

provincially. But when we’re going through this, what took 

place at the time was in the area of variable freight rates. We 

had hearings that took place at the time. For any grain company 

that wished to apply . . . or I should say that the railway 

companies wanted to apply for increased rates, or I should say, 

decreased rates on certain lines or certain points, they required 

them to go to a committee by which it was discussed. It had to 

be agreed upon by the committee. There was a hearing process 

that was involved and farmers participated. 

 

And I had the opportunity to attend many of those hearings. 

And farmers could say whether it was good or bad and there 

was a decision-making body involved. But it still had an 

element of protection there for the producers. 

 

Throughout the ’80s and into the early ’90s there was a 

discussion of whether there should be further deregulation. The 

argument was, from the other philosophical side, deregulate the 

system. We don’t need the controls. The system will work 

absolutely fine with no controls. That’s what we need. North 

Dakota is the example of the northern states. We needed a 

system of deregulation. We will move all the grain, great things 

will happen, improvements will happen to the grain 

transportation system, and away we go. 

 

That was the argument over and over again by the western 

wheat growers’ association, the flax growers’ association, the 

canola growers’ association, the cattlemen’s association. And 

particularly the cattlemen’s association because they deemed it, 

if it got too costly to move the grain out of Saskatchewan, he 

had a mountain of barley that was very cheap to feed. That was 

the theory. That was the theory in the ’80s of why we needed to 

go to deregulation. 

 

So there are a great deal of discussion that took place at the 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with provincial governments and 

federal governments of the day in terms of dealing with the 

question of deregulation. It was a slow process, but it was an 

important process to try and find the best way to deal with these 

conflicting views. 

 

But we had a government that changed, Mr. Speaker, in 1993. 

The Liberals came back. The Liberals who had initiated the 

program in the early ’80s came back to finish the job. They 

came back to do the same thing. So what happened then is that 

when we went to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 

question of deregulation, the Liberals went from half speed, that 

was going by the federal Tories at the time, to full speed. 

 

We saw several changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They proposed 

major changes to deregulation of the system. One major change 

was to do away with the western Grain Transportation Agency 

which monitored, which controlled grain transportation in 

western Canada. Gone, all under the national transportation 

authority which had no power, which left the system wide open. 

It opened up the system to the change of the method of 

payment, where everybody said everything would be wonderful 

and we would see diversification and great changes in terms of 

crops. 

 

But historically, before the change took place, we’ve already   



686  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

had the boom in specialty crops, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already 

had the growth in the livestock industry. And the argument was, 

well you needed to take it away in order to have the growth. We 

already had the growth before the change. 

 

So we take away the method of payment and we bring in the 

deregulated system by which now the railways are faced with 

no one to go to, in terms of producers’ standpoint, that they can 

be said, well what’s going wrong here? There’s no way of 

credibility for producers to have a place or a forum by which 

they could talk about it. The deregulation is now in effect. 

 

Within the deregulation system that’s taken place, as I spoke of 

earlier, branch line abandonment and the protection to the year 

2000 on branch lines in this province. Branch lines 2, a branch 

rehabilitation program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was bought 

and paid for by farmers as taxpayers in this country for the 

branch lines in this province. 

 

But do you know what happens with deregulation? They’ve 

now made it easier for the railway system to get rid of the 

branch lines. They’ve lifted the year 2000 scenario. 

 

So when you see this take place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

protection is now gone. Always when we got to the question of 

the argument of the philosophy basis, deregulation and 

regulation, everybody said the system would consolidate over 

time; it is a natural thing that takes place. It has always been the 

question of pace — pace to allow for proper transition for 

producers to deal with the change. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we saw the deregulation of the 

transportation system, the pace has just gone crazy. It’s going to 

be very difficult for producers now to deal with the changes in 

terms of the changing in the grain handling system. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Fearmongering talk. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know what it 

is I do. I literally don’t know. But every time I stand up and 

speak, I always have the member from Thunder Creek and I 

always have the member from Wood River replying to what 

I’m saying. And I just don’t understand. I’m being very . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, am I not being very calm today in the House? 

Am I not being, you know, very calm? 

 

An Hon. Member:  And reasonable too. You’ve been 

reasonable. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Does the member say that I am a reasonable 

individual? I do digress a bit. 

 

But the question of fearmongering. Mr. Deputy Speaker, look at 

the system that we have right now. I tell you if producers had 

not made the changes to specialty crops and to other crops that 

are now moved by other means of transportation, by the 

trucking industry, the system right now couldn’t handle all the 

grain if these changes hadn’t taken place. And the argument 

always had been, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the system would 

handle it, we could do it with consolidation, the . . . I sat in 

meetings where presidents of CN (Canadian National) and CP 

(Canadian Pacific) said, we can move all the grain any time. 

And they’re not doing it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Why don’t you go after them? 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  The question is asked: why don’t we go 

after them? My question is why doesn’t Ralph Goodale go after 

them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  He stands up in Moose Jaw yesterday, he 

stands up in a riding that is . . . I don’t know if the member from 

Thunder Creek was there or not, but the question was asked, is 

he going to impose penalties and fines or rewards to the 

railways? Yes, sometime, but not now. 

 

Well maybe after an election. Maybe in July when the Canadian 

Wheat Board has moved all the crop. And you know the other 

thing when we talk about deregulation in the Grain 

Transportation Authority, and always my favourite subject, is 

that within the guise of this is also the deregulation of the 

marketing industry. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board is being blamed for part of the 

problem. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is the 

one who’s made the sales. The Canadian Wheat Board is the 

one who that had the foreign ships sitting in Vancouver ready to 

be filled, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s the Canadian Wheat Board 

that had the sales ready to go for a crop that had been a little bit 

disappointing in terms of quality. The Canadian Wheat Board 

has sold it, and the railways have not delivered on their contract 

commitments. And I don’t know what you do when the 

Minister of Agriculture in this government . . . in this country 

says we’re going to act on it later. We’re going to act on it 

later? I don’t know. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I said, this has been an argument on basis of philosophy. But 

not to leave the provincial Liberals out of the argument, not to 

leave the official opposition out of the discussion, Mr. Speaker, 

when we were home talking to our constituents during the 

Easter long weekend and talking about the wonderful budget 

that our Minister of Finance had brought forward, to people in 

rural and urban areas, what did the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, say about this? 

 

(1615) 

 

He said that, you know, well there was a plot afoot. There was a 

plot afoot by the members of the third party — the four farmers 

and the teacher — and the members of the government, to talk 

about the problem of grain transportation and not moving the 

grain. And what did he say? He said, oh, terrible. We couldn’t 

get our throne speech off, we couldn’t get our reply to the 

throne speech off. 

 

My question becomes, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, the 

question becomes then, what’s more important to the official 

opposition? The question they couldn’t get the reply off or the 

question of sending a message to the Prime Minister, who was 

in Saskatoon that day, that grain was not moving in this   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

province and we needed to do something about. It’s a question 

of priorities, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Where are the priorities of the provincial 

Liberals? As we will outline later on as a government, Mr. 

Deputy Deputy Speaker, we do have a strategy that we will be 

talking about in the not too distant future which talks about a 

transportation plan; which talks about protecting grain 

producers and other people who move commodities in this 

province in a partnership arrangement — an arrangement that 

will work in spite of what the federal government wants to do. 

In spite of it, we will do things that are positive to move 

commodities that are important to the people of Saskatchewan 

and to the grain producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And people might add, well why would a member from an 

urban-rural seat from Saskatoon talk about grain transportation? 

Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, we have commodities that are 

around the city of Saskatoon that lead to its growth and its 

economic boom, like the canola crushing plant which provides 

opportunities also to the people of Saskatoon, not just the 

producers of Saskatchewan. We have several potash companies 

around that are mining around Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Deputy 

Speaker, that are providing economics to Saskatoon and to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are seeing other things in terms of greater amounts of grain 

transportation taking place around the city of Saskatoon. We 

see a major oat processing plant being established north of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

 

Saskatoon is at the hub and at the centre of what’s going on 

when it deals with commodities that are moving for the people 

of Saskatchewan. That’s why it’s important to me, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s why it’s important to my constituents — because it 

plays an important role in the economy of Saskatoon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to participate in this debate 

today, and I would like to put forward this motion, Mr. Deputy 

Deputy Speaker. I move, seconded by the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy: 

 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 

develop a comprehensive national transportation policy, in 

cooperation with all levels of government, and that it 

provide funding to the program. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

I’ll make a few comments just on the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest’s speech. Or I guess that would be called a speech — 

it was more, I guess, like a bit of a history lesson. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, when I first took a 

look at the motion that he was bringing forward, I thought, you 

know this isn’t bad. And in fact last night when I was doing 

estimates with the Highways minister, I said, you know with the 

way this motion reads and where I thought it was going, we 

have no problem supporting this. And in fact, we will. 

 

But I think what was disappointing was the fact that the 

member didn’t get into what he should have I think gotten into 

with this motion. So I’ll have to I guess do his job for him, what 

he was trying to get out. 

 

This history lesson that we were just given though, about 

reliving the Crow debate, talking about method of payment, 

deregulation, I wonder if the member at some point would try 

and explain how he can give us this lesson about how we 

should never have made these changes, and then at the end of 

his speech he gets into all the benefits that Saskatoon is finding 

itself enjoying through agri-business that’s growing in the city 

through oat processing plants, specialty crop booms, intensive 

hog operations, feeder associations popping up. Now how do 

you really think that came about? And perhaps it came about 

because there was change. 

 

So there’s no sense living 15 years ago and saying we should 

never have changed it, and then talk about how as a government 

you’re now enjoying some of the benefits of what happens, or 

what business can do for our province once you allow this 

change to occur. 

 

And sure, there’s some painful parts in getting from one 

location to the other, as far as somebody had to give, there had 

to be some serious changes made in farming operations. But it’s 

for the better, and that’s proving itself out in the amount of 

taxes that you’re able to collect as a government from these 

increased businesses. 

 

Is the member wanting to introduce guests? Okay. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave of the 

members, to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, contrary to media 

reports that all of the state of North Dakota has been shut down 

by a storm this last weekend, there is in fact a portion of the 

state of North Dakota, especially in the north-west part around 

Williston, where people are able to get around. 

 

And we’re happy to hear that, because we have with us today a 

group of visitors from Williston, North Dakota. In particular, 

they’re a group of grade 7 and 8 students from Newport School 

in Williston. There is 21 students. They’re accompanied here 

today by their teachers, Art Gutschmidt, Isabell Owan, Marilyn 

Ackerson, and also accompanied by Chuck Allison. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if all of the members might join me 

in wishing our guests, our American visitors, a very warm 

welcome to Regina and to Saskatchewan this afternoon. 

  



688  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Cypress Hills 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  By leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the members of the government in welcoming people from 

the United States, from North Dakota. We certainly sympathize 

with you folks and the bad storms that you’ve had and the 

terrible blow that it will have to your economy. 

 

You will know though that we do have the Rafferty-Alameda 

dams in place so that we will help to keep Minot from flooding 

and keep some of the water out of the Red River Valley system 

so that you won’t wash away altogether.  

 

We’re hopeful though that the floods don’t happen and that you 

can seed your farm land down there this spring, and we do more 

hope immediately that you have a pleasant stay here in Regina. 

Enjoy yourselves. 

 

We do have a mall as well and the tax did go down a little now 

so that you will be able to afford to shop a little more. So have 

fun, enjoy, and welcome to the Saskatchewan . . . We are what 

you would call Republicans, so we were happy to see your 

governor a few weeks back. 

 

And we are taking notes from the governor who showed us how 

you can in fact come back and win even when you’re down, and 

so we’re on the way up. So thanks for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member for Athabasca on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  To introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

Liberal caucus we would also like to invite our American 

visitors and hope that your stay in Saskatchewan is both 

pleasant and also you spend a lot of money shopping here. 

 

We do know what snowstorms are all about. Saskatchewan has 

been known to suffer through a great amount of snowstorms in 

the past and of course we’re all used to it. 

 

So once again on behalf of the caucus, thank you for visiting us 

and we hope your stay is pleasant. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. I 

won’t waste any more time on commenting on the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest’s speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Only to say that, in substance, to say that 

he I think at some point should explain to the rest of the 

colleagues over there where he really and truly is at. You can’t 

be in favour of the results of something and then say, but it 

should never have come about. 

 

But here I think is what he should have done in his speech when 

he’s going to put forward or ask for a national transportation 

policy. And I think to have such a plan it’s going to have to 

consist of . . . well it’s going to have to consist of railroads, 

highways transportation, and the people that work within those 

systems. So those three components for sure have to be dealt 

with. 

 

And let’s go over some of these. I mean it’s clear to everyone 

that the railroads, the railroads, you know, in Saskatchewan, 

they have the ability to move a far greater amount of product in 

this province than any other mode that we have, especially in 

the adverse weather conditions that we sometimes experience, 

and especially this spring again with the flooding and such. And 

so I think we must keep the rail system going. 

 

And so this is going to be one part of this transportation plan. I 

take it that’s where he wanted to go or what he’s meaning with 

this motion that he’s bringing forward. 

 

Now I guess if we take a look at where the railroads and the 

branch lines are going today . . . and I had hoped that they 

would take the same action that we took as a caucus and be 

somewhat proactive and encourage the federal government to 

move in certain ways. And we have done that. 

 

Firstly, if you take a look at the announcement of a few days 

ago of some of the proposed abandonments coming over the 

next three years, instead of sitting back and not doing anything 

except complaining, complaining, complaining about what the 

federal government is doing or should be doing, take a little bit 

more constructive action, I would ask, and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Do something positive. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, do something positive. And that’s 

what I thought what the motion was going to deal with and we 

would all see eye to eye and perhaps send the Hansard to 

Ottawa and show that Saskatchewan is fully united in putting 

together a comprehensive plan. And I think we can still do that. 

 

But you know, I think you’re going to have to get sort of above 

and beyond this history lesson of yours and get right to the 

point of where are we today and where we’re going to be in the   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

next 15 or 20 years, and not what happened under, well 

whoever he was talking about — Pepin. And you know, that’s 

getting a little old, I think. 

 

But if we’re taking a look at the rail system today, firstly the 

billions of dollars that were spent in upgrading our main lines, 

Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, and our branch lines, we know 

that they would probably last 40, 50, maybe 60 years with little 

to no maintenance. And our highway system — and I’m glad 

the Highway minister is now here to listen — but the highway 

system will not last, I’m sure, more than a few weeks if you put 

a large increased amount of traffic on these roads. 

 

In fact, as we discussed in estimates last night, I don’t know, 

probably a few hundred calls that I passed on to him last night 

through the pothole patrol line, I think that’s evidence that our 

highway system isn’t handling the light-duty traffic and the car 

traffic, let alone getting more product, grain product on those 

highways. 

 

Now these rail beds today, like I was saying, it really is 

showing itself in the south-west where in fact we’ve had all the 

flooding. The highways are in horrible condition. I noticed in 

your highway plans, there are no plans to fix up anything in the 

south-west. There should have been, especially with this 

announcement the other day that the lines in the constituency 

that I’m in, of Wood River, is really adversely affected by these 

announcements. 

 

(1630) 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I enjoy of course all the heckling, 

but it’s hard to even concentrate on a thought. Perhaps if they 

would listen for awhile, we could talk about some constructive 

stuff, and what I’ll do is step them through what some of the 

feelings of the people are out there. 

 

Now what happened with this announcement the other day . . . 

And I have a map that was given to me by the Wheat Pool 

committee in my own area, and they’ve done an amount of 

work on some of the branch lines. And could I send this across 

please, over to the Highways and Transportation minister, and 

that way they could follow along and try and get some 

understanding as to how serious this problem is, especially from 

the perspective of somebody living and working and farming in 

the south-west, and try and be somewhat sympathetic to what’s 

happening down there. 

 

If you take a look at the map, Mr. Minister, on one side you 

have the ‘96-97 Vancouver freight rates, and on the other side 

are the projected freight rates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Pardon me, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right, 

and that’s what I want to talk to you about. 

 

Now if you take a look at some of these lines that are going to 

be abandoned and the fact that in these same areas . . . now 

we’re talking about from Val Marie over to the community of 

Consul, that entire south line going. And also from Mankota 

over to south of Assiniboia . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

I’ll let you join in and you can tell me all about that line soon, 

Mr. Member. 

But if we take a look at these lines in particular, can you 

imagine, Mr. Minister, what’s going to happen, you pull those 

lines out. This one line from Val Marie to Consul, it’s 

somewhere 7 to 8 million bushels of product that has to go up 

by truck then, and of course it’s not going to be stopping on the 

. . . you know, I doubt if very little benefit will accrue to 

Shaunavon, say. Once it’s loaded on a truck and going through, 

it’ll go right up to the main line. And we know full well what 

will happen shortly thereafter is that that entire line is going to 

be gone. And this, Mr. Minister, is something that I know you 

realize is that our highway system can’t handle that. That’s why 

I think there’s only one option. 

 

That option is to slow up some of the things that are happening 

today and see if we can’t get a short-line or a regional railroader 

in that south-west area. But they’re going to have to take over a 

line of a size that is profitable. 

 

And this was our concern, and I’ve raised this with you before, 

and I’ve raised it with the federal Minister of Agriculture and 

Food, Ralph Goodale . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, and 

just for the member’s own information, I will send him a copy 

of a letter that I sent to Mr. Goodale only days ago and showing 

the concern that our caucus has — the member from Thunder 

Creek and myself especially because we are so negatively 

affected by not only your announcements but rail line 

abandonments — and I think the letter speaks for itself. 

 

What can’t happen, in our view, is that these rail lines can’t be 

pulled apart piecemeal. If you’re going to take these branch 

lines and pull them apart 25, 50 miles at a time, what you’re 

really doing is then taking all the ability away from short-line 

and regional railroaders to come in and look at this as a viable 

option in all of the south-west. 

 

Now we raised this at the end of January with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture in a positive light — please use 

whatever influence you can and use the influence of your office 

to try and have the railroad not come in with these kind of plans 

and abandon piecemeal. 

 

When of course the announcement came out a few days ago that 

in fact they were going to be pulled apart piecemeal, we took a 

next step by sending out the letter and stating our feelings that I 

don’t think it’s right; it in fact is going the wrong way and it’s 

going to take any ability away from the short-line and regional 

operators to function. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why I asked you the other day if you 

have some operatives in your Department of Highways and 

Transportation dealing with short-line railroad only, to please 

consider having a meeting in the south-west — hopefully 

Shaunavon, hopefully in some of the affected towns that are 

immediately affected, Climax, Frontier, Val Marie. Come out 

and see if we can’t do something to save the line because we 

don’t have an option here. It’s not as though the line can go out 

and your Highway department is going to beef up the highways 

to handle, you know, extra millions of bushels of product. That 

can’t happen and there’s no sense sitting there and laughing 

about it — it can’t. So just be serious, be positive about where 

this should go. 

  



690  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

Join with us. You know, you keep talking about our federal 

cousins and everything else, but why don’t you join with us in 

trying to encourage something for the benefit of Saskatchewan 

people? You never seem to do that. I mean there’s more to this 

than politics. There’s people we all represent and we might as 

well represent them in the best way we can. 

 

So I’m asking you to consider — and we’ll just use this 

example of the south-west — consider the ramifications of not 

taking this kind of a step. And this is why when I saw the 

motion before us, I thought this is exactly what we need — a 

national transportation plan so that somebody can sit back and 

view this in a little bit bigger picture and help perhaps put a 

plan together in a hurry with all levels of government to ensure 

that we’re not going to give something up that we wish we 

really hadn’t of. 

 

In fact I’m going to quote from a letter that I received not long 

ago. It’s from the rural municipality of Bengough no. 40 in 

Bengough, Saskatchewan. And it’s addressed to our caucus: 

 

Dears Sirs: At the February 13, 1997 meeting of council I 

was directed to write a letter to you with regards to the 

transportation of grain from country elevators. As you may 

have noted by the news, southern Saskatchewan has 

received record snowfalls for the ‘96-97 season. This is 

causing a great amount of concern for this municipality 

and to those farmers trying to haul their grain to country 

elevators before spring breakup. 

 

It is obvious that roads will be in poor condition. Road 

bans will be applied in mid-March, and the likelihood of 

skipping road bans is very high. In this municipality there 

has been an increase in longer distance hauling because of 

mainline locations, larger terminals. At this point in time 

local elevators are plugged. We have experienced a steady 

increase in road traffic. 

 

At a meeting of council, a motion was passed requesting a 

more adequate car supply for the municipality to country 

elevators before spring thaw and road bans are applied. It 

is also council’s feeling that railways are operating poorly 

and could be more efficient. One example being that other 

commodities have been shown preference over grain and 

coal because of the higher freight rates applied to them. 

 

While this may be an income generator, it’s certainly not 

why the railroads were formed in Saskatchewan. Your 

immediate attention to this matter would be greatly 

appreciated. 

 

So please take a copy of that letter to the minister as well so he 

can follow along. I think this municipality of Bengough says it 

all, from a rural municipal council perspective, is that they 

know full well that if we can’t have an overall plan that’s going 

to achieve something we’re all going to suffer. These municipal 

governments — how do you expect them to keep up? What’s 

happened is that you’ve cut and hacked and slashed at their 

funding until they find it hard to keep pace where they’re at 

today. And they know full well if there are more changes, well 

what’s going to happen? Let’s be serious. 

And there again, if you’re wondering . . . I’d be curious as to 

know what you and your government and your department is 

doing in regards to some of the backlogs of grain or some of the 

effects of flooding. 

 

Well I know that you’ve had a news release sent out saying that 

you think the farmers should be compensated by the federal 

government. I agree; the farmers should not be the ones on the 

hook for this nor should the municipal governments. But go a 

little bit further, see if you can’t perhaps have some higher-level 

discussions with the federal government and with the municipal 

governments. 

 

You know full well if we had a national transportation plan, or 

somebody had this overall view, knowing full well, well if 

there’s a flood going to occur . . . we knew there was flooding 

going to occur weeks ago in southern Saskatchewan. We’ve had 

250 or 300 per cent more snow than average. So it’s not like we 

didn’t know some problem was coming — of course we did. 

 

But then perhaps if we had an overall strategy, transportation 

strategy at all levels of government involved, we could have 

perhaps moved certain communities . . . the grain out of certain 

communities or off of farmers’ yards. I mean it’s going to take 

some . . . it’s going to take someone somewhere, some level of 

government, to put a coordinated plan like this together. I 

would encourage you to be part of that instead of really just 

playing your politics. 

 

Now if we take a look at the railroads themselves, well I know 

that reading the Leader-Post and this quote in here from Mr. 

Ralph Goodale, federal Agriculture minister, Tuesday, April 8, 

well I think he’s really hitting it right on the head, is that if in 

fact the railroads aren’t going to perform there should be some 

kind of a penalty. I guess on the other hand he goes on to state 

that should they perform, you know, great, then there should be 

some rewards. 

 

Leroy Larsen of the Sask. Wheat Pool is also in this, making 

much the same comments, that there’s got to be some penalties 

for . . . applied against the railroads if in fact they’re not able to 

move the product that they should be. And I agree fully with 

that. You too. You also should . . . you should be putting this 

together. So there again, work with the other level of 

government. I think that you would find that it’s an overall 

benefit and it’s one that’s definitely appreciated by the farmers 

out there. 

 

So I think that pretty much covers sort of the railroad point of 

view. We can’t do without them. So let’s all join together for 

the sake of the farmers to make sure something happens in a 

positive light. Let’s see if we can’t get the short line and the 

regional rail orders up and running. And I think, Mr. Minister, 

that you could start tomorrow. There’s something you could do 

tomorrow and it would go a long ways to help short-line and 

regional operators. 

 

Tomorrow I’ll be bringing forward a Bill dealing with successor 

rights. And it’s making changes to The Trade Union Act and 

the successor rights from . . . (inaudible interjection)   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

. . . Well I hear the third party hollering we already have done 

that. Well we do notice that you bring forward lots of Bills but 

you never get them printed. There’s a little bit more work than 

just announcing that you believe in something . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh is that right? Well I don’t think so. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, why don’t you just stop for a moment and 

think that perhaps it is the best way to go. That if we would take 

a look at successor rights being a problem . . . All people that 

are in this business are of the same view. SRM has been a 

strong proponent of dealing with the successor rights. Make 

sure — and your government has the ability to do this — make 

sure that you aren’t part of the roadblock that’s up there. I mean 

don’t come in here with some national transportation plan and 

then have all these roadblocks that you can deal with, and don’t. 

 

So tomorrow I think will be an interesting day, to watch how 

you react to successor rights. 

 

I guess a few of the other things that you could do, Mr. 

Minister, other than the successor rights, is explain and put into 

action right away what your Saskatchewan transportation 

advisory committee that you proposed in the throne speech . . . 

bring it forward and let’s see, you know, what we can get on the 

go right now. 

 

Now we have, you know, such a committee, similar committee 

in the south-west, south-west transportation advisory 

committee, doing great work. But let’s just take a little bit 

bigger look at this in a provincial picture and I’m sure this 

would work well, working with the federal government. 

 

If it looks like you’re working for the betterment of all the 

farmers, or all the people in the province, there’s no reason why 

the other levels of government aren’t going to work with you. 

But there’s no sense sitting on your hands and not doing 

anything about it. You’re going to have to get busy sooner 

rather than later. 

 

I think another thing that you and your government can do are 

stop the cuts to municipal governments. You know full well that 

if these cuts in funding continue, what you’re doing is not 

affecting, you know, administration or — I’m not sure what you 

think all the monies that you’re cutting from municipal 

governments is actually doing. 

 

(1645) 

 

But what it does, it’s out there building roads, it’s repairing 

roads, it’s ensuring that the people in rural Saskatchewan have a 

little bit of benefit from the province as well. 

 

One other thing I would encourage you to do — I’ve 

encouraged the Premier to do this already; no response, but, Mr. 

Minister, perhaps you would do this — and that is encourage 

perhaps the grain gathering companies to slow their action of 

closing elevators throughout the province until we come to 

some . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, this falls in your 

area. This falls in your area, Mr. Minister. 

 

And this is something that you can perhaps do, is encourage 

grain companies to not be out there closing and bulldozing 

down elevators until we get this somewhat sorted out as to, you 

know, where the railroads are going to be. 

 

You know, I think you don’t give, you don’t give the kind of 

credit that you should to rural entrepreneurs. You know, if we 

have the elevator there, if we have the rail there, at least there’s 

an opportunity. There’s an opportunity for somebody to come 

in and perhaps have a special cleaning operation or a speciality 

crop operation. Who knows? I mean I think it’s unlimited to 

where we can go with this. And let’s encourage the short-line 

operators to work in this same system. Who knows where it’s 

going to be. 

 

But I’ll tell you, if we don’t do this, if we don’t do this then all 

you have to do is drive across into the States and you’ll see 

what the result is. You go for miles and miles and miles and 

you don’t see railroads and you don’t see elevators, and I say 

that those communities and those states have lost a lot. They 

have lost a lot and there’s no turning back once you get to that 

point. So it’s something that you want to give close 

consideration to. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think part of this national transportation plan 

also has to include your department and you, Mr. Minister, and 

have you perhaps fight a little bit better fight in cabinet or with 

Treasury Board than what you have been doing. Now it’s one 

thing to say that you can stand up — and you did again last 

night — that you can’t address the highways situation, the poor 

highways state of disrepair in this province because we don’t 

have a national transportation plan. Mr. Minister, no one is 

buying that — nobody is. Because you have — you have and 

your department has — an obligation to the people of this 

province because you, Mr. Minister, are part of a charge of 15 

cents a litre to pull in fuel taxes. 

 

And you also have motor vehicle licensing fees, and I’ll tell you 

what that amounts to. And we’re not taking the federal 

government off the hook either, but all we’ve been saying is, 

listen. We gave the Saskatchewan government . . . the people of 

this province gave the Saskatchewan government a period of 

time to get their financial house in order after the mess of what 

the Conservative Party did to this province . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Now they’re going to heckle for awhile, but 

they left this province in a horrible state — 14, $15 billion of 

debt. Everyone knows that. Let’s put that behind us and see 

where we can go from here. 

 

Now we gave . . . the people of this province gave you enough 

time to get your fiscal house in order. And I’ll tell you what’s 

happening. I’ll tell you what’s happening, Mr. Minister. You 

are . . . your government, and I’m going to quote this right out 

of the Canadian Automobile Association report, a research 

study done by the university here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Research findings: over a 10-year period, from 1988-1997, 

Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation expenditures 

have decreased 21.6 per cent to 168 million. Over the same 

time, Saskatchewan fuel-tax revenues have increased by 

over 110 per cent and revenues collected from motorists in   



692  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

the form of motor vehicle licence fees have increased 35 

per cent. 

 

So your spending is going into the basement and your revenues 

from the people that are wanting to pay for a highway system is 

going into the attic. 

 

Saskatchewan government will expend 39 per cent of its 

revenues that it collects from motorists through fuel 

taxation in this fiscal year, and this compares to a decade 

ago, in 1988, where 94 per cent of the revenues collected 

from motorists were put back into Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Ninety-four per cent nine years ago. I mean, to the people in 

Saskatchewan it tells that . . . where highways, where their 

transportation system is on the priority list. From your 

government’s point of view, it isn’t very much at all. 

 

Look at the surpluses that you have brought in. And this is not 

anything to do with the federal government. Mr. Minister, as 

you were saying last night, we need them involved. Hey, I’m 

sure that they’re enjoying some surpluses too. And as I said 

earlier, when they get their fiscal house in order in a couple of 

years, we’ll be at the head of the line. 

 

And I encourage you to be with us. I encourage you to be with 

us, Mr. Minister, in asking that these kind of taxes that are 

raised from the people of Canada and especially of this 

province go to where they were intended. 

 

In the 1996-97 fiscal year the Saskatchewan government plans 

to collect $430 million in fuel tax and motor vehicle fees but 

plans to spend only 168 million on Highways and 

Transportation expenditures. And this leaves a surplus of $262 

million that it will collect in revenues but not spend on the 

highways. Two hundred and sixty-two million dollars in this 

one year over a five-year period. And I know you’ve got a copy 

of this report, so I won’t send it over. But in a five-year period, 

what this amounts to is a $1.23 billion surplus. 

 

So let’s take a look now. Well firstly I found some interesting 

things about Manitoba. I know your government doesn’t like 

the House here to compare to Alberta because they’re just too 

well to do, so let’s use Manitoba: same population, roughly the 

same financial situation. 

 

Well in Manitoba in the last 10 years has increased its 

Highways and Transportation expenditures by 10.4 per cent 

while you have decreased here in Saskatchewan 21.7 per cent. 

During the same time period, Saskatchewan increased the 

revenues it collects from motorists and fuel taxes and motor 

vehicle licence fees by 88 per cent compared to Manitoba which 

increased only by 17.4 per cent. 

 

I mean you’re completely going in an opposite direction from a 

neighbouring province. 

 

In ’96-97 the province of Manitoba will spend 84 per cent of 

its revenues it collects back into the highway system; you’re 

spending 39 per cent. In ’96-97 Saskatchewan is budgeted to 

collect $120 million more in fuel tax compared to Manitoba, 

yet it will allocate $53 million less in highways and 

transportation expenditures — a net of $174 million 

difference. 

 

Now I won’t keep going through this report because I think it 

already paints the picture that you’re making the argument that 

you need to have a national highways transportation or a 

national transportation plan before you can start to spend any of 

the $430 million that you’re raking in, before you can spend the 

230 . . . or no, $262 million in surplus this year alone. You’re 

announcing a $30 million increase in your budget. That’s only 

10 per cent. That’s about 10 per cent of the surplus. 

 

So why aren’t other provinces having to do that? Why are they 

picking up their slack and ensuring that they’ve got a safe and 

reliable highway and transportation system in their provinces? 

Mr. Minister, you can’t get away from it. You have, your 

government . . . I won’t say . . . because I’m sure that you 

would like to spend more, but your government is doing a 

disastrous job in providing that service to Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, I know the Premier and yourself will stand up time 

and time again and say, well if we’re going to spend it on 

highways, it’s got to come out of health or education and where 

are you going to pick? Well I say let’s start picking in some of 

those bank accounts that the Finance minister has set aside for a 

rainy day fund, liquor and gaming accounts, and such. Let’s put 

some of those hundreds of millions into use for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Your two and a half billion dollar announcement on budget day 

. . . and I know what you were trying to do . . . is impress the 

people that somehow there’s going to be these great highways 

in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, you and I both know that two 

and a half billion dollars is probably less than what you’re 

spending today. 

 

And over that same time period, what are you going to collect 

in these fees? According to the Canadian Automobile 

Association, using their projections, you’re probably going to 

be up around four and a half billion dollars of surplus, monies 

over and above what you’re collecting for fuel taxes but not 

spending — four and a half billion over that 10-year period. So 

how can you stand up and let on like you’re doing something 

great for the people? You’re not. You’re not, Mr. Minister. 

 

As far as the roads and highways portion of this, I think 

everyone is in agreement. When we’re looking at a national 

highway plan, no one was more disappointed than our caucus 

that there wasn’t one in the federal budget, that there wasn’t 

some beginning. There should be a four-lane highway coast to 

coast, and I mean we would have fully supported the double 

laning of No. 16 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Member, I 

don’t know where you were because I’ve been tabling letters. 

We’ve sent letters to transportation ministers and agriculture 

ministers and the Minister of Transportation can just hand them 

over to you if you’re interested in reading them. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, get out there and take a position 

with us. There’s more to just saying that it’s not our fault. We   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

enjoy the money, but it’s not for us to deal with. The people 

aren’t buying it. No one is. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think tomorrow, like I said, is an interesting day 

for you. You can decide on the successor rights, whether you’re 

on board with the people of this province or not, whether you’re 

a roadblock or not. I would encourage you to be there for the 

people. 

 

One last comment on the budget . . . if we take a look at the 

comments that were made by the now Premier going into the 

1991 election, he was making fun of the Grant Devine golf 

courses in Saskatchewan: the highways, 18 holes to the mile. 

Well I’ll tell you. I’ll tell you. You go out there today, Mr. 

Minister, and drive the highways that you’re responsible for and 

you tell me if these aren’t in worse condition today than they 

were when you took government. 

 

But what has happened? What has happened? If we take a look 

at when in the first year that your government took over in 

’91-92 and look at . . . and use that as a base, we knew the 

highways were in terrible shape at that point. Use that as a base. 

What have you cut back? 

 

Well it’s been millions of dollars. In ’92-93 the shortfall from 

the previous year was 27 million. The following year it’s 17 

million, then 35 million and then 39 million and then 38 

million; $167 million it comes to from the ’91 budget level. 

That’s what you’ve saved, 167 million. And then you come to 

the people in this budget year and say, well we’re going to 

spend $30 million more. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Give a little; take a lot. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Exactly, give a little; take a lot. I think that 

you could do a lot better, especially if the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest wants to bring forward such motions, 

make sure he’s got your caucus on board to get together with 

everyone, put together a comprehensive plan. We’ll support it; 

we’re going support it, no question. But just get up and get at it. 

 

Now I think it’s time that the third party had a chance to 

perhaps jump in here and explain how they even ran up some of 

this debt which is creating some of these cut-backs in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that we 

should take and reread the motion to just start things off to sort 

of focus back on where the discussion really was about: 

 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 

develop a comprehensive National Transportation Policy, 

in cooperation with all levels of government, and that it 

provide funding to the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the members opposite and the member 

from Wood River has been attempting in every move that he 

has been making in discussing this particular issue to try and 

spread out the problems that the federal Liberal government is 

creating across this land into the hands of other people. And in 

doing so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that will achieve 

anything because that does not focus in on what the real 

problem is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the discussion related to transportation is really 

quite simple. The federal government is offloading onto the 

provinces a cost that they picked up for transportation over a 

number of years They’re doing this in a number of different 

ways. Sometimes it’s direct legislation that they’re passing. In 

other times, it’s having a committee or an authority such as . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The House has reached its 

normal time for recess. Just before recessing, in listening to 

debate this afternoon, I would like to remind all hon. members 

of rule 28 which does require that members direct their debate 

through the Chair, and I know that all hon. members will want 

to conduct their debate in the House according to the rules and 

will conduct themselves accordingly. 

 

Now having reached the time of recess, the House stands 

recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 663 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 663 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 687 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 688 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Maidstone Trade Fair 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

 Willowbrook Veselka Dance Club 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Nipawin to Host 1998 Saskatchewan Winter Games 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Trade Mission Benefits Schulte Sales of Englefeld 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Moose Jaw Regional Science Fair 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Hip and Knee Replacements Available in the Battlefords 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Prosecutions Review Report 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 665 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 665 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 666 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 666 

  Teichrob ............................................................................................................................................................................. 666, 668 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 668 

 Prosecutions Review Report 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 667 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 667 

 Gaming Commission Contracts 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 667 

  Crofford ............................................................................................................................................................................. 668, 669 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 668 

 Political Donations Report 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

 Whistleblower Legislation 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 669 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 218 — The Naming of Northern Municipal Airports Act 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

 Bill No. 219 — The Government Whistleblowers’ Act 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 669 

 Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting a Collective Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 670 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 45  An Act respecting a Collective Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 670 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 



 

 Bill No. 45  An Act respecting a Collective Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 45 — An Act respecting a Collective Bargaining Agreement between IPSCO Inc. and United Steelworkers of 

America, Local 5890 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Substitution Motion Ruled Irregular 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Utility Rate Review Process 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................... 672, 682, 683 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 674 

  Kasperski ........................................................................................................................................................................... 675, 683 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 677 

  Thomson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 678, 682 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................... 680, 682, 683 

  Trew ................................................................................................................................................................................... 681, 682 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 682 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 683 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 683 

ROYAL ASSENT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 684 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................... 684 

  McPherson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 687, 688 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 693 

 


