



















































Hansard: April 24, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1091 

 April 24, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise on 

behalf of the citizens of the great city of Melville to present a 

petition and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

would like to present petitions today to do with the problem of 

youth crime. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are all from the town of Kamsack. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to present a petition today on behalf of concerned citizens 

from throughout the province concerned about the escalating 

problem of youth crimes. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The petitioners are from Kamsack, Veregin, and throughout the 

eastern part of the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll read the 

prayer for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crimes, including charges of car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of the 

communities of Waldron, Grayson, and Melville. I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do as well have a 

petition on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed from concerned 

citizens of Balcarres. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice   



1092  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from the Kamsack area. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reverse the 

municipal revenue-sharing reduction; 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime; and 

 

Petitions regarding the construction of a new hospital in La 

Loche. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Aldridge presents the second report of 

the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, which is hereby 

tabled. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to table the second report of the Standing Committee 

on Public Accounts here this afternoon. 

 

I would at this time like to acknowledge the good work of past 

members, the past Chair, the member from Melfort-Tisdale, and 

yourself as the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. I’d 

also like at this time to welcome the new members of the 

committee, the member from Kelvington-Wadena and the 

member from Redberry Lake. 

 

The task of the committee was a large one; there was a lot of 

work to go through. I think all members of the committee 

applied themselves with diligence. Certainly the committee’s 

work was not without disagreement at times, but all members of 

the committee were afforded opportunities to state their case on 

any given issue. And we can take a good deal of pride in the 

fact that we have accomplished as much as we were able to to 

date. 

 

I would also like at this point to acknowledge the work of the 

Vice-Chair, the member from Meadow Lake, and other 

members of the committee: the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the member from Moosomin, the member from 

Lloydminster, the member from Regina South, Saskatoon 

Eastview, and Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Also the good work of the Office of the Clerk for helping us 

along the way, and the Provincial Auditor’s office and 

Provincial Comptroller’s office who . . . all of their help and 

their opinions along the way were invaluable in our 

deliberations. 

 

So I just, in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do wish for the 

committee, a renewed sense of energy, optimism, and certainly 

look forward to working in the year ahead and towards tabling 

our third report. But at this time I would move, seconded by the 

member from Meadow Lake: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’d like to join as well with the member from Thunder Creek in 

tabling this, and it’s a pleasure to second the motion. I just want 

to just take a few moments as well. 

 

I want to thank the member from Thunder Creek for now taking 

over the role of Chair. And I also want to pay tribute to the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale who I know did an awful lot of 

work in trying to get our committee back up to speed again. 

And we’re virtually caught up now. We have several reports to 

deal with. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the diligent and hard work of other 

committee members; and certainly I want to acknowledge the 

work that our Provincial Auditor did as well in aligning the 

different groupings and different departments for us so that we 

were able to get back on track. We were able to, with many of 

the recommendations, we were able to line them up and do 

them in duplication so that we didn’t have to go through all the 

different reports. 

 

But again, just in closing, a pleasure to second the motion in 

tabling the report and to thank all committee members, the 

Clerk’s office, and all involved in getting this report together 

today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m most appreciative of the opportunity to make 

comments on the report of the Standing Committee of Public 

Accounts. And let me begin by stating that I’ve been a member 

of this committee since 1991. It’s been my privilege to 

participate and witness many of the positive changes in the 

accountability of government finances. 

 

The mandate of the Public Accounts Committee is to assist the 

Legislative Assembly in holding the government accountable 

for taxpayers’ money and for its stewardship over public assets. 

To fulfil its functions and meet its responsibilities, the 

committee undertakes to review, examine, and evaluate the 

financial and administrative activities of government 

departments and Crown corporations cited in the Public 

Accounts and the Report of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

The comments that I would like to make stem from the mandate 

of the committee and the importance of protecting the work of 

this committee. The report tabled today is a majority report, and   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

I am compelled to make some statements since there are some 

items with which I do not agree, and I have noted some 

developing trends that are worrisome. 

 

The Public Accounts Committee must be able to examine all 

government organizations in a non-partisan way. And the very 

nature of having government officials rather than ministers 

appear before it, distinguishes it from the Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations. 

 

Now I’m concerned about the trend to refer Crown corporation 

issues away from the Public Accounts Committee to the Crown 

Corporations Committee because the two committees, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, have very different mandates and very 

different approaches, and I find this trend unfortunate and 

disturbing. 

 

Another serious trend is the government’s willingness to join 

one government organization with another to create a new 

entity which then is not required to come before the Assembly 

and be accountable. 

 

Of equal concern is the fact that it is now a matter of public 

record that some members of the government believe that the 

Provincial Auditor should not continue to bring forward issues 

with which the government disagrees. This view is myopic at 

best, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and very dangerous. 

 

There was much debate amongst the Public Accounts 

Committee members about whether or not the government 

provides a complete enough planning framework, and 

obviously there was a disagreement between government 

members and myself or I would not have felt compelled to be 

raising this today. 

 

I most certainly believe that the government’s current planning 

framework is incomplete. Without an overall plan, it is very 

difficult for me to represent my constituency well. 

 

For example, the recent budget stated that interest costs are 

$800 million, but in the summary financial statements, interest 

charges are cited as $1.6 billion. 

 

Furthermore, the Finance minister stands in this House and 

consistently refers to a rainy-day fund and that somehow the 

people of the province can feel more secure knowing that they 

can in times of emergency be able to count on transfers from 

this fund. But we don’t even know if there’s any cash in such a 

fund. 

 

As well, when one examines the present plan of the 

government, there’s absolutely no indication of whether the 

accumulated deficit of $9.9 billion as of March 31, 1996 will 

increase or decrease. There is a plan for debt but no apparent 

plan for the accumulated deficit. 

 

Now this is very confusing for the public and for legislators. 

And it begs the question: does the government even know? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not surprising that no one knew the 

full extent of the seriousness of the financial situation facing 

our province in the past because there was no complete plan. 

Even though government members of the Public Accounts 

Committee disagree with the Provincial Auditor and with 

opposition members of the committee on this issue, I am 

hopeful that in time the Premier, his Finance minister, and the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus will see its importance. 

 

In the meantime, I would like all government officials 

appearing before future Public Accounts Committee meetings 

to know that I’m going to be asking each of them the following 

same set of questions based on the premiss that they must move 

to a broader performance planning and reporting framework: (1) 

what are your programs and services to achieve in clear . . . in 

terms of clear and measurable objectives; (2) what performance 

indicators are you using to measure and monitor the success of 

your programs; (3) what are the key issues that you need to 

manage well in order to ensure the success of your programs; 

and (4) as a legislator, where can I go to get more information 

on your objectives and measurability of your performance 

indicators? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed a privilege for me to be part of 

this committee. We take our work very seriously and I hope that 

my comments will add to future decision making. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s my 

pleasure today to introduce to you in your gallery, a good 

constituent of Regina Centre, Mrs. Mugliston, who is here in 

anticipation of celebrating her birthday tomorrow and this 

seemed like an appropriate kick-off. I won’t reveal her age 

because that’s something I would never do without permission. 

I’ll just say that she has a wealth of experience to share with us 

and with others. 

 

And I would just ask everyone to welcome Mrs. Mugliston and 

her, I think, daughter and, I’m not sure, both daughters visiting 

her today here in the legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I’m on my 

feet I’d also like to wish Mrs. Mugliston a happy birthday 

tomorrow, and many happy returns of the day. 

 

But I also want to introduce, Mr. Speaker, to you and through 

you to the members of the Assembly, some guests in your 

gallery. Joining us today from the Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan — and I would ask each to rise briefly as I read 

their name — we have Ian McAusland-Berg, the president; 

Frances Stewart, the past president; Dr. David Randall; Karen 

Todd; Robert Stephenson; and Marlene Harper. And also 

joining us today, Mr. Speaker, is Kelly Michalko, 

president-elect of the Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists 

Association. 

  



1094  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

Both of these organizations, I’m very happy to say, have put a 

lot of time and effort into the proposed Psychologists Act which 

is before the House, and I’d like to thank them for their efforts. 

And I’d like all members to join with me in warmly welcoming 

these psychologists here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, a group of 

20 grade 7 and 8 students seated in the west gallery. They’re 

from the Benson School. They’re here with their teacher, 

Wayne Wilson. And I know that they will enjoy question 

period, and I want all members to join with me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  And while I’m on my feet, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I want to introduce a friend and an assistant to 

the vice-president of AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

from Beijing, China, who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery — if 

Zewei Yu would stand and be recognized. He is very much 

involved with the CANDU (Canadian deuterium uranium) 

reactor project in China and is a good friend of Saskatchewan 

and a good friend of a number of people here in the Assembly, 

and I want all members to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure as well to introduce in the west gallery a special group 

of students who have come to spend some time with us today. 

There are 21 students from Centennial School. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Marcel Magotiaux, and I know 

that they will spend some time here watching and listening to 

question period; then they’re having a tour and I look forward 

to meeting with them later on. I know they’ve prepared a lot of 

questions so I’m quite anxious to see what sort of questions 

they’ll ask me. Please join me in extending a warm welcome. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the Assembly, two very special people that are 

visiting from Toronto in my constituency for a few days. Sitting 

in the west gallery we have Peter and Pamela Hrycyk, and they 

are here for the graduation of their oldest grandson and look 

forward to visiting with him over the weekend, and I ask all 

members to join in welcoming them here to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Commutron Industries 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

talk a little bit today if I could, Mr. Speaker, about a small 

industry in a small town, Saskatchewan. Commutron Industries 

is a private company situated in the village of Elbow. The 

business of Commutron is the custom automated assembly of 

printed circuit boards both through hole and surface mount. 

Commutron presently employs two people full time and about 

10 to 12 part time. As the business develops, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they hope to employ approximately 10 to 20 people on 

a full-time basis. 

 

The reason that this business is so interesting, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that its predecessor had some financial problems and 

the people of the community decided they could not afford to 

let this business and this industry in their community die. 

 

And I’d like to quote the president of the company, Bryan 

Cafferata of Elbow: 

 

Commutron Industries is locally owned and all of the 

employees hold some shares in the company. We employ 

largely women and all training is on the job. The custom 

assembly of circuit board is a unique industry for a small 

rural village, and I believe it is a tribute to the people of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And indeed it is, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Calgary Company Relocates to Turtleford 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anyone born 

and raised in Saskatchewan tends to appreciate the many 

characteristics that make this province special — the 

hospitality, the friendliness, the cooperation and the community 

spirit. Former residents do not forget those qualities. I think we 

should be proud of our province and the quality of life that we 

enjoy here. 

 

So returning to our roots is easy. Just ask Dave Smith who has 

moved his management and training centre consulting business 

from Calgary back to his home town of Lashburn. Mr. Smith’s 

Canada Training Group has been operating for 17 years, 

primarily in the oil and gas industry, offering quick and 

efficient training in electrical systems. 

 

As a credit to their performance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

company has contracts with such well-known multinationals as 

Proctor & Gamble, Goodyear, Imperial Oil, and Dupont. 

Saskatchewan is the world’s best place to live. Dave Smith feels 

he would be better off moving from Calgary to Turtleford, back 

to his home town. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Good Neighbour Lottery 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to offer my encouragement today to all the volunteers and 

organizers who are participating in the Family Service Bureau’s 

Good Neighbour Lottery. Unfortunately, with a wide range of 

groups competing for charity dollars this year, the Family   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

Service Bureau is finding it a bit more difficult to sell tickets. 

 

In fact the Good Neighbour Lottery still needs to sell a couple 

thousands tickets before tomorrow’s deadline. It should be 

noted by members of the Assembly and all members of the 

province that proceeds from this lottery would allow the Family 

Service Bureau to continue to offer some very important 

services in Regina, including support groups and counselling 

services for victims of abuse. 

 

So I ask all members of this House to join with me in wishing 

the workers with the Family Service Bureau some late success 

with their lottery. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Film Producer Elected to International 

Film Organization 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, I seem to have become both the 

Siskel and Ebert of the Saskatchewan legislature reporting 

regularly on the Saskatchewan movie industry. 

 

I’ve got another hot item from Tinsel Town North — Regina’s 

own Kevin Dewalt, CEO (chief executive officer) of Minds Eye 

Pictures, was recently elected vice-president, North America, to 

the board of governors, the International Quorum of Film and 

Video Producers. 

 

This is a new one on me too, Mr. Speaker, but the International 

Quorum, or I.Q., is a select group of film and video producers 

who are invited into membership based on their high 

professional standards. The I.Q. has more than 75 member 

companies around the globe representing 37 companies on six 

continents. 

 

Its purpose is to provide members with an international network 

of contacts and business resources, co-production partners, and 

international support. As an example, I.Q. president, Christian 

Fueter, and his firm from Zurich teamed with Kevin Dewalt to 

produce the two-part miniseries, The Lost Daughter, filmed 

right here in Regina and starring Richard Chamberlain. 

 

As President Fueter said: 

 

Minds Eye Pictures is quickly making a name for itself in 

the international market-place. And I welcome (he said) 

the opportunity to exchange my experiences with those of 

my I.Q. colleagues. 

 

My congratulations to Kevin Dewalt and Minds Eye Pictures 

for extending their presence around the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Biggar Nationals Win Two Hockey Titles 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that it is 

spring and many members here may not want to talk about the 

wonderful Saskatchewan winter just past, but I would like to 

take a few minutes to do just that. 

Although our winters are at times terribly cold and mixed with 

frequent snowstorms, many of us who are rural residents still 

seem to find our way to our community arenas to watch and 

cheer on our home hockey team. 

 

Hockey in rural Saskatchewan communities is more than just 

one team against another. It is also one town against another — 

the winner of the game gives residents of a particular town 

bragging rights. This is a tradition that has gone on since 

hockey began. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the town of Biggar has earned this privilege 

from the efforts of its senior hockey team this past winter. 

Playing in one of the most competitive senior leagues in the 

province, the Biggar Nationals won the Wild Goose Hockey 

League title. 

 

But the team did not stop here, Mr. Speaker. In addition to the 

league championship, the Nationals also won the Provincial 

Senior B Championship. Two championships in one 

Saskatchewan winter — amazing. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Nationals on their fine 

performance this past season. They not only won the titles for 

themselves, but also for the entire community of Biggar, and 

the bragging rights that go along with it. Congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Safety Recognition Award 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this coming Monday, 

April 28, is recognized as a day of mourning for workers who 

have been killed and injured while performing their duties. 

 

Workplace tragedies are unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

which is why everyone, workers and management, should take 

all necessary precautions to prevent them. The responsibility 

rests with everyone. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the workers and management of the Sifto 

salt plant in Unity have taken this responsibility very seriously. 

Providing and maintaining a safe workplace environment 

requires constant monitoring and continuous awareness. The 

employees and management of the salt plant have made safety 

their top priority. And I am proud to say that they have been 

nationally recognized for their efforts. 

 

The salt plant has been awarded the One Hundred Grand Safety 

Award for achieving 200,000 hours without losing a single 

workday due to injury. I want to congratulate the 74 employees 

of the plant for their efforts. They are the ones who are at risk, 

and they are the ones who have successfully avoided accidents. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no one likes to hear about accidents. That 

is why I ask that all members join me in congratulating all the 

employees and management of the Unity Sifto salt plant for 

their accomplishment. And I know everyone will wish them 

continued success for the future. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



1096  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

Economic Boom in the South-west 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the part of 

my province, the breathtakingly beautiful south-west, there are 

two diametrically opposed views being offered these days — 

black and white; yin and yang; minority, majority; correct, 

incorrect. Take your choice. 

 

The first view, promoted by the member from Wood River and 

his minority band of merry, misguided mischief-makers, says 

that things are about as bad as they can get. Every sentence he 

utters begins with a groan, with the first word usually being, oh, 

woe. 

 

There is another view though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, offered by 

everybody else. And unfortunately for the member from Wood 

River, backed up by facts — facts which say the only problem 

we have is that too much is happening too fast. 

 

The Shaunavon Standard for instance recently said that, quote: 

 

The high activity within the petroleum sector, combined 

with improved profitability for agricultural enterprises, 

appears to be combining to create a shortage of skilled 

labour in our region. 

 

It goes on to say that we have reached virtual full employment; 

that industry is booming; that — horrors — even wages might 

be forced to rise. And that, get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

is a potential for a housing shortage because people from the 

West — and we know where that is, don’t we — people from 

the West are moving to where the air is clean, the crime rate is 

low, and the prices are affordable. Every community in the 

south-west is reporting an influx of new residents, the report 

says. 

 

Take your choice, Mr. Speaker. For myself, I think I will go 

with the press. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Waterhen Resident Wins Award 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

congratulate a constituent of mine who is receiving a 

prestigious award for excellence in education. Pauline Lasas, a 

young mother from the Waterhen Lake First Nation in my 

constituency, is one of only three people from across North 

America who are recipients of The Pathfinder Award of 

Excellence, awarded by the Pathfinder Learning Systems 

Corporation. The other two are from British Columbia and the 

state of Washington. 

 

These people are recognized by Pathfinder because they have 

used its computer-managed learning system to achieve their 

personal educational goals. 

 

Pauline graduated from the Waweyekisik Educational Centre of 

Waterhen Lake, using credits obtained entirely in the Pathfinder 

Learning Centre located in the high school. 

 

I think, Deputy Speaker, to put this in a layperson’s terms, 

Pauline took correspondence classes by computer instead of by 

mail — another way that the 21st century is upon us. She is the 

first person to graduate using the Pathfinder program, and 

Waterhen Lake is one of several institutions using the 

Pathfinder computer lab to deliver both high school and adult 

learner programs to remote areas. 

 

I congratulate Pauline for her accomplishment and hope she 

enjoys her trip to Vancouver to receive her award. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hospitality Network Movies 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the motto “Reach Out and Touch Someone” has taken 

on a whole new meaning in this province. It was brought to my 

attention this week that Sexual Instinct, Fantasy Chamber, and 

Elements of Desire are three XXX movies available at a number 

of Saskatchewan hotels this week. 

 

When I contacted a local hotel clerk to determine who supplies 

these features, I was shocked to hear that they’re supplied by, 

and I quote, “the Hospitality Network through SaskTel.” After 

some checking, we discovered that SaskTel owns 100 per cent 

of a numbered company which in turn owns 49 per cent of the 

Hospitality Network. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskTel — or should I refer to 

her as the minister in charge of “SaskPorn” — bite the bullet 

and bare all the facts on this issue? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member’s question, I would say that there is some discretion 

that is used in the . . . through the hotel owners. I want to . . . the 

Hospitality Network, yes, is a strategic alliance with another 

company that SaskTel is involved in. I’m not aware of the 

particular titles that the member opposite mentions. I will 

certainly undertake to check into it and report. 

 

In the meantime, I wonder if the members opposite have seen 

my ad in the 1 900 numbers — married, white female cabinet 

minister seeks opposition member who will ask an intelligent 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister can make 

light of this issue but never forget that this is a member of the 

family of Crown corporations, and I don’t think the taxpayer 

finds this very funny. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is one point I want to drive home — 

the fact that the minister cannot claim ignorance on this issue. 

The board of directors of the Hospitality Network includes two 

senior SaskTel executives. This government has obviously been 

caught with its pants down. It is involved but has been trying to   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

hide it behind a numbered company. 

 

Madam Minister, you have indicated that SaskTel wants to gain 

40 per cent of future income from other sources. Is peddling 

XXX movies the kind of other sources you’ve been referring 

to? And why has SaskTel’s mandate been expanded to include 

pornography? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, no one is hiding from 

anything here. We have mentioned many times the development 

of the Hospitality Network, which has been successfully sold 

throughout the world including a recent sale to Hong Kong. So 

this is not a secretive alliance, Mr. Speaker. This is a strategic 

alliance in hospitality . . . in hotel movies that we have been 

proud to be associated with the development of. 

 

There is also, I would say, the facility of being able to block any 

kind of offering in a hotel room for the use of under-age minors 

or children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, you’re missing the point. 

Why are we as the Government of Saskatchewan promoting this 

filth and pornography? Mr. Deputy Speaker, when taxpayers 

hear about SaskTel branching out into various activities, I’m 

quite sure that peddling XXX movies such as Sexual Instinct to 

hotel patrons is not what they expect. 

 

It is bad enough that this government has thrust the province 

head-first into gambling; now they want to cut out the XXX 

market as well. 

 

Will the minister who presided over the NST $16 million 

disaster explain what steps she intends to take to get SaskTel 

out of the XXX business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I did say that I would 

undertake to make some inquiries about the content. But I 

wonder whether the member opposite has viewed any of the 

movies, or is he making his accusations based upon the name 

alone? 

 

Because I would suggest that the Liberal Party take . . . calls 

into question their researcher — the researcher who has given 

you the information on which to base this question. The 

research is incomplete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, I do not ask a question 

that I have not fully researched. 

 

I would like to mention though, Madam Minister, that you’re 

sending . . . your government is sending mixed messages to the 

people of Saskatchewan. The member for Humboldt has on a 

number of occasions brought to the attention of this House the 

problem of child prostitution. The Minister of Social Services 

has countered and somewhat ridiculed her even though he 

knows her sincerity on this issue. 

 

Now we have a member of the family of Crown corporations 

peddling filth and pornography. Is the almighty dollar more 

important than our women and children in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, speaking of the almighty 

dollar, I just wonder . . . The researcher, Dr. Melenchuk, the 

Liberal Party’s researcher, is on the public payroll as the Liberal 

Party’s researcher. Is your researcher, the leader of your party, 

spending his time in the back rooms watching on the 

Hospitality Network, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital Closures 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yesterday I rose on behalf of the people of 

Rabbit Lake when it became clear that their own MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly ) was unlikely to do so. 

Today I rise on behalf of Rabbit Lake. But the other 

communities who had their hospitals downgraded to health 

centres, what assurances do they have that they won’t suffer the 

same fate as Rabbit Lake, Cudworth, Dodsland, and Eatonia, 

and see the next step, the closure of their health facility 

altogether? 

 

What assurance do we have that downgrading from a hospital to 

a health centre isn’t simply a way station on the road to 

oblivion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, it is the long-standing history 

of the Liberal Party to try to frighten people about health care. 

When medicare was introduced in this province in 1962, they 

said that people wouldn’t be able to have a doctor. They said 

that the doctors would leave the country. Now the member 

wants to say that the people aren’t going to have hospitals. 

 

Well I want to say to the people, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan has more than twice as many hospitals per capita 

as the national average and it’s going to stay that way. And we 

have back-filled every penny that the federal Liberals have 

taken out of health care, Mr. Speaker, which has been a hundred 

million dollars in the last two years. 

 

And New Democrats built the medicare system, New 

Democrats sustained the medicare system, and New Democrats 

are going to continue to put the money into health care that the 

Liberals take out. Liberals cut medicare, Liberals gut medicare; 

New Democrats protect medicare and sustain medicare, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Machiavelli, that great father of   



1098  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

NDP political philosophy, once wrote that gratitude is the 

weakest of all human emotions. Yesterday the member from 

Moose Jaw was thanking the federal government for saving 

CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Moose Jaw; today we see the 

Minister of Health back to his old tricks of blaming his failure 

to protect basic health services in this province on somebody 

else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister is also a 

lawyer; he knows perfectly good and well that under section 92 

of our constitution, health services are a provincial 

responsibility. Do you want to be the Minister of Health or the 

minister of excuses? What are you doing to protect these health 

centres that are in danger of losing further service? They’ve 

already been downgraded. Are they going to be downgraded 

further? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  In other words, Mr. Speaker, what that 

member is saying on behalf of the Liberal Party is that the 

federal Liberals should cut all funding for the national health 

care system. That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker, and we reject 

that. And I want to say to that member that I . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order, order. The Chair is 

having a little problem hearing the rest of the answer. If the 

House would come to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I have issued 

a challenge to that member and that party about 10 times in this 

session of the legislature, and the challenge is this: if that 

member and that party say that our health system is so bad in 

the province of Saskatchewan, I challenge that member to get 

up on his feet and tell this House and tell the people of the 

province where they have a better, more caring, and 

compassionate health system than we have right here in the 

province of Saskatchewan — no thanks to the Liberal Party, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Alameda Dam Water Releases 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 

afternoon are for the minister responsible for Sask Water, or in 

his absence, the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, the Alameda dam is nowhere near full capacity, 

but because of your agreement with the Tetzlaff brothers, you 

are letting water out at a rate of 27 cubic metres per second. 

That’s faster than the water’s coming into the dam project. That 

water that is being released flows into the Souris River; that 

water then flows into the Assiniboine River, which flows right 

into downtown Winnipeg. 

 

Mr. Minister, by releasing water from the Alameda dam, you 

are directly contributing to the flooding in Manitoba. Mr. 

Minister, what are you doing, flooding Manitoba? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the member may or 

may not be aware of agreements that are formed with respect to 

modern management — interprovincial agreements; agreements 

with our southern neighbours — and that is in fact the case with 

the administration of the Rafferty-Alameda project. 

 

I want to also remind the member that an agreement was struck 

with Sask Water and the Tetzlaffs to determine a level of 

operations, and that was necessary because the former 

administration didn’t follow the proper environmental 

approvals before they completed the dam. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, we are operating it under the 

regulations and the guidelines that we are charged with. I want 

to as well tell the member that the Tetzlaff agreement will end 

in 1998 and he and all the people in that corner of the province 

will have the opportunity to have input with respect to a 

long-term operating level of that lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister says 1998. 

Well it’s 1997 and flood conditions in Manitoba are severe, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

We’ve been in contact with the office of Manitoba Natural 

Resources minister, Glen Cummings. Mr. Cummings’s office 

tells us there’s no way of diverting the water before it reaches 

the Red River in downtown Winnipeg. They could not, they 

could not believe that you were releasing water and 

contributing, further contributing, to their flood conditions and 

flood problems, especially when the Alameda dam is not full to 

capacity and has additional flood capacity at its disposal. 

 

And what’s worse, you’re actually releasing water from the 

Alameda dam faster than it’s coming into the dam project right 

now. Mr. Minister, because of your stupid agreement with the 

Tetzlaff brothers, you are contributing to flooding in Manitoba. 

Mr. Minister, the people of Manitoba have enough distress 

without having you dumping more water down on them right 

now. Will you immediately move to close the gates and 

immediately stop the release of water out of the Alameda dam? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, to answer the 

member: I can say that my office has not been contacted by any 

officials or any politicians from Manitoba. And I certainly 

would welcome some comments if in fact they have any to 

make. I’m not aware that Sask Water has been approached with 

respect to any of the operating facilities in our province, but I 

will undertake to check this directly after question period. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that we do support the 

province of Manitoba. They’re going through some very 

difficult times created by the Red River and the flooding they’re 

in. And I want to say that we will do anything within reason to 

facilitate and to assist our sister provinces. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member opposite that the 

Tetzlaff agreement was as a result of the Conservative 

government of the 1980s’ mismanagement of the development 

of that project. And that member knows full well the agreement 

with the Tetzlaffs was as a result of their mismanagement and 

their incompetence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 

Tetzlaff agreement allows for flood control as well, and you 

know that. The reason Manitoba hasn’t contacted you is 

because they were not aware you were releasing water; they 

thought you would have the good sense not to release water 

when they have flood conditions going on down there. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other day North Dakota governor, Ed Schafer, 

donated thousands of extra sandbags to help out in Manitoba. 

You’re helping out too; you’re donating water. That’s what you 

are doing. 

 

Mr. Minister, this doesn’t make any sense and you know it. The 

Alameda dam is not even close to being full and yet you’re 

releasing water into a flood-stricken province. And, Mr. 

Minister, you don’t seem to even know that it’s happening. 

 

I’d like to ask the Premier. Mr. Premier, will you take the 

immediate steps and immediate action to close the gates at 

Alameda and stop the water that’s flowing into Manitoba and 

do something to help out in this disastrous situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to underline the 

remarks made by the minister in charge of Sask Water 

Corporation about the gravity of the situation in Manitoba. I 

don’t think there’s a member in this House or a person in 

Saskatchewan — anybody who watches on television — can’t 

help but feel very sorry and empathetic and sympathetic to the 

situation in Manitoba. 

 

As a sister province, we’ll try to do all that we can to assist 

Manitoba in this battle. I’m sure that they will persevere and 

they’ll win out as they always have — they’re prairie people 

and will try to do that. 

 

With respect to the question specifically respecting the Tetzlaff 

agreement, I can only repeat what the minister has said. 

However, to look at this matter one step further, I will ask the 

minister and the officials to take another look at this to see what 

impact, if any, the release of water has. Because I have learned 

a long time ago not to rely on the facts that the Conservative 

opposition advance in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Obviously the Premier doesn’t even trust his own water 

department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apparently the federal Liberal government doesn’t 

know how to tell time. So on election day the polls will close in 

Saskatchewan one hour later than most of the rest of the 

country. And are the Liberals trying to fix this problem? No. In 

fact Liberal MP (Member of Parliament) Gordon Kirkby says 

it’s up to Saskatchewan to fix Ottawa’s mistake by switching to 

daylight savings time. Road apples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, federal Liberals may not know what time it is in 

Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan voters know what time it is. 

It’s time to get rid of arrogant Liberals like Gordon Kirkby and 

Lloyd Axworthy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  My question is to the Premier. Mr. 

Premier, have you contacted the Prime Minister to tell him to 

fix this mistake before he calls the election? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have not done so as of 

yet, but I share much of the sentiment behind the question of the 

hon. member. And I definitely agree that it’s going to result in 

one big, large wake-up call for the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan as a result of this effort. 

 

This is a problem which shouldn’t be treated so cavalierly by 

the member from Prince Albert or by the Liberal caucus in this 

House as they say that all the province of Saskatchewan should 

change over to daylight saving time. By agreement, an 

amendment can be made or some interpretation of legislation 

can be made in order to rectify this obviously, patently stupid 

development coming out of Ottawa and the patently stupid 

answer from the member from Prince Albert. 

 

So we’re taking all of our considerations under consideration at 

this point, and taking the appropriate steps in the next little 

while. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Appropriate 

steps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals also forgot that part of western 

Saskatchewan is on Mountain Time. This means the polls will 

close in some communities like Lloydminster an hour ahead of 

the rest of the province. Within some constituencies, including 

Gordon Kirkby’s constituency, polls will be closing at two 

different times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how are you supposed to run an election when the 

polls are closing at different times within the same 

constituency? It may be possible to find out the results of some 

of those polls before the rest of them close. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you contact Jean Chrétien and explain how 

serious these flaws are and to the rest of the boneheads who 

wrote this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, again there is very 

little that I can disagree about the assumption behind the 

question. Perhaps the hon. member from Prince Albert needs an   



1100  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

extra hour. I think he may need an extra 24 hours — it still isn’t 

going to save his bacon out there in Prince Albert constituency. 

There’s no doubt about that. 

 

But I do, but I do say something to the hon. member’s very 

good question on this very important issue. And the Liberals 

who are catcalling the Conservatives and us in this regard, I 

think will be put to the test here. 

 

I’m going to ask leave of the . . . I’m going to ask leave of the 

House right after question period, before orders of the day, that 

an Assembly resolution be passed by this House urging the 

federal government to make the appropriate . . . If you want to 

do it you can do it. I don’t care. I don’t care as long as 

everybody in this House — Liberal, NDP, and Conservative — 

passes unanimously a motion to rectify this absolutely stupid 

Ottawa law that’s taking place here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Taxes on Fire-fighting Equipment 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do have a 

question that this government could answer because it is their 

concern. Not only are the towns and cities reeling from cuts in 

their provincial grants, they also have to cope with paying 

provincial sales tax on all their purchases. Yet this government 

does not pay taxes to municipal governments and Saskatchewan 

is one of only two provinces in Canada who refuses to do that. 

 

The current arrangement means that local governments have to 

pay PST (provincial sales tax) on all their essential purchases 

such as fire-fighting equipment. This is just one other burden 

municipalities must carry. And more importantly, it hinders 

their ability to ensure adequate fire protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new fire truck can cost anywhere from 250,000 

to $500,000, and that translates into a PST charge of between 

17,000 and $35,000. This is an incredible tax burden for 

municipalities. However, the fire-fighting equipment tax 

exemption Act which I will introduce today will help ease the 

strain on municipalities. 

 

If the minister won’t do anything about the 42 per cent decrease 

in revenue-sharing grants to urban municipalities, will she at 

least agree to cancel the PST on the purchase of fire equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to answer the 

question on behalf of the government because I want this House 

to clearly understand and the people of Saskatchewan clearly to 

understand exactly what the Liberal Party is doing here. 

 

I have in front of me here, Mr. Speaker, a March 26 Melville 

Advance. I think the hon. member from Melville will know 

about that publication. The headline, which says as follows, 

“NDP stole budget ideas from Liberals.” Quote: 

 

There’s no question the province has taken some quite 

modest steps towards fiscal health for the province. I’m 

pleased to see the sales tax reduction by 2 per cent. 

That’s the former leader, the current member from Melville, 

who said that on March 26. 

 

Then in Langenburg on April 16, three weeks later, headline, 

Langenburg Four-Town Journal, “Liberal leader sceptical about 

PST (tax).” He says we don’t need the 2 per cent sales tax. He 

thinks the money should be directed to other areas. We do not 

need to reduce it at all. 

 

Now this member gets up and says something entirely different. 

They move from harmonization, which would expand the tax 

base, to saying they welcome the 2 per cent, to saying they want 

the 2 per cent back on, to her saying that the fire equipment 

should be exempted. 

 

I say the Liberal Party doesn’t know anything about this issue, 

any more than they know about the time issue in the Elections 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier obviously doesn’t 

care about what’s happening in small town Saskatchewan. 

We’re talking about volunteer fire-fighters who are trying to 

raise some money for protecting their communities. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Saskatchewan is one of only two 

provinces that does not pay municipal property tax on 

government buildings. Ottawa pays grants in lieu of property 

taxes, as does every other province except Newfoundland. 

 

Why is it this province continues to gouge every cent it can out 

of municipalities by way of taxes, such as sales tax on fire 

equipment, while it refuses to pay its obligations to 

municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, will the 

hon. member please tell us — would anybody over there in the 

Liberal caucus please tell us, would the Liberal leader please 

tell us — do they favour 9 to 7 or not? They did by saying no to 

the budget. They’ll be having legislation introduced to this 

House to tell us once again whether yes or no for the lowering 

of the sales tax. 

 

Please tell us whether they’re for harmonization of the sales tax 

with the GST (goods and services tax). That’s what your 

Liberal leader says he’s for. Harmonization is in direct contrast 

with what you are urging us to accept. 

 

I am saying that you are so confused on this issue, you are so 

misleading on this issue, that nobody can take the Liberal Party 

of Saskatchewan, or for that matter, the Liberal Party of 

Canada, seriously on any issue whatsoever. You’ve absolutely 

deceived the people of Saskatchewan provincially. And 

federally — and federally you’ve broken every promise that 

you made to the people of Canada in 1993. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Changes to Family Income Plan 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you so much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to inform the 

House about changes that were announced this morning to the 

Family Income Plan — changes, Mr. Speaker, which will work 

to reduce barriers to employment, which will increase benefits 

to children of low income families, and which will prevent 

children, families and their children, from falling into social 

assistance, and provide a transition to the national child benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, effective next month benefits available to low 

income families under the Family Income Plan will be 

enhanced and expanded. Mr. Speaker, the maximum monthly 

benefits will rise to $120 from $105 per child; and the income 

eligibility cut-off level will rise as well. 

 

Families now receive full benefits when their income is less 

than $725 per month. In May this income level will increase to 

$850 per month and the rate at which the benefits are reduced 

above this level will drop from 50 per cent to 40 per cent. 

 

So for example, Mr. Speaker, a family with two children and a 

thousand-dollar-a-month income would today, prior to the 

changes, receive $110 a month from the Family Income Plan. 

As of May that same family will receive $240 a month. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, children’s supplementary health 

coverage under the Family Income Plan will be enhanced. 

Presently children of families receiving the Family Income Plan 

are only partially covered for supplementary health costs such 

as drug, dental, and optometric services. That will be expanded, 

Mr. Speaker, so that these children’s supplementary health costs 

will be fully covered. 

 

Presently there are approximately 1,300 families and 2,900 

children receiving benefits under the Family Income Plan. We 

are anticipating that the changes announced today will triple, 

Mr. Speaker, will triple the number of children and families 

receiving benefits. In all, this means more low income families 

will be eligible for more benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to increase awareness of the program among 

eligible families, we’re initiating today a public information 

campaign. Posters and brochures identifying and explaining the 

program are being sent to approximately 8,000 organizations 

and offices across our province, including each of our MLA 

offices. As well, there will be some very limited newspaper 

advertising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, child and family poverty is not an easy issue to 

address, but it is very important that we do. It is an issue that 

could have tremendous impact on both individual families and 

communities as a whole. It is significant that Saskatchewan is 

taking a leadership role in the development of the national child 

benefit, which will have a direct and positive impact on poor 

and low income children and families across Canada. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, Saskatchewan people have always 

been leaders in the development of important provincial and 

national programs and services. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, some countries would like to be known for their 

expertise in space technology, putting man on the moon; some 

countries might like to be known for their financial expertise 

and their military prowess; I think it would be wonderful if we 

in Saskatchewan, we Canadians together, could be known for 

the way we treat our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I am extremely pleased that all levels of government, 

both federal and provincial, are taking steps to correct some of 

the flaws in the current social assistance program and so we 

welcome this new announcement. 

 

We do need to do all we can to help because statistics show that 

Saskatchewan does have the fourth-worst rate of child poverty 

in Canada. There are 57,000 Saskatchewan children who are 

living in poverty and so there has to be, of course, more 

incentive for the working poor to hopefully benefit from this. 

And hopefully these income supplement changes will help 

dismantle the welfare trap that so many people are in. And so 

we are pleased that the federal government has provided the 

money necessary to assist our province during this transition 

period. 

 

While a more complete child benefit program is worked on by 

all provinces, I have some concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

the provincial government establishing some accountability 

measures that we need in order to ensure that this additional 

money is in fact reaching the children and families that need it 

the most. I also am concerned about some measures being taken 

to ensure that proper communication to recipients, not only 

organizations, is there so that they are aware of the new health 

benefits. And I would be very pleased to see if the Minister of 

Social Services would be offering that; so that the 

communications can be effectively carried out to the recipients. 

 

Perhaps the province could also ensure some more frequent 

detailed reports on this particular facet of the assistance plan 

because, as with all programs, it is incumbent upon the 

provincial government to monitor programs to ensure that 

short- and long-term objectives are met. That means 

performance indicators and evaluations and reports come back 

to the legislature. 

 

And while the member . . . rather the Minister of Social 

Services, has commented on the delay that the federal 

government is putting up, looking at July of 1998 as almost too 

far away for the child tax benefit to come into full effect, I want 

to say that I believe that we must take adequate time to ensure 

that any program — federal, across the whole country — be 

complete and adequate and efficient before any measures are 

taken. We don’t want to have to look at programs two years 

down the road and say, well we hurried this and so in fact 

people are suffering from it. 

 

  



1102  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

So I think it is necessary to take the time that we need, and I 

believe that the NDP government has stated a number of times 

that they are taking the leadership role in assuring a proper child 

benefit program. So I encourage them to continue talks with 

every province and with the federal government to have that 

happen as expediently as possible. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A few 

comments regarding the announcement made by the minister 

this morning. While I believe that the government is certainly 

moving in the right direction when it comes to recognizing — 

and I think that’s what this piece of legislation will do and this 

announcement will do is recognizes that individuals — there are 

many individuals in our society who are certainly intent and 

desire to find gainful employment. Unfortunately when they are 

looking for employment, sometimes what you’re left with is 

maybe a low income job which may not give you the same level 

of support that you would get under social assistance. Therefore 

there’s no incentive to take employment. 

 

I believe, if I hear the minister correctly, that this does give 

some incentive to look for employment and to find that while 

you’ve found employment, while it may not meet all the needs 

that your family has, that there is a program out there that 

certainly assists you to provide adequately for your family and 

to make sure that their needs are met. The fact that full health 

benefits or supplementary health benefits are included in this 

program, I think is certainly positive, and we appreciate seeing 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, I think it’s also incumbent that the 

minister take a close look as to how the program is going to be 

implemented so that the program is not abused. I think we need 

to have . . . make sure that there are some checks and balances 

so that indeed the funds that are made available are going to 

individuals and to families that are certainly in need of the 

support and rather than maybe into the hands of individuals 

who find ways to get around the program. 

 

The other concern we do have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’d 

like to raise and raise with the minister — and I’m not sure 

what his department is doing about it — but when you talk 

about families applying for and receiving supplemental 

benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason that this piece of 

legislation and this announcement has come forward today is to 

address the concern of poverty and hungry children in our 

province. This announcement today doesn’t necessarily show us 

how that money indeed will reach the hands, if you will, or be 

put into use to meet the needs, of children. 

 

I would understand that the funds would indeed be sent to the 

parents and how the parents choose to disburse those funds will 

be their choice. And even though a plan is put in place, will 

those funds indeed make sure that children are not going to bed 

hungry and not properly clothed? 

 

And I think there are a few questions here that need to be raised, 

that need to be addressed; so that we don’t have, at the end of 

the day we’re back into the same situation where we do 

have taxpayers’ funds being extended but still we have hungry 

children — hungry boys and girls going to school and having a 

hard time learning because they don’t have . . . they’re hungry 

and they don’t have the ability to really apply themselves — are 

some of the concerns that we have and we have had for . . . on 

an ongoing basis. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say there . . . I can see some 

positive points to this piece of legislation, to this announcement. 

And I just want the minister to recognize some of the concerns 

and we look forward to hearing further debate as the minister 

makes . . . releases more information regarding this special 

announcement, to see to it and to recognize that indeed these 

funds are put in the place that they are fully intended for. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 58  The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill, No. 58, The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 226 — The Fire-fighting Equipment 

Tax Exemption Act 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 226, entitled 

The Fire-fighting Equipment Tax Exemption Act be read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Before orders of the day I would like 

to, in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the 

Provincial Auditor Act, table the Report of the Provincial 

Auditor to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 

1996 Financial statements of CIC Subsidiary Crown 

corporations. I so table. 

 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 46 

 

Alameda Dam Water Releases 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 

orders of the day, I move, under rule 46, an emergency motion 

of urgent and pressing necessity, and it is with regard to the 

situation in the Alameda dam project with the probable waters 

flowing down to flood into Manitoba. The motion is as follows: 

 

That this Assembly, in recognizing the extreme conditions 

faced by our neighbours in the province in Manitoba 

through fast-rising flood waters as well as the additional 

hardship produced by Saskatchewan through the releasing   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

of water from the Alameda dam, immediately undertake to 

utilize Alameda dam’s flood storage capabilities and stop 

the flow of any water from Saskatchewan’s Alameda dam 

until there is no longer a danger of flooding in Manitoba. 

 

So moved. 

 

Leave is not granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I would rise pursuant to 

rule 46 on a matter of pressing urgency and necessity, and ask 

leave of the Assembly to introduce a motion with respect to that 

matter. I’ll read the motion, which I think describes the issue: 

 

That this Assembly request the federal government to 

change the current Elections Act rules regarding staggered 

voting hours to enable Saskatchewan people to cast their 

ballots in line with other Canadian voters. 

 

Perhaps I should amend this to say to immediately change, so 

there’s no implication it can wait for a four-year period or some 

other period, the Elections Act, with respect to the forthcoming 

election. That’s the leave that I request of the Assembly. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I shall be very brief in 

my remarks on this. First of all I want to thank all hon. 

members for granting leave on this issue. I must also thank the 

Leader of the Third Party, the Leader of the Conservative Party, 

for agreeing to second this motion which I’ve presented. 

 

In a nutshell, I think the publicity tells the story that we’ve 

heard over the hours. And that publicity is that subsection 105.5 

of the Canada Elections Act was amended recently to allow for 

so-called staggered voting across the country. However, the 

amendment apparently neglected to differentiate between 

central standard time and central daylight time; so that 

Saskatchewan voters go to the polls from 8:30 to 8:30 while 

B.C. (British Columbia) closes its polls at 7 p.m. And in the 

consequence there’s a half-hour delay in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This does require either an amendment to the Act or, as 

subsequent news seems to indicate, the possibility of a Canada 

Elections Act interpretations of this particular provision. It may 

be possible that central standard time is interpreted in a fashion 

which would not necessitate an amendment, and that of course 

would be a very happy result. But in any event there’s an 

urgency to this issue given the fact that widespread rumour has 

it that a federal election is imminent. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I think we need to have is a unanimous vote 

of this Assembly indicating to the federal authorities the will of 

the province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, to rectify this situation. And this 

motion, I think, will so do. 

Thus, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Third Party, the member from Kindersley: 

 

That this Assembly request the federal government to 

immediately change the current election Act rules 

regarding staggered voting hours to enable Saskatchewan 

people to cast their ballots in line with other Canadian 

voters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to speak to 

this motion with regard to the changes in the time. I think 

initially, I think the legislation was probably good in terms of 

wanting to change it so that people could see the election results 

coming in all across Canada on an equal footing. Unfortunately 

in drafting the legislation, the federal government forgot 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You have to wonder where the Saskatchewan members were at 

that particular time. Where the member from Regina Wascana, 

the cabinet minister, Mr. Goodale . . . what was he doing when 

this was being drafted and debated in the House of Commons? 

Where was Georgette Sheridan or where was Bernie Collins or 

where was Bodnar, Morris Bodnar, or where were all of those 

people when all of this was being drafted? You have to wonder 

about what they were thinking about when they were going 

through their legislative review process in formulating this 

piece of legislation. 

 

So we certainly concur with the motion that the Premier has put 

forward. And when you look at it, there’s places within 

Saskatchewan, as the Premier knows and all members of the 

Assembly know, where there’s actually different time zones. In 

the Lloydminster constituency, provincial constituency, for 

example, they have two different time situations up there. It’s as 

a result of the Lloydminster School Division, I understand, and 

people that are within the Lloydminster School Division 

actually operate on Alberta time, shall we say; different than 

our times at different times of the year. 

 

So we’ll see situations where there’s potential, if this isn’t 

changed by the federal government, we’ll see situations where 

in the constituency, the federal constituency of —what is it? — 

Lloydminster, North Battleford, I think it’s called now, where 

there will actually be two different time zones that people will 

be operating under. The polls will be open for a longer period of 

time in one part of the constituency, closed at an earlier time 

within the constituency — an absolutely ridiculous situation 

that the people of that constituency are going to have to be 

faced with. 

 

So we certainly agree that the federal government has to move 

as quickly as possible to rectify this situation. I would suspect 

that they would get an all-party agreement within the House of 

Commons — you would hope anyway — to change and amend 

this legislation as quickly as possible to make sure that this 

doesn’t transpire in the federal election that is upcoming. 

 

I think the federal Liberals have an obligation to Saskatchewan 

and Saskatchewan’s people to make sure that this doesn’t come   



1104  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

forward — make sure that this doesn’t come forward . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  How many senators have you got down 

there, Bill? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  And the members over to my right — although 

generally speaking they’re to our left, generally speaking they 

are to our left, Mr. Speaker — but anyway they’re saying, 

where are the Tory senators on this? Well I’m sure the Tory 

senators, when it reaches the Senate, will be objecting to it. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is the Liberal government drafts the 

legislation — you people draft the legislation — it goes to the 

House of Commons, and from there it gets into legislation. 

 

So the fact . . . I think all parties have to come forward and 

show their willingness to make some changes in this legislation 

to ensure that Saskatchewan isn’t forgotten in the process 

leading into this election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’d like to make a few comments, I think, to you to 

clarify some position that has taken place in the last couple of 

days. 

 

First of all as the Premier has indicated, there was a need to 

change section 105 of the Elections Act in that the closure of 

the polls, as far as a western provincial idea, has not been met 

with much favour in western Canada. We’ve had a problem 

with the times that polls have closed, and in fact people have 

been very critical of the fact that the election is over before the 

polls have closed in western Canada; so there was a need to 

address that. 

 

I find it very, very interesting, that indeed the Bill that has been 

amended, the federal Act that has been amended, it has received 

three readings in the federal House of Commons, it has been 

through the Senate; and in fact it is now law. All parties have 

had a chance to agree to that. And I guess I can’t blame the 

Conservative MPs from Saskatchewan because there are none. 

But I guess the two Conservative MPs that we have in Canada 

must have been very busy and unable to raise the point. But 

there were NDP MPs that also had the time and had the ability 

to raise the concern. 

 

I also want to indicate that yesterday, when I as the Leader of 

the Official Opposition became aware of this concern, there was 

an immediate contact with the federal party, the Liberal Party of 

Canada, and I raised the concern on behalf of not only the 

opposition, I raised the issue on behalf of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers to say this is not correct; this is not fair to the 

province of Saskatchewan; somebody has goofed and there 

needs to be a repair job done to this amendment. 

 

I raised that concern yesterday and there is no question that we 

will support the amendment . . . or the motion raised by the 

Premier that says that this is an error that has to be corrected 

immediately, and we will support that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  I’d like to close the debate, if you 

want to warn the members. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  It is my duty pursuant to rule 34(3) to 

warn the Assembly that the hon. member is about to exercise 

his right to close the debate and afterwards all members will be 

precluded from speaking to this question. Therefore any 

members wishing to speak, let the member do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to close the 

debate by welcoming the fact that all political parties — even 

the provincial Liberal Party — will be endorsing this particular 

emergency resolution. And I want to make, I guess, two or three 

points in closing this debate before we take the vote on this 

issue. 

 

First, I can understand how it is that legislation can pass — 

although it’s perhaps somewhat unfathomable for the average 

voter to understand — legislation can pass any legislative 

deliberative body and see an error contained in it. However it’s 

not that easily answered by the Liberals in this particular case. 

In this particular case there was extreme pressure by the 

government in Ottawa to pass this Bill hurriedly in preparation 

for the forthcoming election, which we expect this weekend. 

 

The federal New Democratic Party voted against this Bill on 

third reading on the professed and stated grounds that they were 

rushed — the members of parliament did not have enough time 

to consider the adequate aspects, the full considerations, of this 

particular Bill. 

 

In second reading they voted for it in principle because the 

notion of principle is one that, I said at the beginning, is one 

that we support, as your leader says should be supported too. 

But what we do not support is ramming and jamming the 

legislation through, which permitted this kind of an indignity to 

Saskatchewan to be in fact put into the legislation. 

 

And on third reading, the NDP members voted against it. Let’s 

be absolutely clear about that. That’s exactly what the situation 

was. 

 

Second point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is the question 

of the Liberal Party’s position in Saskatchewan. The member 

from Prince Albert, Mr. Gordon Kirkby, when advised about 

this mistake, took some considerable time to check into it. And 

I understand that. I don’t blame him for it. 

 

He was, I suspect, like most of us, caught up in a surprise. 

Quote: 

 

I’ll check into it right now. 

 

After some time he comes back and he says the following: 

 

If Saskatchewan has a problem closing last, it should fix it. 

If they want to put the legislation in line, put Saskatchewan   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

on daylight saving time. Every other province does it. 

 

That is the position of the federal Liberal MP from Prince 

Albert. No other federal Liberal MP spoke to this issue or 

declared any intention of repair, with the one possible exception 

being the member from Saskatoon-Dundurn, Mr. Morris 

Bodnar, who indicated that there might be an interpretation 

open to the Chief Electoral Officer of Canada which would 

obviate the necessity to amend the Bill. 

 

But for 24 hours the position of the Liberal Party was, if you 

can believe it, incredibly: but what the province of 

Saskatchewan should do is open up The Time Act, a matter of 

divisiveness and complexity as the Hon. Leader of the Third 

Party has indicated, a Time Act amendment which has been in 

office now, in legislation, in statutory books for 35 years 

approximately, if not longer. 

 

And that somehow this whole thing was put in there by way of 

a means of forcing Saskatchewan to go onto daylight savings 

time was the implication by an elected Member of Parliament. 

And no Liberal contradicted that position — no Liberal 

contradicted that position. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. It’s incredible that that 

should be the position taken by the responsible Liberal Party 

apparatus. Now that is water under the bridge. We are all prone 

to making some statements which perhaps we regret to make at 

times. And I’m prepared to take the same position with respect 

to Liberal MPs. 

 

I think what is important is that there be a unanimous vote, 

which vote we will communicate, I will communicate, by letter 

this afternoon to the Prime Minister and to the Chief Electoral 

Officer, unanimously being the will of this Legislative 

Assembly to solve this problem, which can be easily solved 

either by legislation or by interpretation and get on with the 

business of what this Bill really was intended to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I urge everybody, Liberals especially, to vote 

in favour of this motion. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 2:58 p.m. until 3 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 44 

 

Romanow Van Mulligen Wiens 

Mitchell Atkinson Johnson 

Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Lorje Scott Teichrob 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Murray Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Murrell Thomson 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

 

 
Gantefoer Draude Osika 

Bjornerud Belanger Hillson 

Julé Aldridge Boyd 

D’Autremont Toth  

 

Nays — nil 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I request that question 48 be 

converted, and by leave, I hereby table the response to question 

49. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 47 — The 

Psychologists Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter into this debate on the new Bill respecting the 

psychological professionals in our province, which I understand 

has not been amended for some 37 years. 

 

Bill 47 is certainly required in order to update the profession 

and the rules governing the profession, but I must say there are 

some points in it which are of concern to the Liberal opposition. 

 

The major issue, as I see it, is the question of what exactly 

qualifies as a professionally trained psychologist; what is the 

definition of a psychologist. And I think we have been 

somewhat taken aback to find that there is not universal 

agreement within the psychological profession as to the issue of 

the definition of a psychologist, which is of course the most 

basic of all issues facing any self-governing profession. 

 

And as I say, this came as somewhat of a surprise to myself, as 

there is certainly in my own profession of law a basic 

agreement by all parties as to what constitutes a lawyer, what 

are the basic qualifications for one to call oneself a lawyer. And 

the same is true for, I think, all of the other professions. 

 

However it is obvious from the input we have received from the 

stakeholders that there is a considerable debate going on within 

the psychological community in our province as to whether the 

term psychologist ought to be restricted to Ph.D.-level 

practitioners or whether it can properly be applied to those 

whose training is at the master’s level. 

 

I understand too that in addition there is no standardization 

throughout Canada on this issue. I understand that in the 

province of Ontario the designation of psychologist would be 

restricted to someone at the doctoral level. In the province of   



1106  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

Alberta, master’s level practitioners are entitled to the 

designation of psychologist. 

 

While we must as an Assembly show respect for the profession, 

and we are attempting to do this, I’m sure, in this Bill, the 

primary question and issue facing us is of course the service to 

the people of Saskatchewan and how their needs can best be 

met and how this Act addresses their needs. 

 

Of course there is a distinction between someone who has a 

Ph.D. and someone who does not. I must say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, though it does occur to me that that distinction is 

perhaps already adequately enough covered by the designation 

of doctor. Those who have a Ph.D. obviously can use the title of 

doctor, are entitled to that title. Those who are practising at the 

master’s level of course are not entitled to the title of doctor. So 

I think if there is the issue of a distinction, that distinction is 

already there by virtue of the title that a Ph.D. may use. 

 

It also strikes me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we may be in a 

somewhat different position than, say Ontario; that it may well 

be that in Ontario, especially urban areas such as Toronto, that 

obtaining the services of Ph.D.-level psychologists may not be a 

challenge, may not be a problem. Clearly in Saskatchewan, 

especially as we get outside the two cities, that is difficult if not 

perhaps impossible. 

 

I am aware that there is a posting available right now for a 

Ph.D. psychologist and my understanding is that that position 

with our provincial government has been vacant for two and a 

half years, and my understanding is the reason for the vacancy 

is that we simply have been unable to attract a Ph.D.-level 

psychologist into the service of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that underlines the issue that we do not have the 

doctoral-level psychologists in sufficient numbers, I say, 

especially as we get outside of the . . . outside the two cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

In my own case, Mr. Speaker — you are of course aware I 

come from the Battlefords — we have in the Battlefords a 

number of psychologists working both to serve the general 

needs of our population but also as a result of North Battleford 

being the location of the North Battleford Youth Centre and we 

require psychologists attached to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our case, none of these psychologists are in fact 

at Ph.D. level, but I don’t think there has ever been any question 

that their work is of high quality and of high professional 

standards. 

 

There are different pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that refer 

to psychologists and one is, as I mentioned, the Young 

Offenders Act, and the work required with young offenders in 

our North Battleford Youth Centre. We need risk assessments, 

and these have to be prepared by psychologists. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think that we are 

very likely to get Ph.D.-level psychologists in the Battlefords. 

We need these risk assessment reports done by psychologists, 

and we need other work done with the residents of North 

Battleford Youth Centre by psychologists. I think experience 

tells us that we’re simply not likely to get Ph.D.-level people 

there, and I think our experience also tells us that we have been 

well served by the master’s level professionals who have come 

to North Battleford. 

 

May I also say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that again, coming back to 

my own profession of law, while one can become a lawyer with 

the basic bachelor’s-level degree, the LL.B. of course, there are 

lawyers who do have their master’s degree, their LL.M., and 

there are even I believe, two doctoral-level lawyers practising in 

this province. They are all, however, all lawyers. The basic 

qualification is set as being the L.L. B. and anyone who meets 

that basic qualification is entitled to call himself a lawyer and to 

be registered with the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s not a great deal different than the college of 

physicians and surgeons, or for that matter, registration in this 

province as a teacher, as we all know. To be registered as a 

teacher in this province one requires some basic qualifications, 

but it may go anywhere on up from there through to almost any 

number of degrees in the bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral 

level. And that no one has ever suggested that in order to call 

oneself a teacher that a doctoral-level degree would be required. 

 

Of course that’s also even, for that matter, true in the case of 

even university professors. Not all university professors of 

course, are in fact required to hold doctorates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, both members of the 

psychological society and the educational psychologists 

association have, however, been debating the pros and cons of 

this with us, and I assume with members opposite, quite 

strenuously. They say that if master’s-level people are primarily 

the people out in the field giving the service, then they should 

have the right to the designation of psychologist, and that it is 

not a requirement of being a doctoral level. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they have been proven capable of 

offering good service to our people, I do not think they have to 

be designated as some lower professional level similar to the 

example was given to me of a paralegal. I think that to 

designate them lower than psychologists is not, I think, in the 

best interests of our people. 

 

There are other concerns that we have however, besides what 

appears to be a lack of consensus in the profession itself as to 

what ought to constitute a psychologist. As I said, with all due 

respect to members of the psychological profession, our 

emphasis in this House has to be on service to the people of 

Saskatchewan rather than on the internal needs of the 

profession. 

 

I am concerned however, with some of the proposals that we 

see regarding internal discipline. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems 

to me self-evident that the self-governing professions ought to 

have parallel rights of discipline and self-regulation. And I am 

both puzzled and disturbed that in this case, as in The Dental 

Profession Act, that the minister has seen fit to grant himself the 

right to make bylaws on behalf of the association. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

(1515) 

 

I know that there would be a tremendous outcry, tremendous 

uproar, if the Minister of Justice tried to take for himself that 

power for the Law Society of Saskatchewan. I assume the same 

would be true if the Minister of Health tried to grab that power 

in the case of the college of physicians and surgeons. 

 

So I have to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why the government 

feels that they need this power over the dentists or over the 

psychologists; that dentists and psychologists may not make 

their own bylaws — the bylaws can be made for them by the 

minister — when other self-governing professions are not under 

those same restrictions. 

 

I have to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we are setting up a 

hierarchy of professions, I have to ask why discipline 

proceedings are different in one profession from another. It 

seems to me so much simpler, so much easier to understand, so 

much easier to implement, if the provisions governing 

self-regulating professions would run parallel and be similar in 

all respects except where circumstances demand that they be 

different. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving towards a different, a fuller 

definition of health. And we no longer think of health simply in 

physical terms. Today there is a growing trend to look at the 

individual as a whole, and this has taken us into areas which 

have not traditionally been thought of as part of the concept of 

health. This is a trend not only in our own province but in 

Canada as a whole. 

 

And if I may say, the concept of wellness, as it started out in 

this province, was a sound one which was moving us forward in 

our thinking of health care generally and in what health care 

involves and entails — the deinstitutionalization of health care, 

the looking at the whole individual, the looking at healthy 

lifestyles. 

 

Wellness was a good concept which unfortunately has now 

been denigrated to be a euphemism in Saskatchewan for 

cut-backs and closures. And that is perhaps tragic because I 

concede that there was, within the concept and philosophy of 

wellness, a good principle there and something that we should 

be thinking about and talking about and trying to implement. 

But I say, unfortunately I think what’s happened today is that 

people are so cynical that when you mention the word wellness, 

they simply wonder whose hospital is going to be closed today. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concept of wholeness 

and wellness is not something restricted to Saskatchewan or 

even to Canada. In the latest version of the basic documents 

from the World Health Organization, there are some very broad 

statements concerning the definition of health. And I would like 

to read one of them to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social 

well-being and not merely the absence of disease or 

infirmity. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a point for all of us to consider. I think 

that we all recognize that not so many years ago we defined 

health or sickness in purely physical terms. And when we were 

faced with a sickness that was not purely physical, I can 

remember my parents and their friends using the phrase, well 

it’s all in his head or it’s all in his mind — which of course 

meant it wasn’t real, didn’t have a basis in reality; it was just 

something imagined. I think we have gotten past that now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We know that’s not the case now and that our 

psychological health is at least as important as our physical 

health. 

 

And I think we also all recognize that with the increased pace 

and the increased tensions of modern life, that psychological 

stress is becoming more of a phenomenon and will probably 

continue to do so. The need for professional intervention, I 

suspect, is probably also increased by the regrettable fact that 

family breakdown is far more prevalent. And when family 

support is not available to our young people, the state, in the 

person of professional counsellors, is the only other answer 

here. 

 

And in this regard I remember the hon. member for Moosomin 

telling us a few weeks ago that the solution is for parents to take 

more responsibility, for parents to take more interest in their 

children, for parents to provide their children with more 

guidance. 

 

Well it’s very difficult for anyone to quarrel with that concept, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly I don’t want to. But the sad, 

tragic fact is that unfortunately this parental support simply is 

so often, too often, not present and we as a society have to deal 

with that fact. And simply saying that, well they should be 

different than they are, doesn’t really get us very far. And when 

that parental support, that parental guidance, is lacking we 

require the services of our professionals, particularly I would 

say, of our child psychologists. 

 

I would also like to quote from another document of the World 

Health Organization which states that: 

 

The healthy development of the child is of basic 

importance; the ability to live harmoniously in a changing 

total environment is essential to the development of 

healthy children. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is perhaps trite to say that our children 

are our future and they are our first and most important 

resource. But while a trite statement, it is also a very true one. I 

think we also realize that the issues of psychological and family 

health are of increasing importance in the workplace. The 

non-physical health of employees is at least as big an issue in 

employee absenteeism as is physical ailments. 

 

These are being addressed through programs such as employee 

assistance plans, which again involve the psychological 

profession. Many employee assistance plans have been 

broadened even further to include family assistance plans, in 

recognition that where the employee has family problems or a 

family member is under extreme emotional stress, that this 

affects all members of the family unit and not just the particular 

individual with the primary problem. 

  



1108  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

There is ample evidence to suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

when these programs are in place, the workforce becomes 

happier, more functional, and more productive. And it is also 

quite easy to demonstrate that where these programs are not in 

place, where we have a dysfunctional environment, that 

absenteeism grows. 

 

It is perhaps sad and tragic though that some of the figures we 

see suggest that one of the most unhappy work environments in 

the whole province of Saskatchewan right now is our health 

professionals. And that seems particularly, particularly 

unfortunate. As one best-selling book a couple thousand years 

ago put it, “Physician, heal thyself.” And I note that in the last 

few months, 10 CEOs of health districts have quit. 

 

And that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me, is the 

empty barrel speaking again? I don’t . . . I hear some rattling off 

that . . . 

 

But I think it’s unfortunate to say that in the province of 

Saskatchewan today our health industry seems to have as much 

or more problems in its work environment than any other work 

environment you can point to. And I submit that when you get 

10 CEOs of health districts resigning within a few months, that 

is an indication that there may be an underlying problem here of 

an unhappy work environment, and more guarantee that there 

will be need for the psychological profession in this province. 

 

Well I must say that while I have great respect for the 

psychological profession and their work for the people of this 

province, and while I don’t discount that any one of us may 

sometime find ourselves in need of their services, I would say 

to the hon. member from Estevan that so far in my experience, I 

haven’t met a group as sound in body and mind and spirit as my 

colleagues on this side of the House. And I see nothing but a 

happy work environment over here. 

 

So I don’t think we are going to need the employee assistance 

plan because we are a happy, productive crew. Absenteeism is 

low, motivation is high, and . . . I know there might be some 

people over there who would benefit from talking to their 

psychologist, and I don’t deny that all of us may at some 

priceless point in our lives need this assistance, but I assure the 

member for Estevan that unfortunately right now the 

psychologists really will have to practise their profession 

elsewhere because the Liberal opposition is happy, in full 

harmony, and full productivity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the practice of 

psychology is an important one in our society today, albeit not 

one that Liberal members are in need of at this time. But you 

know if we have to listen to too much more from over there, 

who knows, I may need counselling in awhile. And I . . . so I’m 

glad they’re available in case I start, you know, listening to the 

member from Regina South too much and he starts getting to 

me. 

 

Okay. I mentioned the problem of the discipline measures not 

running parallel to the discipline measures for other 

self-governing professions. I mentioned that section 17 gives 

the minister the right to make bylaws. And this troubles me 

enormously. I say this is something that I know my own 

profession simply would not tolerate. 

 

I’m frankly surprised that when we’ve heard from the members 

of the psychological profession that they have certainly 

mentioned to us frequently the issue of whether we’re going to 

register master’s or only doctoral level of practitioners, but they 

haven’t mentioned as much as the dentists have, the humiliation 

and embarrassment that they cannot make their own bylaws, as 

can other professions. And we hear from members opposite, the 

issue of two tier; well we’re getting two-tier professions here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t know why we need two-tier 

professions. 

 

We appear to have full professions, and then we have sort of 

secondary professions in the mind of the government. And I 

suppose I should be grateful to members opposite that they have 

included my profession in the one of top tier, but I ask why are 

dentists and psychologists in the second tier? Why do we need 

two-tier professional organizations in this province? 

 

Not only does the minister have the right to make bylaws, but of 

course bylaws do not come before this House nor do they 

necessarily come before the profession, and so they can be 

made in the back rooms with very little discussion, very little 

public debate. 

 

And I just wonder why? I mean I haven’t heard the minister tell 

us why this power is necessary and I haven’t heard why the 

psychologists cannot be trusted to make their own bylaws. I 

would love to hear that explanation. Perhaps they can change 

my mind when they tell me. But so far, this part of the Act 

simply, simply hasn’t made it. 

 

Why is this ministerial power required? And is it something 

more than a power grab? Is this an attempt to simply centralize 

more and more authority into the minister’s office? Is this a 

problem that at the same time he sets up a self-governing, 

self-regulating profession, he is in fact concentrating more 

power in the minister’s office? 

 

Well I think the whole, the whole impetus in health reform and 

now in this reform has been to concentrate decision making 

while decentralizing blame assigning. And I think we see that 

all through the health industry. We concentrate decision making 

here in the minister’s office, but in blame assigning of course 

we spread that around. So that the decisions about funding, the 

decisions about level of care, will be made in the minister’s 

office, but then when people phone in to say my hospital and 

my health care centre just got closed, oh, we’re supposed to 

blame the health district or we’re supposed to blame the feds or 

we’re supposed to blame somebody, anybody, but not the 

minister. 

 

So we have a concentration of power. And for what little it’s 

worth or whenever there’s a little bit of credit due in the health 

care system, that’s come to the minister, but when there is 

blame to be assigned, well we have a long, a long, decentralized   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

list of where the blame is to be thrown around. 

 

(1530) 

 

Well now, okay, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

hadn’t been planning on making my points again but if hon. 

members opposite insist I could turn these over . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Not necessary? 

 

I would like then to deal with the issues concerning the lack of 

immunity, and I think this is the same, same issue as we saw in 

the case of The Dental Disciplines Act. I think that when we set 

up a self-governing profession, it is important that there be 

immunity from civil suit when officers act in good faith. And 

what was put to me by the dentists, and I think also apply here, 

that when you withhold that immunity for actions in good faith, 

you in point of fact really take away a lot of the disciplinary 

powers of the profession. 

 

Because the fact is, in disciplinary matters, as in all matters, 

there is no such thing as certainty. As our friends from the 

psychological profession will tell us, certainty does not exist in 

this life. And if certainty is required before discipline, for fear 

of civil suit, then in effect the professional organization will be 

very, very reluctant to introduce and commence discipline 

proceedings. 

 

And the other aspect about this which concerns me is that again 

we have self-governing professional bodies. It seems to me 

their powers and governing provisions should run parallel 

throughout the self-governing professions. Why, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, would you grant immunity for actions done in good 

faith to one profession and withhold it from another? Again, 

what is the rationale here? I don’t understand it. What is the 

difference here? 

 

And well, while I appreciate, while I appreciate the apparent 

position of the government, that my profession would act 

sensibly and reasonably in discipline matters so they should 

have that immunity from suit when they act in good faith, to say 

I’m not sure why that has to be denied to other professions. And 

I say we have seen it, we have seen it here as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on for a long time yet, 

but I’m not . . . I could go on for a long time yet, but I am not 

totally without mercy, contrary to what members opposite may 

think. 

 

I would like to, in conclusion, make one final quote from the 

constitution of the World Health Organization: 

 

The extension to all peoples of the benefits of medical, 

psychological, and related knowledge is essential to the 

fullest attainment of the health of the people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my view that we are well served . . . 

one, we are well served by the psychological profession in this 

province. 

 

Two, that it has been established that getting doctoral-level 

practitioners in this province, especially outside the two cities, 

will be difficult if not impossible. 

 

Three, we need psychologists increasingly in our complicated 

and difficult society. And we also need them not only for the 

general needs of the population, but also as specific groups and 

organizations such as I mentioned — the youth centre in North 

Battleford that need psychologists attached to them. And I say, I 

think realistically that’s not likely to be doctoral-level 

practitioners. 

 

Four, the master’s-level practitioners that we have had have 

served us well. 

 

And five, I really ask the minister to have another look here. 

Why do we have discipline and complaint procedures different 

from one self-governing profession to another? I was not totally 

being sarcastic. I said, why are we having different tiers of 

professions? I think that’s the first thing. I think it’s demeaning 

to the professions. But I would also put to the minister that in 

terms of public understanding, if there is basically the same 

discipline and complaint proceeding running through all 

self-governing professions, that it’s easier for the public to 

understand their rights and responsibilities in this matter. 

 

And finally, why would we grant immunity for acts done in 

good faith to some professional organizations and withhold it 

from others, in disciplinary matters? I simply don’t understand 

why we would draw distinctions in that regard. 

 

In fact I would even question whether it might not be more 

beneficial if we had a professional organizations Act in this 

province which set out the rights and duties of each 

self-governing profession, rather than the rather confusing 

grab-bag of professional organizations the government is now 

bringing in, in which rights, powers and disciplinary 

proceedings run different, depending on which profession we 

are talking about. 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I encourage the minister, 

please, please, please, explain to me why you need 

bylaw-making powers for this profession? You don’t have 

bylaw-making powers for your own profession. I am positive 

you would not suggest that the Minister of Justice should have 

bylaw-making powers for your own professions; so why do you 

need it for this profession? Why do you need it for the dentists? 

I just don’t understand that. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will simply say, have a 

good day, and I will sit down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 

pleased to be able to rise today to address this particular Bill. 

There are a number of groups across the province who do have 

some difficulties with the Bill but we realize that a good many 

of the psychologists also are very much supportive of this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

We are prepared to accept that this piece of legislation move 

ahead today into Committee of the Whole. But in conversations   



1110  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

with the member from Greystone, she expressed the fact that 

she wished to present some amendments to this particular Bill, 

and therefore needed some more time to do . . . prepare those 

amendments themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, while we’re prepared to allow this to 

move into committee today, we believe that time is still needed 

before Committee of the Whole is gone to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was listening to 

the remarks made by the member opposite — the member from 

Souris-Cannington — and I just wanted to add to the debate at 

this time. 

 

This Bill essentially sets up the governing structure for 

psychiatrists — psychologists, pardon me — and it gives legal 

status to the governance and self-governance of psychologists 

within the province. 

 

Our government members were prepared to proceed with this 

Bill today into committee, and the reason being particularly 

because we have visitors in the gallery, members of the 

profession who have been working on this Bill for months if not 

years. And we appreciated the cooperation of the Liberal 

opposition and of the third party in moving this Bill into 

committee . . . through committee today, and we were expecting 

fully to do so. And I had received word from the member from 

Greystone that she was also willing to go through with this. But 

apparently she has changed her mind since she gave her word to 

our Deputy House Leader. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will still be asking for leave and we 

apologize to those guests who are here today who were 

expecting that this Bill would be proceeded with through 

committee. But we will . . . and regretfully have to just wait the 

procedure should leave be denied. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 34 — The Young 

Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

now on day 33 of this legislative session. It’s quite probable 

that perhaps we’re nearing the halfway point of this particular 

session, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And for nearly each and every 

one of those days that we sat in this House since this session 

opened, this opposition caucus has presented petitions from the 

people of Saskatchewan asking that it do something to look into 

the problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan. 

 

The hundreds of people that have signed these petitions are 

asking that the government live up to its responsibility under 

the Young Offenders Act. The people who are signing these 

petitions and who are calling and writing our office are angry 

that the members opposite are so unwilling to even admit that it 

does have responsibilities under the Young Offenders Act. And 

those responsibilities entail establishing suitable rehabilitation 

and deterrent programs for our young, for our young people 

who are at risk of falling into crime, and those who have 

unfortunately already began travelling that path. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think some of the members opposite 

must be very embarrassed indeed when they hear cabinet 

minister after cabinet minister stand up and deny responsibility 

for absolutely everything that goes on in this province. The 

question was asked recently whether the members opposite are 

running a provincial government or an excuse factory. And 

from what I’ve seen in the last six years, it’s the latter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

On any issue that is brought up in this House, this government’s 

first line of defence is to blame others. They don’t say here’s 

the problem, now what are we going to do about it? They never 

say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s become a reflex action now 

simply to point the finger of blame at others. It’s a shameful 

lack of leadership on their part and they should be ashamed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

On the whole issue of young offenders, the government has had 

the power to appoint youth justice committees since 1984. Yet 

the Justice minister himself stated in estimates that never once 

has this government done so, not even in the last few years 

when public concern over youth crime has grown and grown. 

Now with this Bill, it appears the government is going to bring 

committees that have been formed because of citizen initiative 

under the provisions laid out in section 69 of the Young 

Offenders Act. 

 

They say it will help these volunteer citizen initiated 

committees avoid possible liability. And that’s good, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s great. That’s a positive move. But the 

question still remains, what else is the government prepared to 

do? We’ve been asking on behalf of the public since this 

session began that a province-wide task force be struck so 

professionals and citizens connected with young people can 

look at the programs we have in place and see if there are things 

we can do better. Is that really a much off-the-wall idea, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

Actually asking the people of this province — youth workers, 

police — what should be done and what could be done to get a 

handle on this problem, I don’t see anything wrong with doing 

that. As a matter of fact something very productive might come 

of it. It’s happened in other areas where legislation has been 

passed. Programs have been put into place as a result of 

consultation by the government with interested parties. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite are always 

chattering away about their consultative approach. Of course 

any consultations they have rarely turn into anything concrete, 

as they are usually a sham. And perhaps that’s why they’re 

opposed to the special task force the people of Saskatchewan 

have been asking for. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

Perhaps they know that such a body would come up with such 

reasonable suggestions that they would be hard-pressed to 

ignore them, like they do in any other consultation process. And 

actually taking advice from the people of this province, actually 

taking some responsibility, is just not what this government is 

all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

These people refuse to listen. If they did, we wouldn’t have the 

Minister of Justice standing up in this House and saying that 

youth crime is not a big problem. We wouldn’t have the 

Premier of Saskatchewan saying this issue isn’t important 

enough to discuss in this legislature. Because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if they actually listened to the people that they govern, 

if they actually cared about their concerns, they would realize 

that they should be treating this problem far more seriously than 

they are. 

 

But again, that would entail taking some responsibility for their 

own failures as a government, for their own actions. They 

haven’t done that yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not in the last six 

years. And I don’t really expect them to start now. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course we have a problem with youth 

crime in this province. It’s all over this province — not just in 

the cities, it’s all over the province. The people are telling us 

that every day. 

 

And thankfully, we do have good, solid citizens of this province 

who have developed and operate a form of youth justice 

committee in certain locations around Saskatchewan. And I 

applaud them for those kind of efforts. And I support giving 

them some immunity from potential prosecution. 

 

But more has to be done. And the first step is to convince this 

government to at least be honest and admit yes, they do have a 

responsibility in regards to this issue and they know it. Mr. 

Speaker, all we’re asking on behalf of the people of this 

province is that the NDP live up to its own responsibility as the 

government, and that means taking some meaningful action on 

the whole issue of young offenders. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m really delighted to get in on the debate on young offenders. 

 

I was listening to the hon. member from Melville talk about 

responsibility and I guess that my question is, does the 

government consider that anything is their responsibility? 

 

The rash of crime in Regina lately involving young offenders 

has left many people wondering if the word responsibility has 

been eliminated from the English language, or at least from this 

government’s language. 

 

We all know that youth involved in robbery has risen 77 per 

cent between 1992 and 1995. In Alberta there was a 5 per cent 

increase in robbery at the same time. Regina alone has had an 

average of 10 car thefts a day in 1996, and at the beginning of 

March, in one 24-hour period, there was over 70 car thefts. 

 

When questioned in the legislature on March 7, the Justice 

minister stated, I think we should remember this is not a 

common occurrence. Well personally, I beg to differ. I think 

that any time you have 10 car thefts a day, you could consider it 

a common occurrence. 

 

The vast majority of our young people are law-abiding, 

responsible citizens who make us proud to be Canadians. 

Young offenders are causing fear and suspicion of all teenagers 

in the minds of many people and especially in the minds of our 

seniors. 

 

The police are being taunted by youngsters who know full well 

that they are nearly protected under the present law. There’s no 

concern about the consequences of their actions because there 

really doesn’t appear to be any consequences at all. The victims 

of crime are frustrated and they’re appalled at their own lack of 

rights under the present system. 

 

One of the victims of car thefts that I spoke to had her 

20-year-old vehicle totally destroyed by a young offender. The 

car had low mileage, it was in excellent condition, and it was 

the prize possession of this lady. The insurance pay-out could 

not replace her vehicle, her insurance premium increased, and 

as if she needed another insult, the youngster came back to her 

in about two weeks and laughed, and then bragged and said no 

one could touch him. 

 

When SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) introduced 

no-fault insurance two years ago, one of the arguments was to 

guarantee that there would be no rate increases for the next 

three years. Now we are hearing that rumours of increases are 

likely because of thefts and highway accidents. The accidents 

include the damages caused by the treacherous conditions of 

our highways. 

 

I would suggest that the term no-fault should be used by those 

who have their vehicles stolen as well. It is not their fault the 

vehicle was stolen and yet they are the ones who are having to 

pay the increased costs of insurance. Is it the victim’s fault that 

their vehicle is stolen? And why should the victim pay for the 

crime? 

 

Our justice system is obviously not dealing with the problem in 

a manner that’s making an impact on the offenders. We have 

one of the highest incarceration rates in the country. And the 

remand facilities are understaffed and can do little else than just 

babysit. 

 

Punishing the offender is not really getting to the cause of the 

problem. Are our young people committing crimes just because 

they can do it and they can get away with it? Are they doing it 

because there are bigger problems and concerns in our society 

right now? I think that we’ll find that the problems of not 

having a decent job, of not having the money to actually exist in 

society, leads some people to find other ways of existing. 

They’re not right, and those of us who are trying to succeed in 

life are paying for this problem. 

 

The values and morals that would deter most people from theft 

are lacking with young offenders, and the consequences are   



1112  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

lacking and the alternative is lacking. Jobs, responsibilities, and 

the faith that there is a place in the future that is brighter than 

the present is also lacking for many young people. 

 

I believe government has a responsibility to provide a 

foundation for the future that can be built on by all our citizens. 

The justice system has the responsibility to ensure that the 

offenders, not the victims, pay for the crimes; and that youth 

must learn that with rights come responsibilities. One does not 

happen without the other. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government doesn’t understand that 

many of our youth are very much at risk. Manitoba government 

does, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba has assessed the scope of the 

problem. They realize that there are 4,300 high-risk children in 

Manitoba. 

 

This Bill proposes to use the federal Young Offenders Act to 

establish youth justice committees. This provision has been in 

the Young Offenders Act since 1984. The Liberal member from 

North Battleford has called repeatedly for a youth justice task 

force, but the movement really began at the grass roots level. 

 

Local communities are working together to combat youth 

crime. In Shaunavon, the member from Wood River’s 

constituency has established a youth justice committee to try 

and keep young offenders from becoming adult offenders. It’s 

about time this government recognized the dedication and the 

hard work of grass roots movements like the one in Shaunavon, 

by finally offering protection to the committee from legal 

action. 

 

What can governments do? The third party would like to lock 

up these kids and throw away the keys. This government wants 

to deny responsibility. They’d rather blame the federal 

government and do nothing, than take action for the young 

people of this province. Their approach to young offenders is 

much the same as their approach to child prostitution — let’s 

just wait and see; let’s study it and do nothing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the people of this province 

want more, they expect more, and they deserve more. I think 

that we have a responsibility, and as elected members of this 

legislature, it is our responsibility, and I think it’s time that we 

do our jobs. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think there are a good number of people in our 

province and throughout the country and throughout the world, 

who are concerned about having healthy communities, and 

healthy people in those communities, including our young 

people. 

 

But I think it’s important to understand somewhat of what these 

people are going through, and what has brought them to the 

point they’re at now. And I think it’s important to understand 

that a great deal of dependency and social upheaval that 

sometimes leads to crime, including youth crime, is a result of 

an individual’s inability, or their perceived inability, to meet 

their own basic needs. 

 

Speaking of psychologists just previously, psychologists will 

tell us that human beings have some very basic needs — four 

primarily. The need to live, to love and to be loved, the need to 

feel important, and the need to grow. When a person cannot 

meet their needs or they don’t believe they can meet their needs 

within the boundaries of the societal definitions or acceptable 

behaviour, then the person does one of two things. They can act 

out against society. That means they can seek to meet their 

needs in behaviours which are outside the accepted societal 

definitions. Or else they act out against themselves, meaning 

that they abandon hope of meeting their own needs and they 

withdraw from society in some ways like addictions, 

depressions, suicides, etc. 

 

It is important for people to understand some of these human 

needs, and so as an individual grows from a child to an adult, 

they develop a set of beliefs about how to meet their needs. 

That set of beliefs is their framework within which they make 

their behavioural decisions. If that set of beliefs that they 

learned, does not allow them to meet their needs appropriately 

either because their beliefs do not describe the acceptable range 

of behaviour accurately or because the conditions in society — 

for example systemic discrimination and employment — 

prevent them from exercising their appropriate beliefs to meet 

their needs, then they are driven by their needs to seek out other 

ways of getting those needs met. 

 

If community justice initiatives are to have an impact on the 

rate of criminal behaviour in all people and our young people, 

and on the rehabilitation of those who have engaged in criminal 

behaviour, then change must occur not only in the justice 

institutions through the police, the judiciary and the correction 

system, but in the entire community. Individuals must have the 

opportunities to learn how to meet their needs appropriately, 

and then they must have the opportunities to actually meet their 

needs in the ways that they have learned. 

 

(1600) 

 

Individuals must also have opportunities to experience the 

results of their actions in their own lives and to see the results of 

their actions in the lives of other people. Actions which violate 

the accepted societal standards must bring automatic 

consequences, and the pain of these consequences must be 

visible to the individual whose behaviour violates the standards 

in their own life and in the lives of their victims. Rewards for 

keeping the acceptable societal standards must also be visible in 

the lives of those individuals keeping the standards, and in the 

lives of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to refer to a model of what can be 

done for young offenders that are abusing drugs, alcohol, or 

have been in trouble with the law. In Ontario there is a 

foundation entitled the Vita-Nova Foundation. Basically it’s 

private individuals who have set up a farm situation whereby 

young offenders can in fact fill the vacancy in their souls 

through work. They gain a great deal of sense of self-worth out 

of that. They learn to interact with other individuals and they 

learn what the consequences of their work are, in the form of 

reward. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

And so as these young people have a model whereby they can 

interact with society in an appropriate manner, in a satisfying 

manner, they in turn leave this farm situation going out armed 

with an idea of how they can fit into society and have their 

needs met. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, family violence, youth crime, stress and 

addictions that are widespread in our rapidly changing society 

are often rooted in individuals’ low self-worth, and in the 

widespread attitude that our worth can be found in external 

things, things outside of our self. When those things change, 

their worth is threatened. People can only grow, thrive, and 

flourish in periods of rapid and significant change if they have a 

firm sense of their own worth. 

 

What I have stated reflects a great deal of my own vision of the 

role of governments in relation to individuals and families. The 

development of appropriate skills and values of self-reliance 

and appropriate levels of self-worth in individuals is best done 

at the family and community levels of society. When these 

skills — these values and insights — are not developed, then 

there is no foundation for the ability of an individual to work 

effectively in any group process. Society can only function on 

group processes. 

 

The family truly is the basic unit of society. The role of the 

community is therefore to support effective family processes, 

and the role of provincial and other senior governments is to 

support effective community and family processes. If this is not 

done, the glue that holds our society together and the 

cooperative process that enable our society to function will 

deteriorate until society cannot be governed any more. 

 

I think we’re at a period in our history, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

where a number of our young people have simply not had 

proper guidelines. They are acting out their fears, they’re acting 

out their lack of sense of self-worth, and they are ending up in 

great trouble. And it’s very detrimental to all of us. We cannot 

continue to have this process go on. 

 

I believe that government can play a role, and it is incumbent 

upon government to at least put a youth task force together so 

that the appropriate people may study some very appropriate 

measures that should be taken in order to assist them. 

 

And so I am pleased to have had the opportunity, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to put forth some of my views on this. I believe that 

we’re at a point where government must take in hand what is 

being required and asked of them by society at large and to at 

least form committees and task forces to deal with this problem. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just a 

couple of comments I wish to respond in reference to Bill No. 

34, The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act. And I 

wish to speak about a number of reasons why we must begin to 

stress the need to recognize the challenges many youth face in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t wish to elaborate at great lengths in terms of some of our 

southern locations and some of the southern specific problems 

in reference to youth and young offenders. But certainly in 

northern Saskatchewan we must begin to realize that the youth 

of the North certainly are the forgotten people. 

 

An effort of this nature of trying to form up some kind of 

committee and trying to deal with the issue and talk about the 

problems with the youth is certainly a first step in a very, very 

long and comprehensive journey that we must take as 

lawmakers. 

 

Certainly coming from a small community in northern 

Saskatchewan of 1,500 people, I’ve seen firsthand and I’ve 

been through it as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of living 

in Ile-a-la-Crosse and going through the motions of a young 

man being raised in what you don’t want to call the streets of 

New York but certainly the streets of a very challenging place 

to live. 

 

In reference to some of the work that’s being done at the 

community level to deal with young offenders, they certainly 

haven’t got the resources available to them and they certainly 

haven’t got the technical support that is required to deal with 

the issue. But many northern people in La Ronge, in Buffalo 

Narrows, La Loche, Beauval, Pinehouse and on and on, a lot of 

them really begin to realize that there is something that we 

could do; that there is something that we can fix in the 

community if we put our mind and our hearts and our efforts 

towards that goal on a collective basis. 

 

And while this Bill will certainly do somewhat in recognizing 

the need to have a coordinated approach and certainly to have 

the community involved, we must look at all the resources 

afforded to that process. Again many community leaders and 

community people know in these various communities that 

there isn’t enough effort being made to deal with the problem. 

 

Now some of the organizations that we have had some 

consultation with and discussions with includes the friendship 

centre movement in northern Saskatchewan. As you’re 

probably aware, there are three friendship centres in the North: 

one in La Ronge, one in Buffalo Narrows, and one in 

Ile-a-la-Cross. 

 

And while the friendship centres are very poorly equipped to 

handle some of the challenges associated with living in the 

North, they certainly are very quick to point out that the youth 

and generally the young offenders’ problems are really quite 

low on the priority list of families and battered women and so 

on and so forth. So with young offenders, in terms of getting 

recognized and getting programs at the northern level, simply 

does not exist. 

 

And the key thing we have to look at again when we approach 

any matter, especially for the young offenders, is to look at the 

environment in which they are being raised. And you look at 

the situation in reference to housing. There’s a severe shortage 

of housing in northern Saskatchewan. You look at the 

recreational facilities that are available, which are very few. 

You look at the training that’s being afforded to these young   



1114  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

offenders — there is very little of that. 

 

So in essence what you have, Mr. Speaker, is you really have no 

programs. And again we’re talking about the first step at this 

point in time in recognizing that we have to have a cohesive 

approach to this whole problem of young offenders. 

 

I had the distinct honour of serving as mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and, just for the House’s information, we had a program 

delivered through the Corps of Commissionaires to deal with 

some of the young offenders in the community. And what we 

done as a community group is we amalgamated the young 

offenders with other people that wished to work and learn about 

security training. The program was called the security guard’s 

training program. But we did have a few troubled youth that 

were taken into the course and trained in security guard. 

 

And what the Corps of Commissionaires brought to the class, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they brought attention to the young 

offenders that were in there and to the young people in general. 

They showed them the word, “discipline,” and they showed 

them the value of work. And they also showed them that they 

were worth something. 

 

And although there was some people that may have alluded to 

the idea of a boot camp in terms of dealing with young 

offenders, to a large extent that’s not going to work. We have to 

look at a very, very comprehensive strategy in dealing with 

these young offenders. 

 

Just to elaborate on that point, they spoke about a number of 

things during the security guard training. And I’ll have you 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of the participants of the 

security guard training administered by the Corps of 

Commissionaires certainly excelled at the program and many of 

them are now working at the Cluff Lake Mine site as security 

guards. They’ve completely turned their lives around simply for 

the fact that somebody took the effort to show them time, to 

show them patience, understanding, and also to train them. And 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you look at this process and there’s 

two or three of the troubled youth who were in that program 

that are now contributing to society in general. 

 

So a lot of these Bills that we introduce in the Assembly simply 

miss the whole mark. The intent is there but there is no 

follow-up in terms of dollars and there is no thought of 

community development as a whole. Because if you don’t deal 

with the housing problems and the social development 

problems, and certainly the lack of recreation facilities and 

programs in general, then you’re not going to solve the young 

offenders’ problems. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I’ll allude to some of the attributes 

that was brought to the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse by the 

Corps of Commissionaires. 

 

As you’re probably aware, the Corps is a group of retired 

soldiers and RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officers 

and different people that served in a number of different 

capacities. I believe there’s also fire-fighters, professional 

fire-fighters, that are involved; some emergency medical 

personnel are also involved. But of course the people are all 

getting on in their years, so they’re volunteering for the Corps 

to teach other people their skills. 

 

And that’s certainly a very admirable quality about the Corps of 

Commissionaires. Here we have older people that are willing to 

volunteer their time to transfer their skills and their time and 

effort to the young people who may be troubled or who may 

just simply need a helping hand. 

 

Now we’re certainly no bleeding-heart liberals when it comes to 

young offenders and the crime that obviously is caused from 

time to time. But we know one thing: those that continue to 

abuse the system certainly need corrective measures. There’s no 

question about that. 

 

But those that are reaching out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and are 

trying to change things in their lives, and in spite of all the 

insurmountable odds against them they still continue to struggle 

to find a new way of doing things . . . and this is where the 

whole situation of our argument, and certainly my argument 

from the Athabasca constituents’ point of view is, that if we’re 

going to have a youth justice committee established, we must 

have the corresponding program support dollars to go along 

with that Act. If we do not have that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then 

really the Bill is a shell. There’s no question about it; it will just 

remain simply a shell. 

 

And again, the Corps of Commissionaires’ effort, the 

Friendship Centre movement, all these people at the local level 

recognize the problem. 

 

So again, I’ll have a couple examples. We have Pinehouse, is 

another community that’s in dire need of some technical and 

some financial support to address their social development 

problems. If they’ve got 50 million problems, and one of them 

happens to be a young offender problem, how are they going to 

priorize it and how are they going to deal with this when they 

haven’t got one red cent to deal with problem number one yet? 

 

So really, you can see there’s so many pressing problems at the 

community level that we have to address in order for us to 

change the whole context and the whole process associated with 

Bill No. 34. 

 

There’s been a number of community people that have been 

taking action. Their mayor and their council and a few other 

community groups, including a great number of local ladies, 

have seen the problem firsthand. They’ve seen the young 

offenders and the problems that they could create, and they’re 

going to make sure that they have an opportunity to do 

something about it. 

 

But the whole problem comes back to us once again, is what 

can the provincial governments or the federal government do to 

alleviate the situation? They cannot come in here with a plan, 

they cannot draft up a Bill or a shell of a Bill, and say the 

problem will go away because we now have the wording as 

law. Wording does not mean nothing unless you certainly have 

the resource to go along with it. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

And the question we have — in the example of Pinehouse, I’ll 

use — people don’t like to be viewed as negative all the time, 

but there are prying and pressing problems there that need to be 

resolved, and working with the young offenders is certainly a 

big, big step. 

 

But another good example — and I talk about the community 

development as a whole — housing is a problem, adequate 

housing. And the poor quality of housing is going to impact and 

affect on the attitude of the young offender. The lack of a 

recreational facility — Pinehouse does not have an ice hockey 

arena of any sort — so as a result a lot of young people don’t 

participate in sports. And the only thing that we could say is, 

thank heavens for the school and the efforts of the staff and the 

teachers there because they have been making a significant 

difference in terms of dealing with the people in general, the 

children, and of course in the midst of the school system, our 

young offenders as well. 

 

(1615) 

 

So the whole argument that we have in terms of Bill No. 34: 

yes, it’s good to have a youth justice committee established and 

yes, we’ll continue to support that process, but it’s only one step 

in a long journey — in a long, sophisticated, and very, very 

challenging journey. But that journey, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

not ours to take. That journey is up to the community level, and 

the people that live in that community. And the people will rise 

to the challenge and they’ll change things for their community 

if they’re given adequate financial and adequate technical 

expertise and support programs to deal with these problems. 

 

And some of the interesting figures that we come up with, 

attending a few conferences a few years ago, is that on occasion 

we’ve heard of some of the Manitoba examples of how much it 

costs to deal with young offenders. But there was a pressing 

number that rode, certainly in my mind, about how much it cost 

to care for a young offender, and the figure of $52,000, which 

was released by — I’m not sure which jurisdiction — that is 

what they estimated that it cost to house a young offender, 

$52,000 per year. And I think that was an estimate from 

Corrections Canada, if I’m not wrong. But that $52,000 — is 

there some way we could use that in a better and more 

comprehensive strategy to deal with that young offender at the 

community level? And the obvious answer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is yes, we certainly can. 

 

So as a young man growing up in northern Saskatchewan 

communities, there are challenges. I know; I’ve been through 

there. And there are mistakes you make. Lord knows, I’ve made 

many mistakes and continue to make mistakes. But the path to 

go wrong is so easy — it is so easy to go wrong. It does not take 

much. 

 

And the path to go on the straight and narrow path, one path 

that we can all respect, is very difficult to stay on amongst the 

northern people, especially with the young offender. And all 

throughout our time as legislators in this Assembly we talk the 

talk, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we got to start learning to walk 

the walk when it comes to programs of this nature. 

 

A shell is a shell, and the whole problem is that’s all that we 

have been giving to northern Saskatchewan — especially young 

offenders in that area — is simply a shell, simply words. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, words are not enough. We need 

programs and we need action and we need to empower local 

people to begin to help young offenders and their families deal 

with these issues now — not 5 years from now, not 10 years 

from now, not during election time, but now. 

 

And if you don’t do it now, then the problems will persist. And 

once again, the people will continue knocking down their 

communities and again the crime rate will continue to build up 

and in the end, who loses? All of Saskatchewan people lose — 

especially northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 34, while we can certainly 

support the initial step of establishing youth justice committees 

and recognize the vital role that communities play — of course 

we support that — but it’s got to go much deeper and much 

more complex than that. You’ve got to begin to deal with the 

housing issue that many of these young offenders face in 

northern Saskatchewan, the lack of social development, the lack 

of training dollars, the lack of recreation facilities, the lack of 

youth centres and youth services. 

 

So again the point we made here earlier, it’s easy to go wrong. 

We have to make it easy to go right. And as the Hon. Paul 

Martin, the federal Minister of Finance has indicated in his 

budget, it’s not a good country for any of us unless it’s a good 

country for all of us. And that’s the same phrase that goes to all 

of Saskatchewan, and especially young offenders: if it’s not a 

good country or not a good province for the young offenders, 

then it can’t be a good province for any of us. And that’s a key 

thing we must know. 

 

I guess in the North the employment training, and the 

recognition and respect that the young offenders need, certainly 

goes a certain way. But eventually and ultimately, we have to 

teach them to become independent and we have to teach them 

to become responsible. And we can’t do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by giving them a shell in this legislation. We have to 

provide the meat and the bones and the effort on which they 

could use to build their future. 

 

So therefore, we certainly support the intent of Bill No. 34, but 

we certainly are waiting and hoping and listening and eagerly 

and patiently watching to see if there is some real intent, and 

some real effort, behind the Bill. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I note that the Young Offenders Act passed by the 

federal parliament in the 1980 session, I believe it was, 

contained a provision for the appointment of youth justice 

committees by the Attorney General of the various provinces. 

So our Minister of Justice, in other words, has had the power to 

appoint a youth justice committee for the last, about 17 years. 

 

And of course, the Liberal opposition has been pushing for the 

appointment of a youth task force, an interdisciplinary task   



1116  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

force, to bring together all of the various players. In the deep 

social issues which face us regarding the problem of youth 

crime, we’ve been pushing for this, and obviously the people of 

Saskatchewan want it. We have filed hundreds of petitions 

containing thousands of names. 

 

And I don’t want to be partisan about this issue, because I don’t 

really think it is a partisan issue in the sense that we all want 

what’s best for our young people. We all want safe homes and 

communities. And we are all concerned with some of the social 

trends we see that don’t seem to be going the way we want. 

 

But I still have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think that a 

statement from the minister responding to our request for the 

youth task force would be in order. His initial response, now 

nearly two months ago, was that he needed to have a look at it, 

and that was a fair response at the time. But you know, the time 

for looking at it, presumably, has passed. And I don’t think it’s 

unfair to say that some word from him would now be fair, some 

word to the thousands of people who have signed the petitions 

that have been filed with the Clerk, filed in this House, is also in 

order. It seems to me that mere politeness, mere manners, 

would dictate that some answer would be given to these 

petitioners. 

 

I also have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m disappointed 

that when the minister introduced this Bill, which I took to be 

his response for our calls for a youth task force — when he 

introduced this Bill, I interpreted it as meaning that he now 

wishes to move on the appointment of youth justice committees 

— he confirmed in speaking to estimates that in point of fact no 

youth justice committees have been appointed in this province; 

although it’s been there in The Young Offenders Act, as I say, 

since I believe 1980. 

 

I think it would have been of great value for the Minister of 

Justice in introducing this legislation to tell us what he intends 

on doing with youth justice committees, what his vision is, what 

the purpose of this amendment is. 

 

What is the real plan here, and if, as I think, the minister is 

talking about broadly appointed committees that will bring 

together, firstly, the players in the justice system, the 

prosecutors, the police, the defence, the court people, the related 

services — and of course we were talking about the 

psychologists today and their role in youth services, the youth 

workers — but also ultimately the community itself, both those 

who have been victims of offences by young people and 

community leaders who are attempting to deal with these 

issues, and elders and aboriginal leaders as well, I would have 

liked to have heard from the minister some statement as to what 

he had in mind. Instead all we are told is that this amendment 

provides for immunity for youth justice committee members, 

but we don’t have any youth justice committees. 

 

So that’s what I say, that presumably there is some other 

thinking going on in the Justice department behind this. I don’t 

think it’s unreasonable to ask the Minister of Justice if he would 

be kind enough to share it with the rest of us — and by that, I 

do not mean the Liberal opposition; I mean the province at 

large. It’s clear that the people in the province want some 

answers and they want to see some action. 

 

And I recall that I asked the minister if this Bill . . . I asked the 

minister in question period: does this Bill mean we’re going to 

now get youth justice committees? The Minister of Social 

Services stood up and said, well I should know that there are 

committees doing marvellous work. And I have to say I was 

involved in a broad justice committee in the Battlefords; 

although as I said previously, the Minister of Justice has 

confirmed that no youth justice committees, no formal youth 

justice committees under the Young Offenders Act, have ever 

been appointed. 

 

So it would be just very helpful and I think send a positive 

message out to this province, that if the minister would tell us 

beyond the technical provisions of this Act about immunity 

from civil suit, what is his vision, what is his plan, what is 

behind the proposal? Are we going to finally get the youth 

justice committees that the federal government called for so 

many years ago? 

 

And may I say that I don’t say that in a critical, partisan sense 

because it strikes me that one of the things that happened under 

the Young Offenders Act is that we got immediately 

constructed, the detention facilities. We did not however, get 

very much in the way of the support services, the youth 

workers, the psychologists that were referred to by my 

colleague from Athabasca and by my colleague from Humboldt. 

 

Instead what we got was that there is such a lack of youth 

workers that when a youth comes into his initial contact with 

the justice system, placed on probation, that there isn’t that 

intensive supervision, that close monitoring that could 

hopefully redirect this young person before he takes the next 

step and of course has to be put into custody and into detention. 

 

I also have to say that the hon. member from Moosomin told us 

that he considers that the solution is for parents to take more 

responsibility. Well again I couldn’t agree more, but the sad 

reality is that many of the young people who are in our youth 

justice system, first of all, they don’t really have parents as you 

and I might understand that term; and secondly, in many, many 

cases, they are parents themselves. 

 

Indeed I have been told at the North Battleford Youth Centre 

that perhaps 50 per cent of the boys are parents. I have been told 

that in the girls’ facility in Saskatoon, it could be more like 90 

per cent are parents. 

 

So in terms of saying their parents should take more 

responsibility for them, well the reality is they’re already in the 

parenting business themselves. And it has to be said that in 

many, many cases, the parents of those young people in the 

youth centres are . . . have a great many problems of their own 

that they have so far been unable to address. 

 

So to say that parents should be more responsible, while you 

can’t quarrel with that concept, it does come up against the hard 

rock of reality of who so oftentimes is falling into our youth 

justice system. 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

And we would like to catch these young people before they 

have become offenders, and of course repeat offenders, because 

basically it’s only the repeat offenders who find themselves in 

detention. 

 

Youth justice committees which start a community dialogue can 

be a positive step in that regard. I think that victims have to hear 

some of the social backgrounds of the young people and the 

families and some of the social problems out there. 

 

On the other hand, some of the young people who have stolen 

the cars and spray-painted the houses and stolen the property 

have to hear the harm they have caused. They have to hear it 

firsthand. 

 

(1630) 

 

Because I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in most cases they 

simply don’t have any concept that the people they have 

harmed, the people they have stolen from, these are real flesh 

and blood people with feelings and who have been harmed in 

more than merely monetary ways; and that when these things 

are done to them, they have suffered more than simply having 

to fill out an insurance claim. 

 

And I think the only way that could be brought home to the 

young people is through some of this face-to-face contact. 

 

I think we have to include the aboriginal leaders and the elders 

so that they too can be part of the process. Because we know 

that when we are dealing with aboriginal youth, that it is elders 

from their own community who have the best chance of 

reaching their young people, rather than people such as you and 

I. 

 

So we have to involve the aboriginal community if we really 

want our young people to buy into the process. 

 

My colleague from Athabasca said that we shouldn’t be always 

stressing the negatives. And of course he’s absolutely right. 

Some things have been said in this House which suggest that 

our young people are the enemy and we must be afraid of our 

young people. 

 

And I have to say that we’ve been getting a lot of telephone 

calls in our caucus which indicate that there are people out there 

who are afraid of young people, afraid of young people 

generally, especially if those young people happen to be of a 

different race. 

 

And this is very sad, and this is something I believe that a youth 

justice committee which brings together a broad range of 

citizens from different backgrounds can hopefully address and 

give us a commitment to face up to our problems together as 

one community and not as individuals, and not even indeed as 

members of various groups or backgrounds but indeed as the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I must say in that regard that that is my comment too on 

separate justice system. We are ultimately one province and one 

people. We do not live in watertight, airtight compartments. 

Our actions do indeed affect all other citizens of this province 

and must be treated as such. 

 

So when the member for Athabasca says we shouldn’t be 

stressing the negatives, we shouldn’t see our children as our 

enemy, I couldn’t agree more. But neither can we hide our 

heads in the sand. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of 

order. I’ve listening with great interest to the member from 

North Battleford and it seems to me that the Act before us deals 

with a strict question of liability, and adding a provision 

regarding liability for young offenders . . . or for youth 

committees. The member for North Battleford is all over the 

map dealing generally with issues of social concern. I really 

have to question the relevance of his remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Your point of order is well taken, but 

the hon. member is speaking about young offenders and that’s 

the Act before us. And I would ask the member to continue. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Like I say, I’m not trying to be partisan here, 

but as the member for Victoria pointed out, we’re talking about 

the liability for committees which the Minister of Justice said 

don’t exist, and they haven’t existed although we’ve had 

provision for their appointment for 17 years. So I’m honestly 

. . . I’m trying to understand this and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are trying to understand it too, and I really wish 

. . . As I say, I invite the Minister of Justice to share with us 

what the plan is, what the vision is, what he hopes for youth 

justice committees. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, far from leaving the point of this 

Act, I was trying to lay out what I would hope, what I hope 

youth justice committees can do in this province, what my 

vision of youth justice committees are. And I say, I invite the 

Minister of Justice, I invite the Minister of Social Services, to 

share their vision with us. I’ve tried to share my vision with this 

House. 

 

But simply saying that we have an Act . . . to simply say that we 

have an Act here that deals with the liability of committees, 

which don’t exist, really doesn’t help anyone to understand 

what is going on. And so I’m saying the subject of the Act is 

youth justice committees; the subject of my remarks are youth 

justice committees. And I really invite . . . I really invite the 

members opposite, instead of trying to restrict, instead of trying 

to restrict my comments on youth justice committees, please 

share with us what your view of youth justice committees are. 

 

Why do we need this legislation? I mean clearly we don’t need 

exemption for liability for committees that don’t exist. We need 

liability, we need liability from suit for committees that are 

going to be appointed. As so does this mean we’re going to get 

them after 17 years? And if so, I can only say to the minister, 

congratulations, and he will have no problem with full support 

from the Liberal opposition in that regard. 

 

I said also that while we must not dwell on the negatives with   



1118  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

our young people, we also can’t hide our heads in the sand 

because that also does not deal with the issues. We have to face 

realistically, we have to face courageously, the fact that we do 

have citizens out there who unfortunately are coming to fear our 

young people. And I think youth justice committees might be a 

way of addressing them. 

 

For instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had last week in a section 

of Regina spray painting on a lot of houses, and some of those 

houses of course were occupied by senior citizens who now 

don’t feel safe in their own homes. Now a youth justice 

committee that brings together some of these home-owners with 

some of the offenders can, I think, help to impress on them 

better than any judge or prosecutor or police officer ever could 

the harm that they are doing. 

 

And I don’t honestly think that those young people understand 

the terror they are striking at some of these senior citizens. I 

don’t think they comprehend that. And I say I don’t think 

they’re going to be taught by the police or the courts or even by 

a stint in a youth centre. But a youth justice committee which 

confronts the young person with this senior citizen, this 

80-year-old lady who says now I can’t live in my home because 

this is happening, I think would have an impact on these young 

people. 

 

And I want to know: is this what the Minister of Justice is 

talking about? Is this his vision in the bringing forward of this 

Bill? I hope it is. And let’s say, if it is, he needn’t fear that there 

will be any opposition from this quarter of the House. 

 

Canadian author Hugh MacLennan coined the phrase, “the two 

solitudes,” and my fear is that Saskatchewan could become two 

solitudes too. And I think that properly managed, youth justice 

committees can be a bridge — can be a bridge — between the 

two solitudes. And I hope, I hope my vision is shared by the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are demanding protection. People 

are demanding the right to be safe in their own homes. People 

are demanding security of their property. And I trust there is no 

member of this House who does not agree that those are basic 

rights that all citizens ought to enjoy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — We also recognize that a strictly punitive 

approach, a strictly punitive approach with youth justice is 

unlikely to result in those safer homes and communities that we 

all want. 

 

And so in taking a broader approach to what is happening and 

acknowledging that when we are talking about youth crime, we 

are also talking about education, we are talking about poverty, 

we are talking about health of families, we are talking about 

fetal alcohol, we are talking about the psychologist profession 

— we’re talking about a whole range of things — and we are 

talking about the good of young people. But we are also 

confronting our young people at times with the tragic effects 

and results some of their wrong behaviour has had on some of 

our citizens. 

I didn’t mean to make the member surrender, but I had hoped 

actually that rather than giving up that he would join debate, 

that he would share with us how he thinks youth justice 

committees could be part of the solution. 

 

And I say while I don’t want to increase the negatives and to 

accentuate the negatives, on the other hand, statements such as 

car theft is not a problem in Regina really don’t help either. So 

while it does not help to try and spread public fear and alarm, to 

minimize our problems, to trivialize our problems is also no 

solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I rose in this House I pointed out in the issue 

of youth justice committees and young offenders some of the 

points that our province has the second highest level of youth 

poverty in Canada. I also pointed out that the education level of 

Saskatchewan young people is now unfortunately below the 

national average. So education is part of the mix. 

 

The community schools program — I commend the Education 

minister for . . . I’m sorry that there’s no dental health 

component in that, but that’s another matter. But at any rate, 

when I pointed out that the education level of Saskatchewan 

young people is unfortunately not as high as some other 

provinces, this was found by some people as an attack on our 

teaching profession. 

 

Well it’s anything but. I commend our teachers for the 

wonderful work they do sometimes under very difficult 

circumstances, sometimes with children who come to school 

without proper guidance, without proper nourishment, without 

proper clothes. 

 

But it shows that the education people must also be involved to 

find solutions — broad solutions — to the social problems 

facing our communities. The social problems which lead 

ultimately to the criminal problems we see, first of all, in young 

offenders and of course all too often young offenders who 

graduate into the adult system. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that youth 

justice committees can be part of the mix here in bringing 

together a broad range of community interests, a broad range of 

community backgrounds. And we have been proposing this; we 

have been pushing this. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have been signing petitions 

demanding this, and I hope that this Bill means that the Minister 

of Justice has bought in to the concept. I’m disappointed he 

hasn’t yet told us if he has. I’m disappointed he hasn’t shared 

with us his vision; his purpose in youth justice committees. 

 

But I hope rather than trying to shut down debate, as we saw a 

few minutes ago, I hope that instead our friends opposite will in 

fact join in the debate and tell us how they wish to address the 

social, the economic, the educational, the cultural problems of 

our young people which have led to an appallingly high level of 

youth crime that has . . . damages to the fabric of this province, 

and especially the city in which we are speaking this date. 

 

  



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

So they don’t have to worry about opposition from us. We’re 

not trying to be partisan about this. We simply say, share your 

vision. We want to be part of the solution. We don’t want to be 

part of the problem. 

 

(1645) 

 

And we believe that by adopting a measure that the federal 

government called on us to adopt 17 years ago, namely the 

appointment of youth justice committees, we can do that. Let’s 

bring together young offenders, their families, the victims, the 

people in the justice system, the professionals, and the people I 

say who have been victims of crime — let us bring them 

together for broad-ranging discussions of how we address these 

issues and these problems in our society. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make a few comments regarding this specific piece of 

legislation that we’re dealing with and talking about today, this 

Bill No. 34, The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act. 

 

And I’d like to begin just by referring to some opening 

arguments and comments. Actually I should say comments 

made by the hon. minister when he introduced the Bill for 

second reading, where he made the comment that: 

 

I believe it’s becoming increasingly evident that the formal 

court-centred system of dealing with young people who 

break the law has for at least some individuals met with 

very limited success both in terms of accountability to 

victims and in terms of reducing the likelihood that youth 

will re-offend. 

 

And then he went on to say: 

 

. . . we believe there must be more effective ways and 

alternate ways to deal with youth in our communities who 

break the law. 

 

And to that extent, Mr. Speaker, I certainly can concur with the 

minister. Because for a long period of time I’ve felt that in 

many cases and in many ways we tend to treat individuals who 

would commit criminal activity in one regard. And while we’re 

treating or trying to address the criminal activity or the crime 

that’s been committed, Mr. Speaker, many times the 

unfortunate part is the victim of an act or a criminal activity is 

certainly left out in the cold. 

 

And when it comes to young offenders or young people, Mr. 

Speaker, I have for a long time felt that we have been maybe 

missing the boat, we may not have been addressing some of the 

activity, we may not be addressing the reason why a young 

person may involve themselves in criminal activity, or why they 

may have committed an act which if looked at in a different 

format that young person may, after giving second thought, ask 

themselves why did I do that? 

 

Many times young people react or respond in circumstances 

because of peer pressure, or maybe it’s as a result of problems 

they face in the home. And I think the minister is certainly right 

when he talks about the fact that just by incarcerating 

individuals does not really address the problem out there. 

 

And I just had the privilege a moment ago of talking to an 

organization that really is looking quite seriously at another Act 

before this Assembly in dealing with security guards and how 

we address that concern and how we make sure that we are 

bringing forward legislation that indeed addresses the issue of 

education and training so that we protect people who are out 

performing a duty. 

 

And when you look at young people, my feeling has for the 

greater part I guess I would say, Mr. Speaker, been that on 

many occasions I think we tend to look at incarceration as a 

means of addressing the problem, and trying to make young 

people feel that they have infringed on another person’s rights, 

and because you’ve infringed on that person’s rights, we’re 

going to teach you a lesson. And teaching you a lesson may 

mean it’s easier to incarcerate rather than having that individual 

face up to the problem that has arisen as a result of their actions. 

 

And I certainly can agree with the minister that I think we need 

to look at some new approaches. And when I say that, Mr. 

Speaker, I say that based on the fact that approaches need to be 

kind of tied to the severity of the crime involved. 

 

And the member from North Battleford talked about some 

example where maybe a number of our seniors don’t feel quite 

safe in our communities. Even our smaller communities are 

starting to . . . we’re starting to find that people are not really 

feeling safe at home, let alone being able to walk on the street 

. . . go for a walk on the street at night and just enjoy the fresh 

air and the outdoors because of the fact of the way we treat 

young offenders. And it would seem to me that the Bill that 

we’re addressing today, while it addresses some concerns and 

some issues, is we’re going to have to look at even broader 

aspects as to how we deal with young offenders. 

 

Now I realize when it comes to young offenders that the federal 

government actually sets down a number of the . . . or the 

guidelines and the legislation to deal with young offenders. But 

I believe that certainly it doesn’t take away from our 

responsibility as elected members in this province to bring 

forward some suggestions that the Minister of Social Services 

can share with his counterpart in Ottawa, or the Minister of 

Justice can share with his counterpart as to how we make 

people be more accountable for their actions. 

 

The fact of having young offenders sit down and talk to a 

victim of a crime that has been committed, I believe the 

minister made a comment about the fact that when a young 

person is brought face to face with a victim, the comment by 

some young people who have been actually put in that 

circumstance was, as the minister said, was for that person one 

of the most difficult, if not the most difficult things, that they 

have ever done in their lives. 

 

  



1120  Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 1997 

And I don’t doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there isn’t any one of us in 

this Legislative Assembly today would admit that if something 

we’d done, or said something . . . I noticed the other day on TV, 

or actually last night, I think it was Fuzzy Zoeller made some 

comments which he was responding to and with great regret. 

And while the comments . . . I viewed the comments, saw them 

actually at a later time. To a lot of people actually just hearing 

Fuzzy Zoeller and knowing the man, and having watched him 

and comment on different activities about his golfing activities, 

you wouldn’t have taken it as really being something serious. 

But because different individuals interpreted it as being 

something that should not be said in the way that it was, Mr. 

Zoeller responded and you could see that he had some real 

remorse and regret. 

 

And I can see even for in our . . . as young people, if we treat 

young people with respect and help them to recognize that 

when they infringe and when they interfere with another 

person’s rights that they certainly . . . that is something that is 

not appropriate. And if we confront them, or have them 

confront the individual . . . and I for example can recall I 

believe it was about a year and a half ago where on the news 

they had shown this young offender talking to the victim, and in 

this case it was a stolen vehicle. You could see that that young 

person probably had more remorse than if that person would 

have been taken before a judge in a courtroom setting and a 

judge would have made a decision based on the fact that that 

young person had offended or infringed on a person’s rights and 

stolen a vehicle. 

 

The fact that that individual had to face the victim caused the 

person . . . and you could see it had a dramatic affect, as the 

minister says here in the one comment from one individual: it 

was the most difficult thing I ever did. And I think we have all 

found that in our lives. 

 

So I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about 

young offenders, and when people are working with young 

offenders, when we have committees who are trying to sit down 

with individuals who have committed acts of violence or 

committed activities of crime against individuals, and you say 

to an individual, we want you . . . or to a group of people, we 

want you to sit down and see if you can address some of the 

concerns here and deal with these concerns, it’s important that 

those individuals realize that when they are working on behalf 

of society, or working with young offenders, that they are 

certainly protected, that they are offered protection. 

 

And I believe section 12 under this current piece of legislation, 

or section 12 of The Young Offenders’ Services Act, grants 

statutory protection against liability to various individuals and 

groups of individuals, including employees or agents of the 

department over which the minister presides. But while it 

protects them against liability while they’re acting in good faith 

in the performance of individual or collective function or duty 

imposed by the Act or its accompanying regulations, it does not 

cover, as the minister said, justice committees and people in our 

communities who will volunteer to be part of a youth justice 

committee. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that anyone who would 

volunteer of their time to work with young people, to help them, 

to help steer them in a different direction rather than allowing 

them to be just basically picked up by their peers and maybe 

follow along and go along with their peers and they get 

involved in actions that they normally wouldn’t get involved in, 

I think we need to certainly recognize the efforts of volunteer 

groups and volunteer organizations as they reach out to try and 

steer young people in a direction that would be more beneficial 

and more positive to our society, and certainly in being more 

productive members in our society. And so in that regard, Mr. 

Speaker, I commend the minister for this piece of legislation 

that he has brought before this Assembly. 

 

And the fact that we are looking at ways in which we try to 

address the problems and try to help people — and especially in 

the area of young people — try to help them understand that 

there are certain responsibilities that come with the actions they 

take. And that they should be recognized that . . . if they commit 

a crime, regardless of what the crime may be, if they would 

infringe on another person’s responsibility, or a person’s rights, 

that there is a responsibility that goes with those actions. 

 

And so I think it’s imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly 

take the time to recognize the work of our volunteer groups and 

include them in provisions and protect them against libellous 

actions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, given the changes that have taken place in 

our society, given all of the different ways in which people’s 

reputations can be tarnished simply by one person making an 

accusation, or two or three persons making an accusation . . . 

Even a person who is reaching out in good faith to help an 

individual and doing the best that they can and trying to, if you 

will, steer a person away from the avails of prostitution, trying 

to help them and to steer them into another . . . into trying to 

better their lives and not get caught up in that problem, and then 

all of a sudden, possibly finding themselves being accused of 

maybe having molested . . . or a sexual misconduct feature. 

 

I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly try to make 

sure that we are addressing some of the problems that can arise, 

and that we are giving people some — I’m not saying immunity 

— but giving them some protection. But at the same time also, 

when we as individuals are working with groups — and I say 

this as an individual myself — I find it in my line of duty, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s imperative that I protect myself, and I hate to 

say that. 

 

I think I can protect myself quite well, but on many occasions, 

Mr. Speaker, I find I’m asked to deal with situations. And you 

go to visit . . . you’re asked to come and visit a person to hear a 

concern they may have, and because of the way our society is, 

because of the way the laws are now, you think, well should I 

go and visit? What if there is . . . what if I am the only one that 

enters that home? What if that young person — it’s a young 

person that’s raised an issue . . . you want to make sure that you 

have someone along with you so that you cannot . . . don’t find 

yourself in a slanderous situation down the road. 

 

And I think it’s . . . even though a person has a position of 

responsibility in dealing . . . let’s say a youth worker — even   



April 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

though they’ve got that position of responsibility and they feel 

that they’re reaching out and they’re going to young people and 

asking them to get involved in programs, or asking them to 

abstain from getting involved with certain groups, and they may 

go in good faith and try to work with that individual. 

 

And the unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is, as I had happen 

personally . . . or just recently where an individual came to me 

and mentioned about what they’ve been trying to do. My 

comment was: were you responding on your own or, even 

though you are a youth worker, don’t you think it would be 

better to have another person with you in dealing with it, a 

situation such as that? Because you never know when a 

comment could be made that you may find yourself having to 

deal with a criminal matter that you never even thought of or 

never even occurred, could happen. 

 

So I can see that it is imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

changes, or we have pieces of legislation such as we have 

today, that offer protection. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the comments that the 

minister made in bringing forward this piece of legislation. And 

I observe, somehow or other, I think the clock’s getting away 

on us here. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think in view of some of the concerns I’ve 

raised here today, and in view of the time of day, it might be 

appropriate for me to save some of my comments for another 

day, and therefore I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1091 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1091 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1091 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1091 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1091 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1091 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1092 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

  Clerk Assistant ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1092 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1092 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1092 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1092 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1094 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Commutron Industries 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

 Calgary Company Relocates to Turtleford 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

 Good Neighbour Lottery 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

 Film Producer Elected to International Film Organization 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 

 Biggar Nationals Win Two Hockey Titles 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 

 Safety Recognition Award 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 

 Economic Boom in the South-west 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1096 

 Waterhen Resident Wins Award 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1096 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Hospitality Network Movies 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1096 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1096 

 Hospital Closures 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 

 Alameda Dam Water Releases 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1098 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1098 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1099 

 Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1099 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1099 

 Taxes on Fire-fighting Equipment 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1100 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1100 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Changes to Family Income Plan 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1101 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1101 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 58  The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1997 



 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

 Bill No. 226 — The Fire-fighting Equipment Tax Exemption Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 46 

 Alameda Dam Water Releases 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

 Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

  Romanow ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1103, 1104 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1104 

 Recorded division ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1105 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1105 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1105 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1109 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1110 

 Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1110 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1111 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1112 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1113 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1115 

  Van Mulligen (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 1117 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1119 

 

 


