



















































Hansard: December 18, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2027 

 December 18, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

a petition today to do with night hunting. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Montmartre, 

Candiac, Kendal, and Englot. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 

present to the Assembly and it reads, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from the Montmartre, 

Kendal, Regina areas of the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition comes from the Kamsack and Togo area, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present a petition as well this afternoon. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that films be given away to 

schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service basis. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from Regina residents — all of 

them here this afternoon — and we’d be pleased to present on 

their behalf. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring this 

petition forward today on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 

the Melfort, Preeceville areas. I guess that would be in the 

Melfort and Canora-Pelly riding. I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also present a petition 

on behalf of citizens concerned for life, safety, and preservation 

of our wildlife. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the signatures on these petitions are mostly from Melfort, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

from the citizens of the Kamsack area. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

today to present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks at 

Imperial and Liberty. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding  



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than 

allocating these funds towards capital construction 

projections in the province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Frontier, they’re from Halkirk, Alberta; from Shaunavon, and 

from Medicine Hat as well. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

a petition concerning Highway No. 1 and the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1, and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 

these funds toward capital construction projects in the 

province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And those who’ve signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities such as Swift Current, Shaunavon, and Simmie. I 

so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning with respect to the 

Saskatchewan film library, the ending of the practice of 

night hunting, the banning of night hunting, and the 

allocation of funding toward the double-laning of Highway 

No. 1. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ridgedale Resident Marks 100th Birthday 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to congratulate Bonnie Wassen who is celebrating 

her 100th birthday on January 1, 1998. Mrs. Wassen moved to 

Ridgedale from Arkansas, U.S.A. (United States of America) in 

1924 where she and her husband farmed for many years and 

Mr. Wassen operated as a machinist; Mrs. Wassen too, 

wherever she was needed to work as a midwife, until she 

assisted with her last delivery of twins. 

 

Her volunteer work also included many hours with the Red 

Cross, especially during the war years. Her family said she was 

always ready and willing to help anyone in need. She had eight 

children of her own and is proud of her 22 grandchildren, 43 

great-grandchildren, and 7 great-great grandchildren. She now 

resides with her daughter Bernie and son-in-law Joe Gress of  

Melfort. 

 

Please join with me today in extending our very best wishes for 

continued health and happiness to Mrs. Bonnie Wassen on the 

occasion of her 100th birthday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Praise for Saskatchewan Health Care 

 

Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we of course know that in Saskatchewan we have the 

best health care system in the world. However, it is not often 

that our system is recognized by those associated with 

American health care because many have a vested interest in 

keeping treatment private, inaccessible, and expensive, much 

like the Saskatchewan Party in this province. 

 

This summer though, as Dr. Richard Hoech from Santa Ana, 

California said when he was on a fishing holiday north of La 

Ronge at Pickerel Bay Cabins operated by Ray Twedt, when 

Dr. Hoech became seriously ill with pulmonary edema and was 

evacuated to the La Ronge hospital where he was stabilized and 

taken by air ambulance to the Royal University Hospital in 

Saskatoon — Dr. Hoech wrote a letter to the La Ronge paper 

which I quote in part, quote: 

 

I know the difference between a smooth rescue and a 

not-so-smooth rescue . . . I cannot speak highly enough of 

Mr. Twedt’s professionalism and competence . . . I was 

accompanied by a physician who was more than competent 

in assessment. 

 

Then he praises the air ambulance personnel, the University 

hospital staff, and finally says, and I quote: “I received excellent 

care from the time I became ill, and I cannot speak highly 

enough about my treatment in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it takes an outsider to let us know just 

what we have here in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Plains Health Centre 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

the Liberals moved a resolution to save the Plains Health 

Centre. Today I am pleased to announce that the Liberal caucus 

is launching a new petition drive to save the Plains Health 

Centre. 

 

The Plains Health Centre provides health care services for the 

people of southern Saskatchewan with ready access right off the 

Trans-Canada Highway. And do you know what else, Mr. 

Speaker? Miracles happen at the Plains Health Centre: miracles 

like Kenji Chen, miracles like Karlee Kosolofski, the frozen 

little girl who was revived. The lives of these people were saved 

at the Plains and our medical specialists, the people who helped 

make these miracles happen, have said loudly and clearly that 

closing the Plains is a terrible mistake. It’s a scandal. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The Liberal opposition is 

not going to let that happen. Starting today we will be collecting  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

signatures on our new petition from people from right across 

Saskatchewan. If you think you’re going to have the last word 

on the Plains, Mr. Premier, you’re sadly mistaken. You ain’t 

seen nothing yet. 

 

Today, December 18, 1997, I am calling on the people right 

across this great province of ours to join with the Liberals in 

this historic campaign. Let’s save the Plains. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Care Centre Improvements 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is always appropriate 

to improve the lives of children. What more appropriate time 

than right now, in the middle of this holy season, to highlight 

some real action that improves the lives of children? 

 

Nearly $25 million has been aimed through the Saskatchewan 

action plan for children at programs to benefit children and 

families. This year close to $1 million has gone to 64 child care 

centres for capital improvements: improvements to brighten, 

improvements to expand floor space, and improvements to 

outdoor play spaces. 

 

Last week, 12 child care centres and the children who use them 

in Regina benefited by $170,389. The Regency Day Care 

Co-operative in north Regina received $25,000 to expand its 

space per child. 

 

It is one example. There are 11 more examples in Regina and 

52 other child care centres across Saskatchewan that have their 

own happy story about the improvements they are making to 

their child care centres. 

 

There are a total of 64 child care centres making improvements 

to the lives of Saskatchewan children with the very real help 

and the real money provided through the Saskatchewan action 

plan for children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Welcome to Saskatchewan Youth Parliament Participants 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most members 

probably think that tomorrow will be the last day of 

parliamentary activity in this building before the new year. Well 

you’re wrong. Next week just after Christmas, a bunch of eager 

young parliamentarians will be gathering here for this year’s 

session of the Saskatchewan Youth Parliament. 

 

This organization provides excellent training in debating and 

public awareness for our province’s young people. The proof of 

the value of this organization can be seen right here in this 

Assembly. Members of our staff, members of this legislature, 

and even former premiers have been graduates of the youth 

parliament program. 

 

I think we as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) owe 

these parliamentarians of the future our full support as they 

head into their new session. And I would urge all members to 

make this building a welcoming and productive place for them 

by opening our doors to them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Green Program Saves $400,000 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve all heard the 

slogan, “Think globally. Act locally.” And I’d like to commend 

the Saskatoon (West) School Division for doing just that in the 

last three years with its partnership with the Saskatchewan 

Environmental Society’s destination conservation program. 

 

Working together these two organizations have reduced natural 

gas consumption by 11 per cent, and electrical use by 25 per 

cent — a considerable savings for both our environment but 

also for the school district. Saskatoon (West) School Division 

has saved $112,000 by participating in this program — money 

that can be used for students instead of energy. 

 

Saskatoon (West) is one of ten schools . . . districts involved in 

this program, and last year the city of North Battleford saved 

$18,000 — this year $44,000 — as their reward for being more 

environmentally conscious. 

 

So collectively the destination conservation program has saved 

participating organizations almost $400,000 and prevented 

3,300 tonnes of carbon dioxide from entering the atmosphere. I 

offer congratulations and appreciation to the Environmental 

Society, Saskatoon (West) School Division, and all participants 

in destination conservation. 

 

Channel Lake Petroleum 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And before I 

commence my statement, may I be allowed to say how much I 

appreciate the fact that so many members opposite look so good 

in their red, Liberal attire today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dark and dirty waters of Channel Lake took 

their toll in this House yesterday. As I catalogue the sad and 

murky tale of conflict of interest, untendered sale, lost money, 

privatization without authorization, and other unsavoury details 

about a government which has lost its moral bearings in this 

swamp, the Deputy Premier appeared overcome with the odour 

of it all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we disagree with the Deputy Premier’s 

waste and extravagance in raising utility rates here at home so 

he can take our money with him on his frequent junkets around 

the world to invest wherever, we certainly do not — at this time 

of year especially — wish any harm to his person. 

 

When I saw him hold his nose yesterday and gasp for air, I 

became concerned. My colleague, the member from Melville, 

has purchased this morning a better-smelling Channel product 

called Allure, which we hope will leave a more pleasant odour 

in the House than was the case yesterday, and we will be 

delivering this to the Deputy Premier. Thanks. 

 

Surgery Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just 

when we thought this government had demonstrated how out of 

touch . . . and what little compassion they have, they have 

topped themselves. 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

On Tuesday in this House, I questioned the Premier about his 

promise to personally find out why a 79-year-old woman waited 

six agonizing days for surgery to repair a broken hip. 

 

It was bad enough that the Premier forgot about his promise; 

however the Minister of Health now says he’s satisfied, and I 

quote: “the system worked (well) for this individual,” adding: 

“At the end of the day, there may be an occasion where an 

individual has to wait a day or two or three . . . “ Mr. Minister, 

Hope Sawin did not wait a day or two or three, she waited six 

agonizing days for surgery And if you were satisfied the system 

worked when someone was forced to wait six days with a 

broken hip . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Now I want to remind the hon. 

member that it is the routine procedure in the House that debate 

is through the Chair and it is improper, by rule 28, to direct 

comments directly to . . . Order. And I will ask the hon. member 

to make his comments properly through the Chair. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Hope Sawin did not wait a day or two or three, she 

waited six agonizing days for her surgery. If you were satisfied 

the system worked when someone was forced to wait six days 

with a broken hip, you and your government have either 

completely lost touch with the health care needs of 

Saskatchewan people or you’ve completely lost any sense of 

compassion. Which is it? 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Teacher Contract Negotiations 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are to the Minister of Education. 

Madam Minister, we have just learned that you have stripped 

the taxpayers of this province of their voice in any negotiations 

in teacher contracts. You have thrown out the protocol 

agreement that put the people who pay the bills — the school 

boards — and the teachers on even ground. The Premier has 

criticized the federal government for setting policy, and at the 

same time cutting back funds. You’re doing the exact same 

thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, you know exactly what this 

will mean. School division boards will have no choice but to 

turn to property taxpayers for increases, again. It’s impossible 

for you to do this and hold the line on property taxes, Madam 

Minister. Will you tell the people of Saskatchewan — the 

parents, teachers, trustees, ratepayers, and most importantly the 

students — what your plan really is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for the question, a question I fully expected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always been our intention as the Government 

of Saskatchewan to negotiate a fair, responsible, and reasonable 

collective agreement with the teachers of our province, along 

with the protocol agreement with the Saskatchewan School  

Trustees Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had numerous meetings with the trustees 

in order to reach a common position. In fact we had nine 

meetings in the past two months. Those meetings have been 

frank and cordial and thorough. And at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, it became clear that there were differences between us 

that could not be resolved. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with the trustees this morning and 

I can report that the trustees will remain at the bargaining table 

with the province of Saskatchewan, and it’s our intention to 

together negotiate a reasonable and responsible and fair 

collective agreement with the teachers on behalf of all taxpayers 

in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Madam Minister, don’t even begin to pretend 

that you’ve been fair to our education system. Grants to school 

boards for operating and capital for this year are $61 million 

less than your government’s first year in office — $61 million. 

That’s part of the reason why our property taxes are 

ridiculously high, and that’s why your termination of the 

protocol agreement is going to cause even more offloading. 

 

Madam Minister, before any further negotiations take place, 

will you commit to covering all additional costs of any new 

agreement, both with respect to agreement costs and all of the 

additional expenditures necessary to meet classroom needs of 

our children? Ratepayers want to know that, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have indicated on 

many, many, many occasions that as the financial resources of 

our province become more readily available, that we will move 

towards 60 per cent of the cost of education borne by the 

province and 40 per cent of the cost of education borne by local 

taxpayers. We have given a commitment to the trustees that any 

wage increase that would be negotiated at the bargaining table 

would be covered by an increase in the foundation operating 

grant to school boards. We have given that commitment, Mr. 

Speaker, and when we give our commitment, we keep our 

word, contrary to what Mr. Krawetz does . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 

minister will — order — the hon. minister . . . Order. Order. 

Order. The hon. minister will be aware, I know, of a 

long-standing practice not to use proper names in the House and 

to refer to hon. members by their positions that they hold in the 

Chamber. And I’ll ask the minister to conclude her response. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my point is this: we have 

given our word to the trustees that any increase in wages will be 

fully covered by an increase in the foundation operating grant. 

That is contrary to the word that that member gave to the 

Liberal Party of this province when he said he would remain a 

loyal Liberal, and a few days later crossed the floor to sit with 

the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

Incorporation of Doctors 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Health. As usual, Mr. 

Minister, your government can’t do something right without 

some NDP (New Democratic Party) strings attached. Allowing 

Saskatchewan doctors to incorporate, Mr. Minister, I believe is 

a very good idea that will secure badly needed physicians in 

Saskatchewan. But as I say, if it sounds too good to be true, it 

probably is. In exchange for doctors being incorporated, they 

will have to, quote, “recognize the goodwill and collaborative 

spirit shown by the government.” 

 

Mr. Minister, it sounds like you want to impose a gag order on 

our doctors like you have on our health district workers. Mr. 

Minister, doctors shouldn’t have to give anything but their 

expertise and professional opinion, and they should be allowed 

to continue to point out the many problems you’ve caused with 

your so-called health care reform. 

 

Mr. Minister, we all know your government can’t stand 

criticism, but it’s time you stood up and were accountable. Will 

you commit to incorporating doctors while at the same time 

allowing them to speak their minds with no strings attached? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to say 

to the member from Moosomin that there has never been any 

strings attached to a relationship that a Government of 

Saskatchewan, particularly NDP, have had with physicians in 

this province. 

 

Because the reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that if you were to ask 

any physician in this province, and in particular the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, they will say to you that 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association enjoys in Saskatchewan 

the best relationship that you can enjoy with a government 

anywhere in Canada — anywhere in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in relationship to the issue that the member 

asks around incorporation, there is no gag order on our 

employees who work within the system; there is no gag order 

on the board members who work anywhere across the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there should be any kind of a gag order 

placed in this province, it should likely be on the member, 

member from Moosomin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Local Telephone Rates 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister in charge of SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Minister, the tax grabs by your government just go on and 

on. As we speak, the cabinet is studying a proposal which will 

see local phone rates climb as much as 50 per cent for the 

Saskatchewan people. And while this rate increase will go into 

effect immediately, your promise of enlarging regional 

telephone exchanges sits indefinitely. 

 

Rural people wouldn’t mind paying more for local rates if your  

government would enlarge the exchanges. But what you want to 

do is pay now, receive something later. Why impose this right 

now if you’re not prepared to establish larger exchanges maybe 

until years from now, if ever? 

 

Mr. Minister, why don’t you do what’s right and hold off the 

increase until larger exchanges are in place? Will you do that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 

member opposite raises the issue of larger exchange rate areas 

because it is true that we have announced a number of changes 

to the exchange rates that will make it very much easier for 

many rural people, particularly, to make calls that will no 

longer be long distance. So I think, in fairness, the member 

should realize and be upfront about what he’s really asking for. 

 

The policy of the Saskatchewan Party is to privatize SaskTel. 

That’s their policy. So why don’t you be honest about your 

position? This is not about rates; this is not about larger 

exchanges. This is about your policy to privatize SaskTel. 

 

Let’s get into that debate about who you would sell to and how 

you would sell the corporation instead of trying to destroy an 

institution that has been built by the men and women in this 

province for the last 70 years. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Possibly, Mr. Minister, the public would be 

better served if it was privatized, because all you’re using it for 

is a tax grab — nothing more than a tax grab. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’ll ask the government 

members to come to order. Order. Order. I’ll ask, I’ll ask 

members on both the sides of the House to come to order. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — At least private companies in this province 

are not using any of their income as tax grabs, and that’s what 

that government’s doing on that side. 

 

Is SaskTel so unprepared for competition that you would have 

to punish Saskatchewan people who have . . . don’t have a 

choice in local phone rates at this point? 

 

There are over 600,000 phone lines in this province; so with an 

average of a $5 increase, you’re going to rake in about 3 to $4 

million a month in increases. That’s 30 to $40 million a year in 

increases, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you’re not doing a lot to 

keep the customers from jumping to Sprint and AT&T for 

long-distance service when you’re gouging them on the local 

side now. 

 

Come on, Mr. Minister, it’s Christmas. Let’s give the SaskTel 

customers a break and promise to hold off any great increase 

until they’re receiving something for their money. Will you, 

once again, put the exchanges in place and then increase the 

rates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether 

the member asking the question could see the look of shock on  



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

the present leader of your party when you said you were going 

to privatize SaskTel. But you may want to have a little 

discussion in the caucus room. But question period should be 

true confession today because you, sir, have now outlined the 

policy for us of the Saskatchewan Party — that is to privatize 

the Crown corporation. 

 

In terms of competition though, in terms of competition . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member says we should 

compete and I’ll tell you that the people who manage and work 

in SaskTel are competing with AT&T, and Sprint, and they’re 

beating them at every turn. That’s with men and women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I say to you, that if you’re 

taking the position of AT&T and CANTEL and the other 

private sector of companies, like Sprint, ask yourself when’s the 

last time you saw Candice Bergen shopping in downtown 

Sturgis or Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Doctor Shortage 

 

Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has been 

urging the government for well over a year to solve the issue of 

weekend on-call coverage of Saskatchewan doctors, particularly 

of those in rural Saskatchewan. The latest edition of The 

Medical Post indicates that three months ago the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association gave the province a proposal to reimburse 

physicians. A deadline of December 1 was set — a deadline 

which has come and gone. 

 

To the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker — why do you continue 

to drag your feet on this very important issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well as the member from Melville knows, 

last year in the budget we put in significant dollars and 

manpower to assist with rural services for physicians across the 

province. The member knows that we put in $1.3 million for 

weekend relief, for rural physicians across the province, as well 

as established a coordinator that would help us with recruiting 

additional folks for rural Saskatchewan. The member knows 

that. 

 

And the member also knows that in the negotiation process for 

1998-99 and for ’97-98, which is in front of us today, the 

doctors have in front of us the whole piece on rural on-call. And 

when the time comes right, Mr. Speaker, we can inform the 

member fully what the outcomes of those discussions and 

negotiations have been. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika: — The Leader-Post I have referred to, Dr. Rob 

Weiler of the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) 

describes the on-call issue as an imminent crisis which must be  

resolved shortly or it will result in, and I quote: “A combination 

of people leaving and the potential for work action.” Dr. Weiler 

also warns that if there is no conclusion to this by December 1 

they would really jeopardize the ability of rural practitioners to 

provide the on-call services that they have. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know the impact this problem has had on the 

ability of rural communities to attract and retain physicians. 

You also know that a doctor turnover is at a level not seen since 

the medicare crisis of the ’60s. Why are you inviting doctors to 

leave this province? Why are you opening the doors for job 

action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member from 

Melville. I want to assure him that I have a very close working 

relationship with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, far 

closer and more in tune than I know his leader does. And so 

we’re very much in touch with the issue. 

 

For sure, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that we have an issue of 

rural on-call and we’re addressing the issue of rural on-call with 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association and expect that we’ll 

have, in resolution through this contract agreement, some issues 

that can be identified through that contract arrangements. 

 

Mr. Osika: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Health says that he’s doing everything possible to address the 

issue of physician turnover in rural Saskatchewan, and I note 

with some interest that media reports today . . . indicating that 

this government will be introducing legislation which will allow 

doctors to incorporate. 

 

Mr. Minister, the professional association of interns and 

residents has cited incorporation as the number one incentive 

this government could provide which would help Saskatchewan 

keep its graduates in this province. For two years we have been 

telling you to get this right. The time for games is now over. 

 

Will you make a commitment, Mr. Minister, in this House, to 

move on this issue, not in 1999 but as soon and as quickly as 

possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well clearly, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Melville is a bit confused when he talks about getting it 

right, because in this province the Government of Saskatchewan 

has negotiated with the doctors in very good faith over a long 

period of time; as well as has addressed on an ongoing basis, all 

of the issues that are in front of us in terms of addressing good 

health care services across the province for the people. 

 

I want to ensure the member opposite that when the medical 

association advised me that there are a number of issues that 

they wish to discuss with us, we said that we will do that in an 

open forum with them and discuss, as best possible, meeting all 

of the obligations that we can in the negotiation process. 

 

So I want to assure the member opposite that I’m not privileged 

today to discuss what those contract negotiations are about, but 

soon he will learn, as well as the people of Saskatchewan, what  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

the outcomes of those negotiations have been. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tuberculosis Rates 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

continues to have the dubious distinction of having one of the 

highest TB (tuberculosis) rates in Canada — TB rates even 

more shocking when one looks at the figures for northern 

Saskatchewan where the rate is 100 cases per 100,000. The 

national average, Mr. Speaker, is 6 cases for 100,000. 

 

Can the Minister of Health explain in the House today why his 

government has decided to ignore the problem in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that our government hasn’t ignored any of the 

services or any of the issues around the province of 

Saskatchewan, and clearly have not ignored any of the issues as 

they relate to northern Saskatchewan, as it relates to this very 

serious issue on tuberculosis. 

 

I want to report to the member opposite that in 1996 the average 

provincial new cases were 8 in 100,000 population, of TB 

cases. And then 14 . . . as compared to 14 per 100,000 in 1995 

— a reduction. And the corresponding rates for first nations 

were 85 for 100,000 in 1996 compared to 132 for 100,000 in 

1995. Those numbers are clearly indicating that they’re going 

down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now do we have more work that we have to do in those areas? 

The question is that we do. And these are the things that we’re 

going to be doing into the future, Mr. Speaker. Currently we 

have in the northern part of Saskatchewan, two district health 

boards, which the member is aware of, and we’re working very 

closely with them to ensure that we can reduce those numbers 

into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is well 

known that the rate of TB can be linked to the living conditions 

of people. We have called for a comprehensive approach to help 

solve the dire problems in northern Saskatchewan. The North 

has a critical housing shortage and overcrowding for many 

families. Along with the water and sewer services and the lack 

of water and sewer services, the lack of education about TB — 

a perfect recipe for the spread of this particular dreadful disease. 

 

Will the minister tell this House if he has a plan to address the 

issues that we’ve talked about today, that helped contribute to 

TB; and if he does have a plan, is he prepared to table that plan 

here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to this question, 

the member has his figures wrong again and his facts wrong. I 

think that in regards to the North, what we have seen is federal  

offloading in regards to the province, in regards to the reserve 

situation in the North. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the expenditures on sewer 

and water — over $20 million in 19 communities in our first 

term. Last year, Mr. Speaker, we had $14 million this year on 

12 communities. That is action by the province at a time when 

the federal government is offloading responsibility to the 

provinces. They haven’t put a penny in regards to the housing 

and we’re putting $8 million also in the housing program over 

the next three years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

University of Saskatchewan Capital Funding 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

questions this afternoon will be for the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education. 

 

Madam Minister, I ran into a professor from the College of 

Phys Ed at the University of Saskatchewan a week ago who 

stated that he should give thanks and all of us should give 

thanks that there hasn’t been a heavy snowfall, because it is 

unquestionable that the roof of the phys ed building would have 

fallen in, potentially taking the lives of faculty and students. 

 

Madam Minister, what is your government prepared to do to 

address the inadequacy of capital funding for the University of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, I’d just like to congratulate the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) for their quick action once they did discover that 

they had a problem. Of course this wasn’t a problem that 

anyone knew about, so as soon as they found out about it, they 

took the action. 

 

Now capital planning is part of the university’s priority-setting 

process, and this particular building was no. 7 on their list prior 

to them discovering this problem. And it may in fact move up 

on their list as a result of this. I’m not sure about that; they’re 

busy reconsidering that at the moment themselves. 

 

But they plan to continue their phys ed program in full and we 

are having discussions with them right now, Mr. Speaker, to see 

if there’s some way we can help them through this interim 

period. But so far, my understanding is all the students are 

accommodated and the academic programs are continuing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, that was 

interesting words but it did not answer my question, which is 

what your government’s prepared to do with the inadequacy of 

capital funding overall. 

 

No one believes that the critical problems facing Convocation 

Hall, the Phys. Ed. Building, the Thorvaldson Building, the 

Education Building, started recently. These chronic problems, 

Madam Minister, date back to the 1970s, and have been  



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

outlined by just about everybody with whom one meets, that 

this was something that was actually a problem when Allan 

Blakeney was the premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

What real commitment is your government going to make now 

to keep buildings at the University of Saskatchewan in 

acceptable order and safe for those who use them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll just 

say that education remains one of our highest priorities. But 

what I would say is in the space of a minute you spent about 

$120 million. And maybe you find that easy to do, but it’s a 

little harder to do when you’re actually responsible for a budget. 

 

And certainly, the board of governors and the council at the 

university of Saskatoon appreciates that as well. So they’re 

working in a number of ways with the public and the private 

sector to raise funds for what they consider to be their priorities. 

And we’re working with them on that. 

 

As well, DesRosiers is doing a study as a result of the MacKay 

report on university revitalization. We expect it in the spring, 

and at that point we’ll be able to look at a long-term plan for the 

funding of universities. But I agree with you that it’s very 

important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, everyone 

knows that the gap in capital funding has gone on for almost 

two decades. Chemistry labs were actually antiquated in the 

1970s when I was there, and there are chronic, hidden problems 

in the campus’s utilities structure. 

 

Now given the inequities between Saskatoon and Regina in 

everything from the Centennial Auditorium to the YMCA 

(Young Men’s Christian Association), in amount spent per 

university student on both campuses, is your government 

prepared to treat Saskatoon, and in particular the University of 

Saskatchewan, with some fairness? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well without getting into a debate, Mr. 

Speaker, I will mention that she did leave out things like 

Innovation Place and SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council), 

but we’ll just leave that aside for the moment and stick to the 

point of the discussion, which is that we do think this is 

important. And certainly, when you have an old and honoured 

university like the University of Saskatchewan, it does have old 

buildings and they do have needs. So we’re just going to work 

with them to do our best to improve the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grain Transportation 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this afternoon is for the minister of transport. 

 

Madam Minister, we have learned earlier today that the federal 

government has announced another inquiry, this time into grain 

transportation. 

 

We support this. We supported the last one Ralph Goodale  

announced. We supported the one he announced before that and 

the one he announced before that and before that and before 

that. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker — the point is, Mr. Speaker — the 

grain transportation system in this country is in a shambles and 

the federal government hasn’t taken any responsibility for it 

whatsoever. The provincial government hasn’t done anything to 

help with respect to it as well. 

 

Farmers today are facing successor rights, fuel taxes, rail line 

abandonment, higher taxes, and an unfriendly business climate 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, those are the concerns that farmers are faced 

with today. Are you looking into this latest grain transportation 

system problems that farmers are faced with, or exactly what 

are you doing for farmers these days? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to this 

particular question because this has been a matter of top priority 

for the provincial government. We have been saying at all 

levels, western premiers’ conferences, the annual premiers 

conferences, the federal/provincial premiers’ conferences, the 

ministerial meetings with the ministers of Transportation and 

Agriculture, that there is an absolute need to get at a very quick, 

thorough study of the rail transportation system. 

 

We welcome the appointment of Judge Estey, who is a very 

competent person, a Saskatchewan person, and this 

announcement is a positive announcement. 

 

My only concern is that the time lines are simply too long. The 

first phase is May, 1998 ending in the second phase in 

December, 1998. 

 

And what I’ll be doing is writing to the Prime Minister and Mr. 

Estey, Judge Estey, seeking ways and means to try and 

compress the study in order to get on with answers and 

solutions to help ease the bottleneck and the situation for 

farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 240  The Recall of Members Act 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that An Act 

respecting the Recall of Members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly be now introduced and read for the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

Transportation Policies 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to 

have the opportunity to present this motion regarding the state 

of Saskatchewan highways and roads as well as problems faced 

in our entire transportation system. 

 

I’m particularly pleased that we have a chance to debate this 

issue at this time of year. I think it is important to come back in 

the fall to debate the issues that are truly important to the people 

of Saskatchewan, and I hope the government members opposite 

have the intestinal fortitude to call back the House every fall 

now that precedent has been set. But given their terrible 

performance this week, I doubt very much if that’s going to 

happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since being elected in ’95, there have been two or 

three types of issues that are obviously of more concern than 

others. Obviously the deterioration of our health care system 

has been front and centre for several years now since this 

government began its health reform policies. 

 

And education has also been a major concern for people I 

represent, because they worry that this government has in its 

mind to close our schools just as they have boarded up our 

hospital windows. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, probably the issue I’ve heard most about in 

the last two, two and a half years, is the state of our highways 

and of our rural roads. People are angry when they see their tax 

bill continuing to rise and that the highways, the vital links that 

connect our communities, are very quickly becoming 

impassable. 

 

In some cases people are scared to drive on some of the 

highways in this province for fear of heavy damage to their 

vehicles. I think we’ve all heard stories now about vehicles 

being thrown off the road because of conditions of the 

highways, or vehicles that are deliberately driven into the ditch 

to avoid giant chunks of asphalt that have been torn from our 

highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in more serious cases however, some highways 

are avoided because of a fear of personal safety. I don’t think 

there’s a more telling instant of this than the ambulance driver 

who said he deliberately avoided some highways in his area 

when transporting sick or injured patients, because he was 

worried that high speeds on such potholed-riddled roads would 

cause further injury to his patients. 

 

And school bus drivers have told us the same thing, Mr. 

Speaker. They take alternate routes now that roads and 

highways in their part of the province have deteriorated past the 

point of repair. Stories like this are becoming all too common in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what makes this situation truly unacceptable is the fact that 

our highways are more important today than ever before. 

Because of this government’s policy of shutting down rural 

Saskatchewan, because of its decision to close hospitals in 

many of our communities, and because of its choice to close 

schools in rural Saskatchewan, our citizens, our sick and 

elderly, and our children are forced to travel greater and greater  

distances to receive the very basics of life — basics such as 

health care and education. 

 

Now like never before, vital services are disappearing from our 

rural Saskatchewan communities, forcing our people to travel 

many miles over our highways to get the services they once 

could get in their own communities. And the situation isn’t 

getting any better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has let our highways deteriorate to the point 

where many are simply un-repairable. I find it amusing and 

telling that the newly admitted Minister of Highways likes to 

get her face on camera when a new section of highway is 

actually opened, such as we saw Highway 16 last week. But I’d 

bet you a dollar that it will be a very long time before that same 

minister comes to get her picture taken along Highway No. 15 

in my constituency, which resembles something like the roads 

in Bosnia. 

 

There are examples all over the place, Mr. Speaker. I welcome 

the minister to travel Highway 35 from her constituency of 

Weyburn towards Fort Qu’Appelle in the Minister of 

Environment’s riding. Or take a ride with the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood through Lipton, Dysart, Cupar. But I’d 

advise you to ride in an armoured tank because you’d probably 

have a better chance of surviving the trip intact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could stand here and give you a long list of our 

highways in the province that are particularly in terrible shape, 

but since we only are sitting until Friday, I don’t know if I have 

enough time to get through them all. But clearly we have a 

major problem in this province and government action so far is 

far too little and far too late. Unfortunately some of our 

highways have gotten to the point where they will virtually 

have to be built from scratch. Had the government been 

responsible in recent years, by maintaining this highway at a 

decent level, the cost of repairs would have been far lower. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that didn’t fit into their little game plan. They see 

no future in rural areas and did not want and do not want to do 

anything that contradicts this. Well there may be no future for 

the NDP in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but there’s a 

whole lot of life out there yet, and they deserve decent roads to 

drive on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, time is quickly passing our roads by. The coming 

of large, concrete grain terminals, the abandonment of railroads, 

the closure of small elevators in many of our communities, has 

made our highways even more vital today than they ever have 

been before. This is all happening because both the provincial 

and federal governments have partly written agriculture off. 

And we need to see in this province a long-term action plan on 

how we’re going to deal with the changes that are occurring due 

to the changing face of transportation in Saskatchewan. 

 

So far, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard very little about this from the 

members opposite. Perhaps they realize that they themselves do 

not have a long-term future in politics so why bother putting 

together a transportation action plan. Well of course, the 

Saskatchewan Party will be glad to do it in a couple of years 

when we’re on that side of the House. But I would urge, in the 

meantime, that the outgoing government get to work on it now, 

give us a bit of a head start, because there’s going to be plenty  



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

of work to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in last spring’s budget we heard the government 

brag about their new-found commitment to our highways — 

two and a half billion over 10 years they said. And the 

back-benches rose and cheered the Finance minister. But let’s 

take a . . . take this into a bit of perspective. Once inflation and 

many other rising costs — many due to the government’s own 

policies — are added to the equation over the next 10 years, the 

government’s financial commitment to highways is about the 

same, if not less, than it was before this grand announcement 

last March. 

 

The Finance minister may be able to fool her back-bench into 

thinking everything is now going to be wonderful in terms of 

our roads and highways, but the rest of us in Saskatchewan can 

count. This so-called commitment is another smokescreen 

thrown up by this government to disguise the reality of its own 

neglect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at this from another angle. The 

government says it will spend two and a half billion over the 

next decade. Well try this on for size, Mr. Speaker. Over that 

same period, the provincial treasury will rake in over four and a 

half billion in fuel taxes and vehicle licencing registration fees. 

And that’s if the taxes stay where they are now and don’t go 

higher like they usually do under this administration. 

 

That’s a great big “if” when it comes to this government, Mr. 

Speaker. In the past fiscal year alone, the government took in 

365 million in fuel taxes but spent only 107 million on the 

preservation and maintenance of our roads. Some commitment, 

Mr. Speaker, some commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize we have to be realistic. It would be 

difficult to begin spending 100 per cent or even 90 per cent of 

the revenue from the fuel tax on our roads immediately. Not 

because that much repair and building couldn’t be done and 

isn’t needed, but it’s because we recognize that this money is 

used to fund other vital services. 

 

However, I don’t believe it is impossible that over time, the 

percentage of the fuel tax that is devoted to highways is 

increased until eventually most of it, if not all of it, is going 

directly to our roads. 

 

In our consultations with the residents of Saskatchewan, that’s 

what they told us they’d like to see, Mr. Speaker. And the 

government should listen to them and make this commitment 

now. I don’t think any of us should forget that this is a 

government that today takes in over 800 million more in taxes 

than it did when it came to power in 1991. 

 

Making this commitment over a period of time should not leave 

all other government services devastated, as the members 

opposite claim. Some sort of commitment has to be made and 

so far the government has done nothing. I’m sure in just a few 

moments they’ll all start chiming about how their so-called 

promise of two and a half billion has done wonders. But I’ve 

already told you what I think of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last year I recall stating that the Premier stated that only so 

much money can be spent on repairing our highways because  

the contractors can handle only so much. But even here, Mr. 

Speaker, the government is being less than honest. For years the 

Saskatchewan road builders association has urged the 

government to release their highway tenders earlier than they 

do, at least by a couple of months. 

 

Tenders for work this fall were only released in July, giving the 

contractors very little time to line up necessary equipment. If it 

hadn’t been for the unusually warm fall, much of the work 

couldn’t have been completed and much of the budget would 

have gone unspent. 

 

The same thing happens in the spring. Whereas the road 

builders have urged to get the tenders and contracts out early as 

January, to allow them to prepare for the job and to bring in 

more equipment and more workers if necessary, the government 

has refused and does not release these contracts until April, very 

shortly before the work begins. 

 

Why not budget this work on a multi-year basis, Mr. Speaker? 

Then the government would not have to wait every year for the 

budget to be brought down before contractors know what work 

is going to be done. It seems like a simple solution to rather a 

major problem, Mr. Speaker. But of course, the government 

refuses to listen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s neglect of the 

primary and secondary highways in Saskatchewan, the entire 

transportation system in the province is failing very, very 

quickly. Because of the NDP’s failure to ensure safe, drivable 

highways, many vehicles are now getting off the main roads to 

avoid potholes and taking grid roads. We see this in the oil 

patch, we see it where the large grain terminals have popped up, 

and this has a devastating effect on the grid road system in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These roads were not built to handle a large volume of heavy 

traffic, and as a result, the roads in many of our rural 

municipalities have been left as heavily damaged as the 

highways themselves. 

 

And what does the government expect? The municipalities will 

just run right out and fix theirs over and over again. Well again, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the RM (rural municipality) councils 

would dearly love to fix their roads and I’m sure the RM 

councils would dearly love to build new roads, Mr. Speaker. 

But the provincial government has ensured that that cannot 

happen either. 

 

I’m going to speak about the government’s offloading to its 

own problems . . . off on to the municipal governments in 

greater detail tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, but it has to be mentioned 

when one is talking about the transportation system in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when more and more of the heavier and heavier 

traffic leaves the main highways, preferring the grid road 

system, the RMs suffer financially. More repair work is needed, 

and frankly the money just isn’t there, Mr. Speaker, to do it. 

And why isn’t it there? Because the provincial government has 

devastated the municipality’s bottom line by its constant hatchet 

job to their budgets. 



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

Since coming to power in 1991, this government has slashed 

transfers to municipalities time after time after time. Of all the 

effects this has on a municipality, perhaps the greatest is on the 

RM’s ability to maintain its roads. As its revenue falls because 

of provincial government cut-backs, so does its ability to keep 

the roads in the RMs up in shape. And at the same time as this 

is going on, the province’s own negligence is forcing more and 

more traffic onto these roads. 

 

(1430) 

 

They’ve created a vicious circle here, Mr. Speaker, and it 

doesn’t look as if it’s going to end any time soon. In the last 

year alone the provincial cut . . . the province cut another 25 per 

cent from local government transfers. And yet they expect those 

same RMs to pick up the cost of repairing these roads. I’ll have 

more to say on this tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, when we discuss 

this government’s offloading in all areas. I’m sure that’s a 

discussion they’ll love to have, since they just love to talk about 

offloading from the federal government onto the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking about the federal government, I do 

recognize that it has some major responsibility when it comes to 

highways in this province and all across Canada, a 

responsibility that is not borne any better than our provincial 

government. The federal government, including Ralph Goodale, 

has got to commit to a national highways program. And in 

Saskatchewan it’s got to commit to twinning Highway No. 1 

from border to border. There is no question about that, Mr. 

Speaker, and I urge the current Highways minister and the 

Premier to continue to pressure the federal Liberals to do their 

share as well as when it comes to our highways in 

Saskatchewan. I would do it myself, but Mr. Goodale isn’t 

accepting my calls for some unknown reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, times are quickly changing in the 

transportation system in Saskatchewan. More and more we are 

seeing rail lines abandoned by the major national railways; 

however, because the people of Saskatchewan have initiative, 

they are coming up with solutions to the problems. But as usual 

the provincial government is doing all it can to stop these 

initiatives. 

 

I found it very amusing to see the Highways minister and the 

current Intergovernmental Affairs minister, the person who has 

so much devastated farmers in Saskatchewan, elbow their way 

in front of the cameras in Eston last week when the farmers 

were there coming up with their own solutions for the problem 

they face in transporting the grain. But those same ministers 

have done absolutely nothing to get their government to 

enhance the chances of short-lines starting in Saskatchewan. 

 

They are part and parcel with their colleagues, who absolutely 

refuse to repeal succession rights for short-lines. They won’t 

even admit that succession rights are a cause . . . and a problem 

for small companies wanting to establish short-lines in order to 

transport our grain. 

 

I don’t have to go into much detail here as I know my colleague 

from Kindersley will speak on this subject later, but for this 

government to sit back and cry about elevator closures and 

rail-line abandonments, is absolutely hypocritical, Mr. Speaker. 

They have refused to do anything to find a solution to these  

problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do have a crisis in our transportation system. 

Last winter we saw that in spades with a severe shortage of 

grain cars. Unfortunately there doesn’t seem to be any solution 

coming any time soon. The review of those problems have been 

delayed again and again even with the seriousness of the 

problem, and we’ve heard very little from this government or 

from Mr. Goodale, who supposedly represents Saskatchewan 

farmers in Ottawa. 

 

The provincial government has steadfastly ignored the issues 

that are involved in this situation, Mr. Speaker. They refused to 

negotiate with the federal government, with unions, with 

anybody, to help find a solution to this major problem. Once 

again they simply bury their heads in the sand and point the 

finger of blame elsewhere. Instead of showing leadership for 

once, they simply ignore the problem. Instead of being 

proactive and helping to come up with a solution, they simply 

pretend the problem doesn’t exist. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough; it’s not good 

enough for our farmers. Just as the government’s negligence of 

our highways is not good enough for the rest of the people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are facing a major crisis in our overall 

transportation system, and nothing this government has done so 

far indicates that they’re ready to address the many problems 

that exist. That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly not a 

surprise. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move my motion and 

I will read the same: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

underfunding of Saskatchewan roads and highways 

resulting in crumbling roadways, poor infrastructure, and 

loss of tourism and investment dollars; and further 

condemn the government for its failing to help short-line 

railways to purchase abandoned rail lines through its 

refusal to end succession rights, which is the number one 

hindrance to this transaction; and further condemn the 

government for its failure to negotiate with federal 

government, labour groups, and other interest groups to 

ensure the orderly transportation of grain and other 

commodities. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Kindersley, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

enter into the debate today. The resolution that my colleague 

has brought forward with respect to grain transportation, 

transportation in general . . . and there are many, many aspects 

of this resolution that are extremely important, I think, that 

Saskatchewan people have opportunity to debate and to make 

comment on. So I’m pleased to enter into the debate this 

afternoon. 

 

The whole area that I wanted to deal with this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, deals specifically with the concerns with respect to 

grain transportation. A part of the resolution speaks to that and I  



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

wanted to contain my remarks essentially to that area. 

 

The whole area of grain transportation, as you know, Mr. 

Speaker, is under great scrutiny these days. It has been for the 

past couple of years. Farmers across this province have been 

waiting patiently, I think you would say, for the last couple of 

years, as we wait for the federal government and the provincial 

government to deal with this issue . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Impatiently, impatiently. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — And my colleague says impatiently, and I think 

he’s probably correct because I think their level of tolerance and 

their level of patience is growing rather thin here as we sit back 

and wait and wait and wait. 

 

We’ve seen the federal government just this afternoon, or 

earlier today, make an announcement with respect to another 

grain transportation study. And Mr. Judge Estey, I understand, 

is going to be handling that, and we are fully supportive of that, 

Mr. Speaker, although the concerns of course are with respect 

to time lines. 

 

The farmers of this province and of western Canada will be 

waiting till January . . . December, 1998 before we see any 

results from this study, or at least the completion of this study. 

And if the federal government’s inaction is any indication of 

what we might expect in the future, we won’t expect anything 

coming out of them, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen 

nothing to date. I have no reason to be hopeful that we will see 

anything in the future either. 

 

This grain transportation debate is very timely and I say that 

because we are now seeing in Saskatchewan another grain 

transportation problem developing, and that’s the shortfall of 

cars once again here in Saskatchewan. Farmers have harvested 

not a big, huge crop by any stretch of the imagination, but 

they’ve harvested a good crop. Quality is good, quality is 

probably unprecedented over the last number of years, probably 

even decades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now farmers are waiting patiently, and somewhat impatiently 

as I’ve said, to start moving that grain. We’ve had a fall that has 

set record temperatures all across western Canada. We see a 

situation where farmers are wanting to move grain as quickly as 

possible to meet their expenses — the expenses many farmers 

have faced with, dating back to the spring of this past . . . this 

year, 1997, bills that are still unpaid on many farms 

unfortunately, simply because they have a product that they 

can’t move. They have a product that’s sitting in their bins that 

the rail system just simply cannot handle, a grain transportation 

system that doesn’t seem to care, a federal government that 

doesn’t seem to care, and a provincial government that doesn’t 

seem to care on any of these issues. 

 

Mr. Goodale has announced, as you know, Mr. Speaker, study 

after study after study — talk, talk, talk. If that isn’t the history 

of this man, I don’t know what is. We have waited and waited 

and waited; seen nothing whatsoever but another deadline. 

Another deadline, another deadline, just saying you’ll just have 

to be patient, Mr. Farmer and Mrs. Farmer, out there. You’re 

just going to have to be patient until we get around to 

completing the latest study and then we’re going to make some  

dramatic announcements at the end of that. I don’t know how 

long this has been going on. The member from Saskatoon 

Northwest probably has a better memory in that area than I do, 

but nevertheless it’s been going on for several years now, as he 

well knows. 

 

We have been waiting for some changes; we’ve been waiting 

for some response; we’ve been waiting for some help; we’ve 

been waiting for something from both levels of government and 

we’ve seen nothing to date. 

 

I wanted to tell you a little bit about, Mr. Speaker, some 

initiatives that farmers are taking though, to try and address 

these concerns. Farmers in Saskatchewan, and as my colleague 

from Cannington has pointed out, are becoming very impatient 

with the situation. And so, as always is the case, as always is 

the case when it finally hits the wall, when it finally hits the 

wall the farmers of the this province stand up and say, well 

we’ve had enough and we’re going to have to obviously take 

this system into our own hands and deal with the problems that 

are . . . we are confronted with. 

 

And we saw a very, very good example out of my constituency 

and the member for Rosetown-Biggar’s constituency here in the 

last few weeks. And he’ll recall the . . . what I’m referring to, 

and I hope many members take the time to watch the news 

coverage of that day, where farmers, a few weeks ago, banded 

together in an effort to develop some consensus and also to 

highlight the problems that they are faced with. So there was 

some gentleman from my constituency, some gentleman from 

my constituency, a Mr. Bill Woods, a neighbour of mine from 

about . . . oh I’d say Bill’s about 10 miles away from my farm. 

A very good operator and a good farmer out in that area; out in 

the Isham area of this province. 

 

Him and another gentleman by the name of Rob Lobdel. And 

Rob is from Richlea, Saskatchewan; the heart of some of the 

finest farm land in all western Canada I would suggest. Those 

two gentlemen have taken it upon themselves — along with 

representatives of the municipalities and many, many farmers in 

the area — to coordinate an effort to try and bring some sanity 

back to this grain transportation system. 

 

What they did, I think has been . . . is unprecedented probably 

in the history of grain transportation and in agriculture in this 

province, I would suggest. They did . . . What they did was 

organize and coordinate a complete producer car loading of a 

train. A hundred, I believe it was 104 or 106 cars, something in 

that neighbourhood, were loaded at various points all along that 

line, a line that has been . . . Well there’s great concern about 

the possibility of that line closing down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They are very concerned about that. That line that extends from 

. . . starts at Delisle, runs down through Demaine, up through 

Elrose, right through Eston, all the way out to Alsask and 

beyond, is the line that’s in question here. That line, my 

understanding is it annually produces and moves in excess of 10 

million bushels of grain, so it is one of the highest production 

lines in all of Saskatchewan. And yet it is a very strong 

possibility that line will be closed down in the not-too-distant 

future. 

 

And so what farmers are concerned with here is a very, very  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

what would appear coordinated effort between various interests 

groups to move on that line. And I say a coordinated effort, 

because there are so many coincidences that it’s hard to believe 

that all of these things just sort of happened by happenstance. 

 

We see things like no cars coming into that rail line any longer. 

The elevator companies have responsibility in that area. As I 

understand the situation, Mr. Speaker, what happens is the rail 

companies move . . . they bring cars in on the line. What 

happens in advance of that, however, is the elevator companies 

themselves make . . . put in orders for grain cars. They say, we 

need 10 or 20 cars at Richlea, Saskatchewan in the next train 

that’s going to be sent out there. 

 

Unfortunately what happens though, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is in recent months and in recent years the elevator 

companies, I think have developed a little bit of a coordinated 

strategy here. And I would like to talk to them sometime about 

their strategy in that regard, because I think that it’s beginning 

to wear very thin on the nerves of Saskatchewan producers. 

 

They see a situation where the elevator companies do what is 

called flex-cars. Instead of having the cars allocated in a normal 

fashion where the elevator managers phone up and fax 

information and computer e-mail information to their head 

office and say we’ve got in our house today, in our elevator 

house today, we’ve got 10 cars that — we’ll say durum in this 

case — 10 cars of durum that are ready for shipment. When the 

Canadian Wheat Board has sale for it, and the grain 

transportation authority makes up a train load, they’ll send out 

10 cars to that point in question. 

 

(1445) 

 

Unfortunately what happens is, unfortunately what happens is 

though, the elevator companies, I guess being business people 

like they are, they’ve recognized that if they close down 

elevators all over this province and, in a coordinated effort with 

rail lines and with rail companies, if they close down a number 

of rail lines in this province and close down elevators all over 

this province, they will force that grain to move to higher 

production . . . higher movement-type areas, main lines. 

 

And I guess that’s true. If you have a monopoly, if you have a 

monopoly, that only makes sense to force it to a position where 

you can move it as cheaply as possibly, force it . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that’s deregulation. Yes, the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest talks about deregulation. And I’ll be 

happy to get to that in a moment. I’ll be happy to get to that in a 

moment. 

 

True deregulation has not taken place and the member knows 

that. If true deregulation had taken place we would not have rail 

lines closing down all over this province. We would have short 

rail line operations starting up all over this province because 

there would be opportunity. The entrepreneurial spirit in this 

province would take hold. Farmers would band together with 

rail line companies and they’d start up their own operations. 

That’s what would happen. That’s what true deregulation is. 

 

What we’ve seen is a systematic regulation reduction. It’s a far 

different thing than deregulation. We’ve seen a reduction in 

regulations for the companies themselves that are in existence,  

the companies themselves that are in existence, and for the 

grain companies. We have seen nothing whatsoever in terms of 

freeing up the system so all people can use that system, which is 

what true deregulation is all about. 

 

Getting back to the situation in my constituency and the 

member from Rosetown-Biggar’s constituency, now those cars 

that I’ve been talking about that are normally sent down that 

line have been flexed, as they call it, to higher production or 

higher-movement elevators. The rail companies, the rail 

companies, and I would suggest the grain companies in this 

country, have in a very, very what is . . . if it isn’t collusion it’s 

so close to it it isn’t possible. 

 

They together have worked out a system where they’re going to 

force grain to the higher through-put elevators. Now as a result 

of that, the cars that would normally be going to that 

lower-volume elevator rail lines, have been going to the 

higher-volume lines. And so what happens is the elevator 

companies have forced a situation where the lines that are up 

for abandonment always have a chronic problem with elevator 

congestion. The elevators are chronically plugged there all of 

the time. This is something new. This is something new to 

many, many areas of this province. We have never seen that. 

 

In the town of Eston where I’m from, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we’ve always been represented by three elevator companies — 

the Pioneer, United Grain Growers, and the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool. As a result of that, there’s always been extremely 

intense competition; and as a result of that extreme competition, 

there’s always been car allocation that has always gone to that 

rail line. There’s never been a problem with that before, up until 

about a year and a half ago; never have seen that before. 

 

Many other rail lines have experienced that. All of them have 

been done in the same, systematic fashion — starve them for 

cars, plug the elevators, the handle goes way down. Close the 

rail line because the handle’s down. You can demonstrate that 

the farmers don’t want to deliver grain there. 

 

But that isn’t the way it is. The farmers want to deliver grain to 

these points, but they can’t because there’s no space in the 

elevators. There’s no space in the elevators because the 

elevators don’t want there to be space in the elevators. The rail 

companies don’t want there to be space in the elevators so they 

can close that line down and force grain to the higher 

through-put elevators and to the main lines in this province. 

 

And that, unfortunately, is what’s happened in our area. As a 

result of that, farmers have banded together out there in a very, 

very unusual . . . particularly in an area that is known for its 

independence. For an area that is known for its independence, 

Mr. Speaker, what has happened is farmers have got together 

and they’ve said, we have got to address this situation. We have 

got to bring some sanity back to this situation. So they’ve 

coordinated this one full train load of No. 1 and No. 2 durum to 

be sold in a complete unit train that was going to be picked up 

all along that rail line. 

 

So I think that there was, I believe, something in the range of 

about 9 or 10 different points that were involved in this 

situation, a number of rail cars at each one of them. In Eston, 

there were 13 rail cars loaded on that day. 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

Now I think it was an extremely important effort because it 

pointed to a couple of things. It pointed to the fact that farmers 

won’t accept this any longer. 

 

Farmers around this province, I think, watched with great 

interest to see what was going to happen out there. It came, it 

went, was coordinated; it was put together, and it came off in 

just a spectacular fashion. That entire train was loaded by about 

11 o’clock in the morning. Farmers started at about, oh, I’d say 

7 o’clock in the morning. They had brought in trucks — entire 

cars of grain were loaded on trucks in advance. 

 

In the town of Eston I would estimate there was probably 100, 

if nor more, grain trucks in town that day delivering grain to 

that train. They wanted to show clearly that this is not 

something that they’re going to stand by and just watch happen. 

So the farmers that day loaded that entire train. 

 

You would never believe, Mr. Speaker, the people that were 

there. Eston is a community of about 1,200. The school closed 

down because the people in that community recognized how 

important this was to the people of this community, and the 

entire school population . . . I don’t know about entire, but there 

was a huge number of students there that day. They had to seek 

permission from their parents in advance, and some people, I 

guess, thought it wasn’t perhaps as critical an issue as others. 

But there — I don’t know — I’d guess there was 150 to 200 

students, something like that, there. I think the school holds 

250, somewhere in that neighbourhood. So there was a large 

contingent of students there that day. 

 

But in addition in that, there was a large contingency of people 

who were non-farmers there that day, watching and wondering 

what was going to happen, whether this thing was going to 

come off very well. The minister of transport was there, the 

minister for Intergovernmental Relations was there, 

glad-handing everybody in sight, making it known that they 

were supportive of this effort — supportive of this effort. And I 

say that because it is with great concern that the farmers have 

with respect to things like successor rights. 

 

If you talked to the coordinators there, Bill Woods and Rob 

Lobdel, they were at the grain transportation hearings that were 

held here in short-line grain transportation talks. They were 

held here in Regina, oh, about a year ago. And I remember Mr. 

Lobdel speaking at that meeting, and he got up and he said that 

he was very concerned about the rail line in his area; it was 

going to close down. And one of the significant problems were 

things like successor rights. He had been talking to many 

people. 

 

This young fellow is a recent arrival to our community. He’s an 

American, young guy, married a farmer’s daughter from the 

Richlea area, and has moved up here. And what he has seen, 

from where he has come from in the United States, is many, 

many short rail operations setting up down there. And of course 

the natural question that he has had to ask, is why aren’t there 

rail line operations like that setting up in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, so he attended the meetings that were held here in Regina 

to find out what was said and what was the problems with 

setting up rail lines here in Saskatchewan. And he found that 

there are many people that shared his concerns. There was one  

gentleman by the name of Russell MacPherson from Moose 

Jaw talking about the Outlook line, a line from Moose Jaw up to 

Outlook. It faces the same problems as many other rail lines 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And Mr. MacPherson said on that day, any of the short-lines 

we’ve talked — apparently they talked to numbers of them, 

trying to interest them in that short rail line opportunity in that 

area — any of the short-lines we’ve talked to are interested in 

coming, but successor rights are certainly a roadblock issue for 

them. 

 

Now here we have a situation where this government opposite 

over here, they like to stand up in their places and say that they 

have concern for farmers. They like to stand up and say that 

they’re going to deal with this thing. They like to stand up and 

criticize the federal government at every turn. They like to stand 

up and say, we’re going to do something good for the 

agriculture here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But what have they done when it comes to helping short rail 

line operations in Saskatchewan? Absolutely nothing. In fact 

they’ve placed a huge roadblock in their way, and that is 

successor rights. 

 

Another gentleman at that conference, a Mr. Bruce Flohr — 

Flohr I think his name is — and he is the chief executive officer 

for Railtex. Now Railtex, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

a short rail line operation from the United States. This 

gentleman runs a company that sets up short rail line operations 

all over the United States, and they have numerous of them; 

they have numbers of them. They run good operations. They 

come in and they are able to run an operation and make money 

at it, and provide a service where no one else can. And that’s 

why they’ve been very successful at that. 

 

And Mr. Flohr was at the conference here in Saskatchewan. 

And he stood up and he said, we will not be buying rail lines in 

Saskatchewan — in spite of the fact that they have them all 

over the United States and are very successful at that — we will 

not be buying rail lines in Saskatchewan as long as successor 

rights are in place. Without a change, without a change, we are 

not interested in Saskatchewan, but we are interested in . . . And 

get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Flohr says, without a change 

we are not interested in Saskatchewan. We are interested in 

everywhere else. 

 

Everywhere else. Everywhere else. All across the United States. 

All across Canada, with the one big exception of this place in 

the middle called Saskatchewan. Don’t want to operate here. 

Don’t want to operate here. Don’t want to operate in 

Saskatchewan because they will not be responsive to the needs 

of companies that are successful all over the United States, in 

places all across Canada. But we can’t have them here because 

of one simple reason he says, and that is successor rights. 

 

What possibly could be wrong, what possibly could be wrong 

with trying to help successor rights . . . deal with the issue of 

successor rights and help farmers in this province? What 

possibly could be wrong with that? 

 

The member from Regina South speaks from his chair over 

there. This is an expert on short rail line operations, as we  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

know. He won’t take the word, he won’t take the word, he 

won’t take the word of a chief executive officer of a company 

that handles them, sets them up all over this . . . all over United 

States, says he would come to Saskatchewan. Oh no, we have to 

listen to the likes of that member over there because he knows 

more than people who actually run these operations, actually 

run these operations. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

saying, it seems a very, very ironic situation when you have 

people who first . . . in the first case, a Mr. MacPherson from 

Moose Jaw who has a rail line opportunity that he knows that 

the farmers along that Outlook subdivision want to proceed 

with, a short rail line operation. And they say they’ve gone out 

and actively solicited bids from people, gone out and tried to 

interest companies that have experience in setting these 

operations up. And they have been told on every occasion, no, 

don’t want to come here. Saying, you know, we’d be happy to 

have a look at this situation, we’d be happy to enter into an 

agreement with you but there’s only a . . . there’s one problem 

here. If we do enter into this agreement, we’re going to go 

broke — we’re going to go broke. 

 

The chief executive officers of outfits like Railtex aren’t in the 

habit of going broke. They’re not in the habit of going broke 

because they know how to run operations. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Omni Trax. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — They know how to go in and set up operations. 

And the member from back in the corner over there, the former 

transport minister . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Carrot River Valley, says Omni Trax. Well I 

know about Omni Trax as well as you do, I think. Omni Trax 

came in in a very, very different situation, as you know — very, 

very different situation. 

 

(1500) 

 

They bought an entire rail line, starting in Saskatchewan, all the 

way extending up to Churchill. A situation where farmers in 

those areas, farmers in those areas have been supportive of that 

line for a long, long time, saying that that line can be economic 

if we could just get, if we could just get the federal government 

and the provincial government’s hand out of their pocket. 

 

So for once, they did something right and sell it to somebody 

that could run the operation properly and make a few dollars at 

it. And we congratulate Omni Trax for coming in under very, 

very difficult circumstances. But their circumstances, even 

though there are successor rights in place, they were able to 

secure the line and make money at it. That doesn’t happen with 

other lines — doesn’t happen with other lines. 

 

Omni Trax can do what they want and they’re doing a very 

good job. When you look at other rail lines in this province, 

they are different situations altogether. And the member knows 

that is to be the case. And that’s why you see rail company  

executives that have experience in this area saying no, we don’t 

want any part of this. 

 

Getting back to the situation along our rail line there, and with 

respect to this whole thing, the member from Rosetown and the 

member from Weyburn happened along that date, as I said, 

glad-hand every farmer they could come across. And I suspect 

as a result, the member from Rosetown-Elrose being there, it’ll 

be just like the situation back when he came out into our area 

when the whole situation of hospital closures was, and won by a 

relatively small majority in ’91, and as a result of his exposure 

in my constituency got nearly 60 per cent in the next election. 

Lord knows, in this election upcoming, I probably won’t even 

have to campaign if he shows his face again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — It was interesting, it was interesting, it was 

interesting, because the farmers looked at them like the Scrooge 

that stole Christmas. They wanted their help, they wanted their 

help like a . . . there was no help from those people that day. 

 

I had farmers talking to me all day long that day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, saying to me, what are these people doing here? What 

possibly do they know that could be helpful? What possibly 

could they do to help us out? 

 

And I said, they could do one thing, and when Mr. Lobdel 

spoke that day, he said they could do one thing as well. And 

Bill Woods, who coordinated that train, they said they could do 

one thing. They said if they truly were interested in anything 

other than a photo opportunity, if they are truly interested in 

anything other than a photo opportunity, they’d have been out 

here standing on a stump saying, we are going to deal with 

some issues for you. 

 

We are going to deal with some issues like successor rights. 

We’re going to deal with some issues like fuel taxes. We’re 

going to deal with some things like rail line abandonment. We 

are going to deal with some things like municipal reassessment 

that has cost rail companies significant amounts of dollars. We 

are going to deal with this unfriendly business climate that we 

have here in Saskatchewan. That’s what could have been 

helpful that day. 

 

But having the member from Rosetown-Biggar going around 

getting in the way — which is literally about what he was doing 

— these guys, these farmers out there that day, were busy. They 

were busy. There was a hundred, there was a hundred grain 

trucks running around. There was tractors and loaders and 

farmers busy all over the place, and they were staggered by the 

situation of this member wandering around wanting to climb up 

on top of the rail cars and have his picture taken. He practically 

fell off. 

 

They moved the train. They had a backhoe there that they were 

moving the cars along so that they didn’t have to, so that they 

didn’t have to, they didn’t have to reset the cars. And the 

member got up on top of there and the backhoe operator — I 

don’t think it was deliberate, although he had a little smile on 

his face — he had a little smile on his face. I know the guy very 

well; he just lives 2 miles south of me. He had a little smile on 

his face and he gave that car a little bump. 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

You never seen anybody, you never seen anybody jump to 

attention as quick as the member from Rosetown-Elrose did . . . 

Rosetown-Biggar did, because I think he thought he was going 

head over heels off the end of that thing. We didn’t wish . . . we 

wouldn’t wish that on anybody because it could have resulted in 

a serious accident. But nevertheless, nevertheless, the point is 

here, Mr. Speaker, any time that the farmers of this province 

stand up and try and do something for them, this government is 

always there — always there — to try and get in on it; to try 

and have their face on the front page of the local newspaper. 

 

But what really, what really the farmers are looking for is some 

help from you guys. And I think you people know very well 

that. The member from Watrous, he knows very well that there 

are problems out there. He knows that there are concerns out 

there, and he knows that there are problems that need to be dealt 

with. 

 

When you look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and grain 

transportation, these kinds of issues have been going on for a 

long time. All change, all change in agriculture has been 

preceded by a couple of things. It’s been preceded by the 

perception in agriculture and the perception in farmers that is 

has to change and that it should change. 

 

It’s also been preceded by one other thing — opposition from 

the NDP and every left-wing farm group that there is. Any 

beneficial change has been opposed by these people opposite 

every step of the way. Every step of the way. And you can go 

back, you can go back as long as my memory exists in 

agriculture, back to, back to the days when grain terminals were 

set up in this province by farmers. 

 

When the Weyburn Inland Terminal was set up, when that 

terminal was set up here in Saskatchewan, what was happening 

at that time? Farmers had congested elevators, poor grain 

movement, NDP bucking them all the way. And what happened 

at that time? They banded together. Free-enterprise farmers 

banded together and said, we’ve got to address this situation. So 

they stood up and they said, we’re going to build a terminal in 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 

 

They stood up and they built that. They pooled their money 

together; put their resources together; built a terminal in 

Weyburn, Saskatchewan. And I remember the NDP and the 

National Farmers Union, they condemned that out through and 

through. They said this is going to be the end of agriculture; this 

is going to be the end of collectivism in Saskatchewan. This is 

going to be the problems . . . this is going to be a big problem 

for . . . They tried to put all kinds of barriers in front of them, if 

you remembered, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you were around at 

that time, so I think you remember pretty well . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I’m not surprised that Karl Marx would have a 

concern about this, no doubt. 

 

But the NFU (National Farmers Union) blockaded it. The NFU 

blockaded it; they tried to stop free-enterprise farmers from 

delivering grain to an elevator that they had just finished 

building with their own money. The NFU stood out front of that 

elevator and said, we’re not going to let you into the elevator 

that you just built with your own money. What kind of, what 

kind of lunacy is that, Mr. Speaker? That’s what happened that 

day. 

And I recall another incident. I think the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest might even have been there. This was 

with respect to the, this was with respect to the opening of 

Cargill in Rosetown, Saskatchewan. Either it’s someone that 

strangely looked like you then. There was someone, there was 

someone there that bore a very, very funny resemblance to you 

that were there. 

 

What happened that day, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Again farmers 

wanted to have an elevator. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew):— Why is the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — What is your point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — The member from Kindersley has made 

reference that I was at an event in Rosetown, Saskatchewan at a 

particular time. I was not at that event, and I want to make sure 

that that is into the record. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — I thank the hon. member 

for Saskatoon Northwest for raising what he refers to as a point 

of order. What we have here is a dispute between two members; 

therefore I cannot entertain it as a valid point of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Apologize. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — I’d be happy to apologize. If the member wasn’t 

there, he wasn’t there. But certainly the likes of him were there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — The likes of him were there that day. The 

National Farmers Union was out in all its splendour that day, 

and the member opposite was a member of the National 

Farmers Union at that time, I think. Yes, he nods in an 

affirmative, he was. If he wasn’t there the likes of him were 

there. 

 

Well anyway, getting back to the story. Cargill was opening up. 

Again it was going to be the end of the world for agriculture — 

end of the world for grain transportation as we knew it. Big 

elevator going to open up. So Cargill, they run a pretty good 

operation as many of you know, and Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool’s hooked up with on many joint ventures now. They 

realize that they’re pretty good operators as well. Anyway, 

Cargill, they run a pretty good operation. 

 

So they had a big opening that day — big, big opening that day. 

They had grain transportation representatives at it all over the 

place. They had dignitaries of all description there, and they had 

the National Farmers Union at their gate not wanting to let 

anybody in. 

 

That all took place all day long, and the National Farmers 

Union was mad as the devil all day long until it came supper 

time; then they had this big barbecue. Cargill, as I said, they run 

a good operation. They know how to bring in customers. So 

they had this big steak barbecue that day and I was there. It was  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

great. They put on a pretty good show for the farmers that day, 

trying to gain their business. And they gained a lot that day. 

And many of them are still delivering their grain, and their 

families are delivering their grain, to that operation today. 

 

The protests ended when the dinner bell rang. When the dinner 

bell rang, the protest ended, and all of the National Farmers 

Union bellied up to the table like everybody else, and the 

protest was over. The protest was over and again grain 

transportation moved on. The farmers triumphed once again 

over that left-wing bunch of radicals known as the National 

Farmers Union. 

 

And again, as you look down through history, we see, as I said, 

change is preceded by the perception of change and an 

unwillingness to have the NDP and the National Farmers Union 

to accept it. We see that with the Crow rate. We’ve seen that 

with many, many grain transportation problems. Farmers have 

always had a . . . Something that really sticks in the craw of 

every farmer in this province is when it comes to things like 

demurrage. 

 

You know what this is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Demurrage is a 

situation where you hold hostage the people that shouldn’t be 

held hostage and you make them pay in what amounts to 

bordering on extortion for something they have no 

responsibility for. No responsibility for that. 

 

Who has responsibility for that? Who is responsible for that? I 

remember Henry Kancs, a grain handler out at the west coast, 

standing up and saying he could care less what anybody 

thought; they are going on strike. They were going to put the 

grain transportation system in chaos. They were going to hold 

up the economy of western Saskatchewan. They were going to 

hold hostage every farmer in western Canada. And they didn’t 

care what it cost; they wanted their increase in salary. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t Henry. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — It was so Henry. Henry Kancs has been a thorn in 

the side of agriculture as long as I can remember. And the 

sooner that guy retires, the better off agriculture will be. And 

the better off . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’s one of the sane ones. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — One of the sane ones? Why would he make a 

statement like that then? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Stevedores. 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Stevedores. Anyway, the situation with 

demurrage has been something that’s been a problem for 

agriculture as long as I can remember. It’s a situation that this 

government has opposed. I remember there’s been resolutions 

put before this House on many occasions to make the grain 

transportation a first line operation, to make it a situation where 

they cannot strike, to consider it an essential service — which it 

is — and not allow strikes in that system. 

 

But oh no, the NDP has opposed that all the way along. That’s 

why we are seeing many, many changes taking place in 

agriculture. The approval rating in terms of the grain  

transportation situation has changed. 

 

I wanted to touch, I want to touch, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in 

getting to my closing remarks here, I want to touch a little bit 

on the problems that farmers are faced with in terms of 

marketing their product, like through the Canadian Wheat 

Board these days. 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board has done a pretty good job at 

marketing products for a long, long time for farmers. I’ll 

acknowledge that. I’ll acknowledge that. There’s been lots of 

problems associated with it. There’s been lots of concerns. It 

was brought in years . . . 50 years ago for some very, very good 

reasons I think at that time. 

 

Just as many things have come and gone in Canada, things that 

have been good, things that have continued to be good, things 

that need to have some changes made to them. 

 

I think the Canadian Wheat Board is at a crossroads, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think they’re at a crossroads because of two 

things. I think they’re at a crossroads because many, many 

farmers now are looking at other crops. They want to market 

their product outside of the Canadian Wheat Board, and that’s 

why you see the explosion in things like specialty crops. That’s 

why you see an explosion in terms of acreage of crops, like 

canola. That’s why you see all kinds of developments in 

diversification aspects in agriculture. Farmers want some 

freedom. 

 

(1515) 

 

There are farmers that also . . . there are also farmers that 

believe that the Canadian Wheat Board is the best system to go 

through, and far be it from me to criticize them for that. That’s 

their right. That’s their . . . that is a right I believe that they 

should have to deliver their product wherever they choose. 

 

I’ve had farmers say to me many, many times: who are you, 

who are you, Mr. Member from Kindersley, to tell them how 

they should market their grain? Far be it from me to tell them 

how to market their grain. I would never stand in a hall 

anywhere in Saskatchewan and tell them that they should 

market their grain through the Canadian Wheat Board or 

outside the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

But I would ask you people opposite to extend one courtesy to 

us as well and that is not to do the same in reverse. I want those 

same kind of opportunities myself, just as many, many farmers 

across this province want. They want the opportunity to market 

their product in the way they see fit. 

 

If that is within the Canadian Wheat Board, so be it. But if that 

is outside of the Canadian Wheat Board, that is also a right that 

they should be given. Dual marketing is something that is 

coming. The member from Watrous knows full well it is 

coming. Change in agriculture has always been preceded by 

two things: first and foremost, that it should change and will 

change; and second, that the NDP will oppose it all the way 

along. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

Mr. Boyd: — Nothing has changed. Nothing has changed in 50 

years of agriculture that the Wheat Board’s been around. 

Nothing has changed. 

 

Australian producers have changed. Australian producers have 

said they want freedom. Australian producers have looked at 

dual marketing, have implemented a system of dual marketing 

not, albeit, perfect in any respects — not perfect in any respects 

— but at least a start down the road to freedom, a start down the 

road. 

 

If there was one farmer in Saskatchewan that wanted the right 

to market their product outside of the Canadian Wheat Board, 

you Minister of Agriculture and the minister of transport should 

be standing up and defending that right rather than denying 

them that right. That’s what democracy is all about. 

 

That’s what democracy is all about — allowing choice. 

Allowing choice. Allowing people to stand up and say yes. 

Allowing people to do what they choose to do. That’s what the 

choice is that farmers want. That’s what the kind of change that 

needs to happen. 

 

I’m always amused when I’m debating these . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Pursuant to a special 

order passed by the Assembly dated December 15, the time for 

this debate is up and it is time for the question to be put. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 15 

 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 

D’Autremont Boyd Draude 

Gantefoer Heppner Osika 

Hillson McPherson Aldridge 

McLane Julé Goohsen 

 

Nays — 23 

 

Flavel Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Renaud  

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order, order. Order. 

Order. It is a good thing that there is a visual aid to this vote 

because I’m having a great deal of difficulty hearing the votes. I 

ask the cooperation of members on both sides as we complete 

this vote. 

 

Lorje Scott Nilson 

Stanger Wall Kasperski 

Jess Murrell Thomson 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

Northern Community Development 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just want 

to say it’s an extreme pleasure that as the MLA for Athabasca 

I’m here to present for the next 45 minutes a great and very 

innovative idea on behalf of northern Saskatchewan people. 

And before I get into the debate, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to assure the member from Kindersley, who has 

always indicated that I had my hand out, that the fact of the 

matter that the people of northern Saskatchewan actually have 

had their hand extended in cooperation and in support for this 

province for many, many years; and all they want back, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they want fairness and they want . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Trew): — Order. The hon. member 

for Athabasca has the floor and I am having a great deal of 

difficulty in hearing his presentation. I ask for the cooperation 

of all hon. members. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just want 

to say it’s an extreme pleasure for me to be here today to speak 

on behalf of a very important issue that many northern leaders 

and many people throughout the history of northern 

Saskatchewan have been hammering away on and talking about 

at great lengths. 

 

And as I mentioned, on numerous occasions, that there is no 

way in my opinion that the people of northern Saskatchewan 

will continue being denied and will continue suffering the 

indignation of people from various other parts of political 

parties in parts of Saskatchewan by saying you always have 

your hand out, people in northern Saskatchewan, like the 

member from Kindersley does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we got to have understanding. We got to have 

compassion. We have to have respect for northern 

Saskatchewan people. That’s all that they’ve asked for and 

that’s all that they practically had to demand in the year of 

1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure, as I mentioned a couple of days 

ago, to talk about the tribute to northern leaders that we 

participated in, in Prince Albert, and there we spoke about the 

many leaders that have spoken so eloquently on the challenge 

that northern Saskatchewan people and the communities of the 

North. At the supper, we recognized many of the people that 

have passed on that played an incredible part of the leadership 

role of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason why we celebrated that leadership 

is because for many years the leadership was consistent and 

they’re very, very well-connected to all these northern 

communities and they’re also very disciplined and continuing 

on with one same message: we want to part of the northern 

economy; we have contributed a lot to the province; we want to 

be equal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I mention names, the names of people 

like Louis Morin, Rod Bishop, Jonas Favel, Raymond 

Daigneault, Jonus Clarke, Louis Chicken, Dick Waite, Leon 

Hanson, Albert Hanson, Ross Cummings, these are the leaders, 

Mr. Speaker, that have passed on. The people of the North will 

remember these people. 



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

And last Saturday, as I mentioned, we spoke about the current 

leadership that’s out there now. And we spoke about the Vital 

Morins, we spoke about the Lawrence Yews, we spoke about 

the Nap Gardiners and the Allen Adams — the current 

leadership of northern Saskatchewan. And as the MLA for 

Athabasca, it was the most . . . the best honour that I ever had 

and the best tribute I’ve ever seen for the northern leaders and 

the leadership in general. 

 

So I’m saying that, Mr. Speaker, as I panned through the 

leadership and the people of the past and the people of the 

present, every single leader in there have asked for one thing for 

northern Saskatchewan — and they’ve asked for revenue 

sharing. And this is the reason why we’re proposing this motion 

to this day. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about definition of roles and 

responsibilities, we have got to believe that the northern 

leadership, which includes mayors, includes chiefs, want one 

thing and that is control over their own destiny, their economy, 

their lives, and their community. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 

not gotten any of that over the many years that we have existed 

as northern people. 

 

And when I hear the Minister of Northern Affairs continue 

pressing us, saying how about the federal Liberal government? 

How about this? How about that? How about this? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, does Alberta and Manitoba not have the same federal 

Liberal government? 

 

In the last 20 or 30 years that northern Saskatchewan has 

suffered with some of these problems, did we have the same 

federal Liberal government in power? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we did not. There’s all kinds of governments that have been in 

power. There has been no government that has delivered the 

due benefits that northern Saskatchewan people ought to have 

and deserve. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is time. And I encourage the Minister of 

Northern Affairs to stop apologizing for what northern 

Saskatchewan gets and start fighting for what northern 

Saskatchewan needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — These people before us and the current 

leadership have all said time and time again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they want revenue sharing. And why can’t they get it, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I sit back and I say . . . People tell me, well revenue 

sharing, what is that, Buckley? What is that, Buckley? Well let 

me explain to you what I believe revenue sharing is. What 

revenues do you get from northern Saskatchewan? Well let me 

go through a bit of the revenues I feel that the current 

government does get. 

 

And we continue on, Mr. Speaker. In my humble opinion, 

northern Saskatchewan contributes billions to this economy — 

billions. Uranium mining industry alone: Cigar Lake, 1.4 

billion; McArthur River, 1.5 billion. 

 

And then let’s look at Key Lake. Let’s look at Cluff Lake. Let’s  

look at all the mines — McClean Lake. The list goes on and on 

and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all these mines, the last 20, and for perhaps the next 30, 

years will contribute to provincial coffers. And we’re not 

talking a 100 million or 200 million, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking 

billions over the next 10 to 12 years. 

 

(1530) 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t talked about the 

natural gas exploration in the Garson Lake area. We haven’t 

been talking about any of the contributions made to that 

tremendous forestry industry out there. We haven’t been 

speaking about the personal income tax. If it’s not news for the 

people in this room, there’s a lot of people in the northern part 

of Saskatchewan that pay an incredible amount of tax to this 

government and various other levels of governments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking tourism, agriculture, 

forestry, fishing, farming, the list goes on. There’s all kinds of 

opportunity in the North and there’s all kinds of resources and 

revenues that this government currently receive from the 

northern part of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to add to a very clear point as well. A 

very clear point. There are only 3 per cent — 3 per cent — of 

the provincial population, approximately 30,000 people, that 

live in northern Saskatchewan, and yet they occupy half the 

land mass of this great, beautiful province called Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what is beyond me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that 

after all these years of getting revenues from northern 

Saskatchewan and the fact that we have such a small population 

base in northern Saskatchewan with all that land, and all the 

opportunity and time that this government had, why is it that 

we’re continuing to have the social, economic, and 

infrastructure problems that northern Saskatchewan has had to 

endure for the last 20, 30 years. 

 

You cannot answer that question, Mr. Speaker, because the fact 

of the matter is nobody ever had a plan. There never was a plan 

and there never will be a plan. But as I mentioned before, the 

northern Saskatchewan people have a plan — it’s called 

revenue sharing. 

 

Another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we done a freedom of 

information Act through the . . . for SaskPower information and 

we asked for three northern power plants, the hydro plants. And 

we asked the question: how much hydro . . . or how much 

electricity do the three northern plants generate for SaskPower? 

 

So we got the information back and I just want to share with 

you, first of all, in kilowatts, so the message gets through, and 

then we’ll go to . . . the Wellington Hydro Station, 37,900,000 

kilowatts; E.B. Campbell, 1,179,700,000 kilowatts; Island Falls 

Hydro Station, 688 million kilowatts. 

 

So these three northern stations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three 

northern stations, they generate 43 per cent of the total hydro 

requirements that SaskPower has in terms of their needs for 

power — 43 per cent. And that generates, Mr. Speaker, again, 

the $374.53 million from the northern hydro plants. Another  



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

significant contribution. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you look at the uranium mining industry — 

Cigar Lake, McArthur River, Key Lake — you look at the 

northern dams, you look at the forestry information, you look at 

the personal income tax, you look at all the taxes, all the 

royalties. And, Mr. Speaker, I still sit in this House for the last 

two and a half years and I hear the Minister of Northern Affairs 

get up and say, for every dollar we spend in northern 

Saskatchewan, we put a dollar sixty back in. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister and I’ve said on many 

occasions, we want that information. And then when we force 

them to give us the information, they could not. They could not 

justify statements. 

 

So I ask the Minister of Northern Affairs to stop insulting the 

intelligence of northern Saskatchewan people and start speaking 

facts. The North contributes a significant amount of money, a 

significant amount to the economy of the province, and it’s time 

that this Assembly recognizes that contribution. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the very important point that I 

want to make is that if we are going to speak up about northern 

Saskatchewan, it all becomes an issue of voicing the concerns. 

This is about economic and social justice of the people of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And what’s confusing to a lot of people is, would not a truly 

socialist government, a government that’s supposed to care for 

the people, that’s supposed to help the people, would not a truly 

socialist government not . . . give the people very little in return 

for what they’ve done? Would not a truly socialist government 

empower the people of the North and help defend what northern 

Saskatchewan needs? Well I believe that it should. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me great honour to stand here today on behalf 

of the constituents of Athabasca and say it’s time for this 

government to deliver. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — And, Mr. Speaker, we have gone through 

enormous challenge, enormous challenge as an individual, 

coming here as an MLA, enormous growth, and there are 

problems galore. But I want to say that from the day I walked 

into this Assembly to the day I leave, that the northern issues 

will continue to be heard. Whether the Minister of Northern 

Affairs or whether the government does not want to hear them, 

they will be heard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — And, Mr. Speaker, I watched with great 

interest on the way the government also divides the North. I’ve 

seen memorandums of understanding signed on numerous 

occasions. MOUs. Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe they start 

putting those MOUs away and start singing IOUs. 

 

And I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve got a 

number of points I want to make. And I want to also point out 

these news releases we have over a period of time. And it’s one 

press release that says “Goulet fails the North again on 

revenue-sharing issues.” And we’ve talked about a number of  

problems we’ve had in the North. And that was one press 

release that we had. 

 

Number two, “Lack of access to health care facilities putting 

Northerners at risk.” That was the second press release we 

talked about the northern issues. 

 

And even so far, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve supported the mining 

industry, where July 31 we issued a press release. “Belanger 

urges speedy approval of northern mining developments.” On 

the headline it says, “Athabasca MLA also calls on government 

to renew investment in people and communities of the North.” 

 

And then we have another news release, October 29, 

“Aboriginal study prompts need for immediate dialogue.” That 

wasn’t heard. 

 

And then we have another one on the McArthur River mine, 

“Government needs to use McArthur River mine as a 

springboard to future northern development.” That’s dated May 

5. 

 

And then we have another press release, May 16, 1997, “NDP 

government not making people a priority in the North.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, how many more press releases 

do we have to make and how many more statements does the 

northern people have to make till this government understands 

the bottom line is, you are not hearing northern Saskatchewan 

when they say we want revenue sharing as a solution to some of 

our problems. 

 

And I also want to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that fact that I had 

the opportunity to read an article in the Star-Phoenix. And in 

that article it indicated that, “revenue sharing no panacea for 

northern problems.” And the reason why they said it wasn’t the 

panacea for northern problems, or the answer to northern 

problems, it was because it was a finite resource. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the northern Saskatchewan people don’t 

need 50 years to settle some of their social and economic 

problems. They need 5 years or 10 years. And that’s the key 

message we’re trying to get through for the last 50 years, is give 

us that opportunity, that 5 or 10 years that we need, to begin to 

develop our own future. 

 

And I also want to share, Mr. Speaker, a few of the articles just 

for the information of the Assembly on some of the problems 

that we’ve had. Housing, for example, and I quote Cecile Caisse 

that says, quote, “There’s a real big need. There’s not enough 

housing for everybody.” That’s the Pinehouse mayor, Cecile 

Caisse. 

 

And then we also go talk about needs in Buffalo Narrows, 

Green Lake, Pinehouse, Duval, the far northern communities. 

We mustn’t forget those communities. And the most critical 

community of all, La Loche. And fortunately, Mr. Speaker, I 

quote from the same article. And this is . . . I’ll read it out: 

 

“Putting more houses in the northern community has to be 

. . . is a continuing priority for the province,” Styles says. 

 

And I believe that this is Deputy Minister Ron Styles with the  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

. . . associate deputy minister of the Municipal Government, in 

charge of housing. And the quote is: “The need is quite high; in 

almost all the communities the housing authorities have large 

waiting-lists,” Styles said, quote. In La Loche it’s over 100 

people. 

 

So an associate deputy minister of Municipal Government in 

charge of housing, admits housing needs are quite high. These 

housing needs have been high for the last 5 or 10 years. But I 

have a news flash; it’s not the waiting-list in La Loche for 100 

people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the list is 200 people. 

 

It’s 200 people that need homes for their families; that need 

jobs for the young people. That’s the one community. And I say 

that that community is the one community that has been for 

many years struggling with a sense of powerlessness in the 

things that they want to change but have no control, no 

resource, and no support to make that change. 

 

So when their mayor and their chief get up and say we want 

revenue sharing, we want a piece of that pie that the 

government benefits from, the people believe their local people. 

All of a sudden they begin to see that revenue sharing may be 

the fantasia, it may be the solution that we need over the next 

10 years to make things happen. 

 

Now I submit to everybody in this Assembly today, from the 

uranium mining industry, from the northern hydro stations, 

from the forestry, from the tourism, gas tax, personal tax, 

corporate tax — all those taxes — do you believe that 3 per cent 

of the provincial population consume all those dollars? No, we 

don’t. 

 

And further, if we can look at the situation that we’ve had with 

a number of areas of concern, which includes housing, as I 

mentioned, highways, economic challenge for the communities 

in terms of funding some of their economic agencies, 

infrastructure needs such as a facility for recreation in 

Pinehouse, decent strategies for our young people so they’re 

able to go to work, hospitals. La Loche is, after how many 

years, getting word they’re going to get a hospital in a couple of 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many more years must the northern people 

wait? How many more years must the northern people be 

ignored? And how many more years must our calls for revenue 

sharing be denied? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, going on. We talk about the native 

veterans. And I take an article here from the indigenous 

people’s article, in which Frank Tomkins of Saskatoon, 

Saskatchewan talks about: “Native veterans denied helping 

hand from Saskatchewan.” And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a 

lot of native veterans in the North that could have benefited 

from activities that Mr. Tomkins certainly wanted to propose 

here on behalf of the Metis veterans. 

 

And I point out, quote: 

 

I recently tried to have provincial departments of 

intergovernmental and aboriginal affairs and Northern 

Affairs provide our Metis veterans with financial 

assistance and a gift of useful telecommunication devices.  

Both of these things are necessary because we need all the 

resources we can in order to capture the attention of 

government. Unfortunately the two ministers responsible 

for those two departments that I can’t name here — two 

ministers known for their support of aboriginal people — 

failed to have their departments provide our associations 

with the funds necessary for a general meeting of Metis 

veterans in Prince Albert on September 2. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at that small request from Metis 

veterans and you point out another article from the 

Star-Phoenix in which we talk about the recent situation here in 

reference to the two rich uranium deposits in northern 

Saskatchewan, Cigar Lake and Midwest mines. And I quote 

from the second page, “Estimated revenues for the province 

from licensing and royalties from Cigar Lake are expected to 

reach $1.4 billion.” 

 

So again we’ll continue on, Mr. Speaker, of some of the 

challenges that we have — some of the discussion we’ve talked 

about. And when we say royalties, what we’re saying is we 

don’t want the whole pie coming to us. All we want you to do is 

to help us with our hospitals; to help us with our roads; to help 

us with housing; to help us with training for our young people 

so we can have a chance as well. 

 

(1545) 

 

So we can share in the revenues that northern Saskatchewan has 

for many years been pumping into the southern economy and 

the thousands of jobs created in communities like Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, Regina — the list goes on. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to one day hear this minister and 

this government say that northern Saskatchewan contributes to 

this economy a significant amount of money. I want to hear that 

from them one of these days as opposed to excuses and their 

total rejection of revenue sharing. 

 

I tell people in northern Saskatchewan that governments react to 

success. They do not initiate success. But they have told us, the 

northern people, for we have been successful for many years 

despite the fact that we’ve had all these challenges; we still 

have our eye on the ball. We still have . . . the fact that the 

matter is, we still have the vision needed for northern 

Saskatchewan, and it’s time that you start financing that vision 

appropriately by giving us our fair share. 

 

People in northern Saskatchewan talked about the definition of 

roles and responsibilities. We know that there’s discussion 

going on separately with FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations). We know that there may be discussions 

separately with the Metis Nation. There may be discussions 

separately with the northern municipal councils. 

 

Now in that separation, we’re going to urge all those 

organizations is that they have a northern focus. If they’re 

talking about northern revenue-sharing, why have separate 

discussions with all these groups when the whole intent is to not 

support the North? That’s the intent, not to support the North. 

That’s the intent, not to support the North. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you again, when you have all this  



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

dollars — and I say it 10 times — you have all these dollars 

coming in from the North, why can’t you put back a piece of 

that pie for their future? Why can’t this government deliver 

revenue sharing to the North? What’s the excuse? What’s the 

reason? 

 

And I don’t ever want to hear somebody say that for every 

dollar we take out of the North you put a $1.60 back in, because 

we know that is not true — that’s not true. They could not 

substantiate their figures. These new figures . . . And the fact of 

the matter, you look at what the provincial government gets 

from the federal government in northern Saskatchewan, we 

done an inquiry a couple of years ago, and we found out that all 

the dollars that Indian Affairs put in and the federal government 

— some of these northern projects — includes money into the 

Cumberland House bridge, money into some of the road 

construction into Grandmother’s Bay by the Indian Affairs 

department, and all the dollars that they put in, plus the federal 

government . . . If they want us to apologize for them, the 

federal government also gives this province $1.3 billion in 

social services and education and health care funding, block 

funding. 

 

So in essence, some of the social services, education, and health 

care needs of the North are also being, in a roundabout way, 

being met by the federal transfer to this province. 

 

So we can’t even say that some of the uranium mines are here 

for your support towards the social services system or towards 

your health care system, because this province gets money from 

the federal government for those purposes as well. Very 

important to clear that. 

 

And recognizing some of the strategies, Mr. Speaker, we had 

time and time again handed in petitions here about roads, 

housing, health care. We’ve handed petitions about the . . . and 

are planning on handing on more petitions about those same 

issues. 

 

But let’s look for a minute at Stony Rapids — no water and 

sewer — Stony Rapids. I spoke today about the TB rates in 

northern Saskatchewan and that they’re 100 per 100,000 in the 

North. And those figures we got from an article. But the fact of 

the matter is, the TB cases in the North are prevalent because of 

inaction on a number of fronts in a number of problems; an 

inaction in terms of housing needs, in terms of basic water and 

sewer services like I mentioned in Stony Rapids. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, totally lies squarely on provincial government 

responsibility. 

 

I think it would be very important as well that I add, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we have a number of letters that we forward to 

the minister last session. We asked this young man to go around 

and talk to 250-some elderly people that live in their own 

homes. We asked them what they paid for water, power, 

electricity, and so on and so forth. And they told us, for many 

years we can’t afford to fix up our own home; we’re older 

people. So upon which I sent those 250 questionnaires from five 

or six communities to the minister. I said, could you use some 

of those dollars that you would speak so highly about to help 

these 257 people within my constituency on housing problems? 

And I got a number of letters back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, saying 

that there was nothing done. We’re still waiting. 

So you don’t take my word for it. You take the press’s word for 

it. You take the northern people’s word for it. You take some of 

the panel’s words for it. You take some of the stats from your 

Finance department — take their word for it and see who is 

exactly hitting the nail on the head in this Assembly when it 

comes to revenue sharing. I propose to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that it’s the MLA from Athabasca hitting the nail on 

the head when it comes to revenue sharing. 

 

The other, in fact, that we talk about, Mr. Speaker, is when we 

talk about the mining sector. I want to say that I support the 

mining sector. I support the forestry sector. I support every 

sector in northern Saskatchewan, as many northern people do. 

They have done a tremendous amount of work. The northern 

mining sector have created a thousand jobs, of which I hear the 

minister expound on from time to time. So the mining sector 

should be given credit for the work that they have done. 

 

But the big problem that we have in that whole sense is, as long 

as we continue to simply focus our economic strategies and our 

economic energies on development of the uranium mining 

industry and the diamond mining industry and the gold mining 

industry, which is a finite resource, we are asking for problems 

20 to 30 years from now. 

 

The people of northern Saskatchewan want to use revenue 

sharing for social development, infrastructure development, and 

economic development. And that economic vision, Mr. 

Speaker, they are saying, we now want to expand the dollars to 

develop an economy in the North, an economy that we’re 

familiar with and an economy that where we can have 100 per 

cent of our people participate in that economy as opposed to the 

52 per cent that are currently employed in the mining sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s take for example the fishing industry. Many 

years ago the fishing industry was a very successful industry. 

Many people survived on fishing. And I think of people in 

northern Saskatchewan over the many years that have fished 

their entire lives, and now some of their students and some of 

their kids are going to university. Now the fishing industry is 

that . . . could be potentially a billion dollar industry if you put 

resources and efforts into that industry. 

 

And let’s take for example eco-tourism — another example. 

There’s a lot of land out there — 3 per cent of the provincial 

people, you should be able to take 3 per cent, connect it with 

half the land mass to equal great opportunity in eco-tourism. 

 

But is it happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It is not. Many of 

these communities continue suffering through 70, 80, 90 per 

cent of the unemployment rates. 

 

Now if you don’t take my word for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

phone some of the mayors, phone some of the chiefs, phone 

some of the people with housing problems, phone some of the 

people from Stony Rapids. Call these guys. Our office can 

provide you with all those numbers. Call them and talk to them. 

 

And the key thing here is that we have been saying this thing 

for time and time and time and time again. And you look at the 

situation with some of the northern communities. They have 

financial challenges time and time and time again. Because 

these northern mayors, these northern leaders of these northern  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

communities, they have not got the resources in which they 

could work with and which they could make a difference to 

their local people. Why? Because they get meagre amounts of 

money handed to them to operate their entire community with. 

 

And I say today that we should pay tribute, as we did Saturday, 

to the northern leaders that continually refuse to let go of that 

revenue-sharing argument. And they continually refuse to say 

yes, we’ll base all our economic aspirations on the mining 

sector. They absolutely refuse to continue to suffer through the 

indignation of poor roads, poor housing, and high TB rates, the 

lack of infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this does not come down to politics. This 

comes down, downright to humanity. And the bottom line is 

unless and until we begin to see the benefits and the discussion 

of revenue sharing being taken very seriously and within time 

frames that are spelled out and a definition of roles and 

responsibilities of an organization like the Metis Nation, like 

the FSIN and the communities and the mayors and the chiefs, 

then and only then can people begin to even take . . . believe 

they have an opportunity to change things. That’s the first step, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think the key thing that we’ve been pointing on is that the 

northern people do have the spirit. They do have the vision. 

They do have the imagination to improve their surroundings. 

And when they talk about social development, infrastructure 

development, community development, or economic 

development, they know what they’re talking about. They know 

exactly what they’re talking about. 

 

So this is the reason why we took it a step further, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We developed a model, and I hold this model in front 

of you as an idea that we worked on overnight. And this model 

is probably the first plan that this Assembly has ever heard 

when it comes to northern Saskatchewan — the first plan — 

and this is called the northern community development model. 

 

And let me expound on this a bit. The issue that I spoke about 

and I’m speaking about today is the need for economic, social, 

and infrastructure stimulation in northern Saskatchewan. And I 

highlight we can set an example for the rest of Canada with 

Saskatchewan being leaders when it comes to northern and 

aboriginal service. And I quote here when I’m done this thing, 

the key to a new development plan for northern Saskatchewan, 

I’m not talking about investing more money — I’m talking 

about reallocating existing dollars which includes revenue 

sharing. 

 

We have to look at a number of things at the community at the 

local level that we talk about. The current revenue sources for 

northern communities, for the government’s sake, there are 

three areas the local councils access. They get dollars from the 

revenue-sharing pool, they get dollars from local taxes, and they 

also get complimentary dollars for northern capital works 

programs. That’s it — those three sources of incomes plus 

services. 

 

Now what these communities try to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they try to do a wide range of things, responsibilities that are 

traditionally with the provincial government but they know 

they’ll be waiting for a long time before these things get done.  

So in the end what they do is they use all these revenues — 

these minor revenues — they get local councils in there. They 

have to look after staff. They have to look after maintenance. 

They have to look after water and sewer. They have to look 

after their garbage collection. They have to look after their 

general costs. And after all those costs are met, many of these 

communities have no dollars in which they can operate with. 

 

So once again we come hand in our pocket or hat out to Regina 

— as the member from Kindersley say we always do — and we 

say, can we have more dollars for our infrastructure needs? Can 

we have direct financing of our local economic development 

corporations so they can create training and jobs for us? Can we 

have direct financing for our social development agencies so 

they can help people that may need help in the social 

development aspect? And this is the problem that’s so apparent, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about the ignorance and the 

problem that many people over the years have afforded to 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

They have not listened. They have not accorded us the decent 

time of day for us to hear what we have to say. 

 

Another example we talk about and this is Garson Lake. Their 

mayor out there, who’s been working quite hard on trying to 

convince the government to build a road to his community, now 

this guy, he’s got a small community. There’s probably about 

maybe 10, 15 voters in there and he has travelled many miles to 

talk about the road to Garson Lake. 

 

And is he given a huge amount of money in which he can lobby 

with? Is he given a free airplane? Is he given a brand-new 

department which he can work with? 

 

The answer of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is no. He has not 

been given anything except the meagre amount of municipal 

funding that that small community of Garson Lake has been 

given by this current government. 

 

Northern communities cannot continue to afford to wait. We 

talk about economic development, we talk about social 

development, we talk about infrastructure development, and we 

have seen hide nor hair of any evidence that would suggest that 

this government’s finally waking up to hear what the northern 

Saskatchewan people have said. 

 

And I’m going to repeat myself time and time again here. So 

they’re able to hear finally what needs to be said in this 

Assembly. And we talk about the taxes that the North pays. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I quote here again, 

 

In 1988, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council of northern 

Saskatchewan got help from the federal government to buy 

40 per cent share in a struggling pulp mill, NorSask Forest 

Products, and update the mill’s equipment. Help from the 

provincial government produced a tree farm licence. 

 

A licence came from them. 

 

Then the LPC then launched a new business to do  



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

reforestation, logging, and road construction. MLPC 

businesses have since paid $11 million in taxes and saved 

$10 million in social assistance costs by employing 240 

people who would have otherwise been jobless. 

 

And that statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes from the 

report, People to People, Nation to Nation, a highlight from the 

report of the royal commission of aboriginal people, 1996, page 

38. Now that’s proof in the pudding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the fact that if you give the aboriginal people an 

opportunity to participate then they will deliver. And there’s 

benefits totalling $21 million from one joint venture from one 

Indian band. 

 

So I submit to you, imagine for a moment that we took it upon 

ourselves to afford that same opportunity to the northern Metis 

communities, to the northern band councils, and to the northern 

people in general. 

 

What if you give them the opportunity to produce their own 

wealth? How about if you give them the opportunity to produce 

their own economy by affording them the means and royalties 

from northern Saskatchewan to design their own future? I 

submit to you that many northern leaders and many northern 

people have more vision for northern Saskatchewan in their 

little finger than the entire room here has collectively. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Now what we propose here in terms of a 

northern development Act, Mr. Speaker, is that fact that we 

believe that northern development Act should be established. 

And that the northern development fund be direct financing of 

local councils in the area of local economic development 

authorities, social development agencies, and infrastructure 

needs. 

 

If you give the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, the community of 

Buffalo Narrows an opportunity to develop, they will deliver. 

And I believe that’s what this government is afraid of — is the 

fact that the northern people will finally stand up and say, that’s 

it, no more, we’ve waited long enough, we’re going to do it our 

way with our resources. 

 

And that’s why today we propose this motion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We’ve talked about this. We’ve talked about this 

motion time and time again. And in the future, the people of the 

North will be the judge, will be the judge of what this 

government does — not our caucus, not me as the MLA. We 

will be watching what it does from here on in. 

 

And I talked to a number of other northern leaders, some of the 

people that work with the current government and northern 

aboriginal people. Some of the people that work for the mining 

companies and the Indian bands and all these northern people 

that work for other people in southern Saskatchewan, I submit 

to all these people — these aboriginal people that are using their 

talents, their dedication, their drive, and their intelligence for 

other purposes — is come back to northern Saskatchewan and 

help us develop a bright, brand-new future for northern 

Saskatchewan. Not for me, but for our children and the children 

after that. 

And that’s the bottom line, is many times northern aboriginal 

people commit to processes that take them away from the 

North. And in the end, who suffers? The northern people. So 

whatever capacity that these people currently hold within 

government and within industry and anywhere out of northern 

Saskatchewan, use your time, your resources, and your 

intelligence to help northern Saskatchewan people develop that 

better future. 

 

Now in closing, Mr. Speaker, if I have to go through the . . . if I 

have to go through where the sources are . . . the revenues could 

come from, again, northern resource extraction — uranium, 

forestry, tourism, hydro. There’s also perhaps federal 

initiatives: sale or lease of Crown land in northern 

Saskatchewan; reallocation of provincial programs to where 

they should be allocated to northern Saskatchewan, if it’s in 

economic development, tourism, or agriculture; establish a 

brand-new northern development fund. In terms of all these 

development dollars in the North, they’re there, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s no question about it in my mind, they’re certainly there. 

 

I guess the key thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk in 

closing, as I mention, is the northern people also want 

accountability. They say any new development strategy, any 

community development strategy must highlight the need for 

accountability and decent principles. 

 

We say that large extent, operating traditional government 

agencies in northern Saskatchewan on behalf of communities 

without accountability, will not be acceptable. That’s the 

message that we are presenting today on behalf of the northern 

people, and that this is not a matter of trust, it’s a matter of 

business. They understand that better. Accountability and the 

delivery of any services on our behalf will be first and foremost 

on the minds of all people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So eventually the bottom line or lesson this current government 

is a word that they’ve never heard before — empowerment. The 

overall mandate about revenue sharing, the proposed northern 

development Act is to cultivate local industries that will 

maximize profits, decision-making, and employment to the 

local people. It will let the northern people priority-setting goals 

include their basic needs of housing, health care, jobs, training, 

and decent roads. 

 

And we, as a northern representative . . . myself, as a northern 

representative, will continue to expound on that regardless of 

what the situation is. We will continue to expound on that. 

 

And to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my closing remarks, is that 

I will share with the minister what we have, a report, and the 

source is The Canadian Fact Book on Poverty, 1989, Ottawa. 

And page 40 of the Barriers to Social Health, we have a figure 

4.4. And the title is: percentage of the population for Canada, 

1986. 

 

And it goes coast to coast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this map. It 

talks about different levels of poverty, with the light being not 

so bad in terms of the overall poverty, with grey being fairly 

decent, and with black being the most depressed social and 

poverty-stricken area in the whole country. And as I pan from 

coast to coast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see that northern 

Saskatchewan, the whole portion of northern Saskatchewan, is  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

the biggest and the blackest mark in this country. 

 

And I want to get a copy of this for the minister, to explain this 

to the people in Pinehouse who may need some decent housing, 

to the people in Stony Rapids who want water and sewer, to the 

people of La Loche that want housing. Why is it that we 

continue to be in the deep, dark, black hole of depression? It’s 

because we have been denied revenue sharing; we have been 

denied the opportunity to develop our own future. And we’ve 

been denied, largely, respect. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

can no longer continue. 

 

I say to you that today we are going to call for a standing vote 

and I wish to see how the members opposite vote. And we will 

be using the information to our benefit, most certainly, and we 

will be letting people know exactly what a socially 

compassionate party is supposed to do. 

 

And I also want to point out this last bit of information on the 

housing situation. There’s a number of working people in 

northern Saskatchewan that cannot afford to continue living in 

government housing and they’ve asked that the current 

government . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Pursuant 

to special order, the time for debate on this motion has elapsed 

and I will ask the member to put his motion directly. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Moved by 

myself, and seconded by the member from North Battleford, I 

move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 

establish a comprehensive community development 

program to improve the life of people in northern 

Saskatchewan; particularly that measures be taken to 

rebuild the dilapidated hospitals in northern communities, 

to build basic infrastructures such as adequate housing, 

roads, water and sewer installations, recreational facilities; 

that initiatives be undertaken to provide training and 

employment opportunities for people in northern 

Saskatchewan; and further, that measures be undertaken to 

provide true empowerment for people in northern 

Saskatchewan, beginning with a genuine policy of fair and 

reasonable revenue sharing from provincially controlled 

resources such as forestry and mines. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . According to special order, this is 

your timed debates and the time has elapsed for debate on the 

motion; therefore it’s out of order. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:12 p.m. until 4:16 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

Osika Hillson McPherson 

Aldridge Belanger McLane 

Julé Goohsen  

 

Nays — 27 

 

Van Mulligen Tchorzewski Johnson 

Whitmore Goulet Lautermilch 

Kowalsky Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Renaud Lorje 

Scott Nilson Serby 

Stanger Sonntag Wall 

Kasperski Jess Murrell 

Thomson Bjornerud Toth 

Boyd Draude Heppner 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 

Business Investment Promotion 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I am very pleased today to be able to stand and address 

the many problems with over-regulations, red tape, and 

excessive taxations — policies of the NDP that have long been 

a thorn in the side of all Saskatchewan residents. But 

particularly today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to address those 

frustrations on behalf of the entrepreneurial spirits wishing to 

start their own business and engage in diversification and value 

added activity directly into the bison industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been a number of bison 

producers, particularly the more than 100 producers in the 

north-central area of the province, that have come to me, 

making me aware of the many problems and regulations 

standing in their way. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Now I cannot hear the 

speaker and I’m sure that everyone would want to get in on a 

debate, but you’ll have to wait till she’s done. So would you 

please let her have her say first. 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I was referring to the numbers of bison producers 

within the province, particularly in the north-central part of the 

province, who have contacted me with their frustrations 

regarding their ability to make a profit, and not only that, but to 

enable their business to work in an efficient and effective 

manner. And they’re having difficulty doing this because of the 

excessive regulations in the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we all know, many farmers have 

diversified in many ways. And many others wish to continue to 

diversify their agricultural operations. However, the bison 

producers, as well as many others, are finding that the costs 

associated with value added production is greater in 

Saskatchewan than it is in our neighbouring provinces, and they 

act as a major deterrent to growth in this, our home province. 

 

The fact that it costs an average family of four $5,000 more to 

live in Saskatchewan than a family of four in Alberta is a telling 

tale and highlights the high cost of living in this province. 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one can imagine that the costs 

associated with value added farm production such as bison 

ranching adds a great deal of extra financial burden to the 

producers. Because needed is a larger land base, and more 

utilities and more taxes are paid. And it seems that these costs 

are enough, without the inconvenience and high costs of having 

yet to transport bison to be slaughtered, processed and 

marketed, to places outside of the province, such as to New 

Rockford in North Dakota, to Edmonton and to Fort Macleod in 

Alberta. 

 

However, this is the only auction that larger producers have 

because excessive regulations in this province, red tape and 

excessive taxation, have deterred companies from setting up 

slaughtering and processing plants in Saskatchewan. 

Regulations connected to workmen’s compensation and 

occupational health and safety, while they are generally good, 

are very much more strict and costly to implement here. 

 

In addition, the unfair inclusion of bison into the classification 

of wildlife rather than the classification of being domestic 

animals means that bison fall under the very strict and 

cumbersome regulations of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 

and Resource Management) that affect wild animal transport, 

killing, processing, disease control, storage, handling, and 

inspection. 

 

Now if classified as domestic animals, bison would be handled 

as cattle under the Department of Agriculture, with much less 

red tape, easier movement and handling, and handling of 

packing plants. If this reclassification would take place 

provincially, then it should follow through that a reclassification 

at the federal level under the Health of Animals Act would also 

take place. 

 

While dealing with animals right now classified as wild 

compared to domestic, the federal Health of Animals Act 

contains much more red tape again and has higher associated 

costs regarding rules of quarantine, transport to other countries, 

and disease control. And so this provincial reclassification 

would simplify things and benefit the bison producers greatly in 

their efforts at this value added industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also need inter-provincial 

standardization of these Acts and regulations. The Labour 

Standards Act and The Trade Union Act also fall into this 

category. And while they can be argued to be beneficial, the 

fact is that they are not standardized with Manitoba and Alberta, 

and the fact is that our regulations under this NDP government 

are more costly to business. Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

these facts make our province uncompetitive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, presently a new-generation cooperative from New 

Rockford in North Dakota is showing some interest in setting 

up slaughtering and processing plants somewhere in the West 

and they are looking at Saskatoon. However those in the bison 

industry question whether or not they will be seriously 

considered, or Saskatoon will be considered seriously for this 

plant’s set-up, because they realize that once the cooperative 

looks at the many deterrents to investors here in this province 

under the present NDP administration, they may turn away 

from the province. 

And these bison producers have reason to be doubtful again, as 

not long ago, the Koreans were thinking of setting up a drying 

plant for elk horns in Saskatchewan. However once they did 

their research, they determined there were too many regulations 

and taxes. Saskatchewan did not produce a climate for growth 

or a fair and profitable environment for investors. And so they 

turned their sights to other provinces as an option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month we heard about the announcement that 

Maple Leaf packers was taking their business to Brandon, 

Manitoba. Why did Saskatchewan miss out on this opportunity? 

Well for the same reason — too many regulations, high 

taxation, too much red tape. And Maple Leaf furthermore did 

not want to compete with the existing government-backed 

packers in the province. 

 

And what did Saskatchewan lose? Well it lost 1,200 jobs. It lost 

millions of dollars in investments, and more than likely the hog 

industry in Saskatchewan will grow only in areas closest to the 

Manitoba border. Mr. Speaker, it is time to fix what needs to be 

fixed in this province in order to promote growth, to foster 

wealth and prosperity. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, rather, the NDP must 

commit itself to establishing a level playing-field for all 

agriculture producers and all kinds of businesses, including any 

value added business. In addition, political patronage and every 

form of government interference in business must come to an 

end. Government funding to preferred businesses through 

SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) and the likes, 

favouring a few to the detriment of the many, are contrary to 

fair-minded practices and policies that the people of this 

province are asking for. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am asking this government 

today to recognize the need for change and to make change to 

its excessive and prohibitive taxations and regulations, and to 

stop patronizing their friends. All businesses deserve to flourish 

in a fair and equitable manner in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore put forward the following motion, 

seconded by the member from Athabasca: 

 

That the Assembly urge the provincial government to 

create an environment conducive to growth that enables 

private investment in the agriculture value-added industry 

to benefit through cost savings and convenience in their 

transactions, and that the provincial government facilitate 

this environment through the lifting of excessive 

regulations, taxation, and interference in business which 

presently deters such investment. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to address the member’s concerns today in the 

motion that she has brought forward. 

 

I found it . . . I must admit I was a little taken back. I expected 

the discussion being presented by the member to be slightly 

broader than what was in fact presented. I am not completely up 

to speed in terms of what is happening with the bison and 

buffalo industry, and in fact I felt a little bit buffaloed by the  



December 18, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

entire speech the member gave today. 

 

(1630) 

 

But I do want to say a little bit on the general approach this 

government has . . . what the government has been doing to 

improve the business environment in this province. And I think 

it’s significant. I think in fact there have been very many 

positive things that in fact the member herself I’m sure would 

recognize. 

 

This government, as we know, was faced with some very 

difficult choices in 1991 when it was elected. It has gone 

through a very remarkable turnaround. I think we’ve seen the 

very, very positive business environment come out of it as a 

result. There is no greater proof of that than the fact that today 

we are able to say that there are 22,000 new jobs created over 

the same time a year ago. That’s not simply something 

government does. Government didn’t create these 22,000 jobs, 

but it set an environment, it set forward a climate that allowed 

business to do so. And I think that that’s very important and 

worthwhile noting. 

 

That environment contains a bunch of different pieces. It 

contains a tax piece that saw the sales tax decline from 9 to 7 

per cent. It has seen changes in terms of targeted tax relief for 

businesses to allow them to grow. It has seen changes in terms 

of the way we have dealt with labour-force training, which I 

know is important to the member for Humboldt. These are the 

sort of changes we need to continue to work on as a 

government. 

 

It is our economic development strategy, our business climate 

strategy; our strategy for growth is larger than simply buffalo. 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it also will provide room 

for people who want to raise game farm animals to see growth 

as well. I know that there’s a lot of debate out there in the 

community today about how we should approach that, whether 

it’s elk farming, whether it is buffalo, whether we simply 

proceed on with cattle. But we understand there has got to be an 

opportunity for people to find those sort of new niche markets, 

to be able to develop and to grow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am reminded that there are in fact many things 

and many positives in all parts of the province. Perhaps no more 

. . . more so specifically than with value added for agriculture. 

And we’ve seen some great, great things. The agri-food equity 

fund, I think is a very positive initiative this government has 

introduced to help the agricultural sector grow. 

 

I think we have been able to see a lot of growth in the area of 

farm manufacturing, farm implement manufacturing, 

particularly in the area . . . I see the member for Kelvington 

talking from her seat. I’m sure she’ll want to jump in this debate 

as well because she has seen the growth in her community. In 

her local community she has seen the growth from the sort of 

climate and the sort of investment climate that we’ve been able 

to set on this side of the House through this government’s 

policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is one of those issues where we should 

be able to . . . to sit back and say, are there changes that need to 

be made? Certainly. Are there minor pieces we need to look at?  

Certainly. Is this government headed in the right direction? 

Absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to prolong the debate today and I 

don’t think there is much need. I appreciate the opportunity 

from the member for Humboldt to be able to speak today. I 

would note that it was certainly a courtesy on her part and I 

want to recognize that, because other members, I think, 

shamefully and unfortunately have monopolized the time in this 

Assembly and have not allowed opposition voices to their 

motions to be heard. 

 

I am certainly reminded that the Liberals have not given us a 

single opportunity in these days to put forward the 

government’s position. Lots of rhetoric, lots of strong words, 

but no opportunity for government members to speak. And in 

that regard, I want to say that I certainly appreciate that from 

the member today the opportunity for us to put forward our 

case. I think that that shows a certain honour that other 

members in this House have certainly been lacking and have 

not shown. 

 

Let me move . . . but let me move an amendment to this. I know 

that the member will likely support me on this. I would move, 

seconded by the member for Lloydminster: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the words “to 

continue” after the words “That the Assembly urge the 

provincial government”, and further, by deleting all the 

words after the words “facilitate this environment 

through”, and substituting with the words “continuing to 

examine regulations and taxation levels”. 

 

Moved by myself, seconded by the member for Lloydminster. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I find the amendment in order, and debate 

will continue on the amendment and the motion. 

 

Ms. Stanger: — Since I seconded the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll only take a minute so the member’s seconder can 

have a few words also. I just want to say that I have been 

involved with many game farmers in my area and we have been 

working very hard to decrease some of the regulations. We have 

been working cautiously. The government has set up the 

technical advisory committee which includes members from all 

types of game farming across the province. 

 

Progress has been slow but steady. We believe in the game 

farming industry in our government. People like the Minister of 

Agriculture have been trying to move to get game farming 

under the purview of Agriculture. There are many aspects that 

you have to negotiate because a lot of the regulations were 

under the Department of Natural Resources, SERM, and we are 

moving in this area. 

 

I thank the member for bringing this up because I think that this 

is an area where there’s going to be great growth. It’s a great 

value added area. And I think that working together we’re going 

to . . . in fact right now, we are exceeding the industry in 

Alberta and Manitoba because we have worked with our game 

farmers and because we are decreasing some of the unnecessary  



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1997 

regulations. 

 

And I think if the member would like some information, I 

certainly could get her some in this area and certainly would be 

glad to work with her because I have many game farmers in my 

area. 

 

So I’ll just sit down and let the other members speak, but I just 

wanted the member to know that this is an area that I’m really 

interested in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been really 

interesting to listen to the debate going back and forth for a 

change as we’re sort of used to in normal sittings. And I want to 

say that it makes some sense what the government members 

have said, and it makes some sense that they would want to put 

in an amendment that would give them the opportunity to be 

able to support a cause like this. 

 

I think it is apparent in their remarks that they intend to try to 

move in this direction and I think that the bison producers and 

all people involved in wild game farming — that should not be 

called wild game farming anymore, but should be called 

domestic farming like anything else — I think those points are 

well made. 

 

It’ll take a little time. I’m going to encourage the member from 

Humboldt to support the amendment. I’m going to, more 

pointedly, ask that all of the members support both the 

amendment and the amended motion so that we can get on with 

the business of helping our people to expand and diversify in 

this province and get out and make some money doing their 

jobs and provide the jobs for other people. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:39 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2027 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2027 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2027 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2028 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Ridgedale Resident Marks 100th Birthday 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2028 

 Praise for Saskatchewan Health Care 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2028 

 Plains Health Centre 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2028 

 Child Care Centre Improvements 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

 Welcome to Saskatchewan Youth Parliament Participants 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

 Green Program Saves $400,000 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

 Channel Lake Petroleum 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

 Surgery Waiting-lists 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2029 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Teacher Contract Negotiations 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2030 

 Incorporation of Doctors 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2031 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2031 

 Local Telephone Rates 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2031 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2031 

 Rural Doctor Shortage 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2032 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2032 

 Tuberculosis Rates 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2033 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

 University of Saskatchewan Capital Funding 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2033 

 Grain Transportation 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2034 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 240  The Recall of Members Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2034 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

MOTION — OPPOSITION 

 Transportation Policies 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2035 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2037 



 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2042 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

MOTION — THIRD PARTY 

 Northern Community Development 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2044 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 2051 

MOTION — INDEPENDENT MEMBER 

 Business Investment Promotion 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2051 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2052 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2053 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2054 

 

 


