



















































Hansard: April 14, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 831 

 April 14, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. To my right I’d like to introduce Ray Clayton, the 

deputy minister of Energy and Mines; to my left, Dan 

McFadyen. Dan is the assistant deputy minister responsible for 

resource policy and economics. And behind me, immediately 

behind me, is Donald Koop, the assistant deputy minister of 

finance and administration, and to his right is Bruce Wilson, 

executive director for petroleum and natural gas, and that’s it. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 

evening to the minister and also the officials of Energy and 

Mines. Just for the sake of a few students that may be listening 

this evening, Mr. Minister, would you be able to give us a brief 

background on your portfolio and what your department’s all 

about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t 

changed basically and fundamentally for many years. The 

Department of Energy and Mines is a department that has been 

in existence in Saskatchewan now for decades. And basically 

the role of the department is to put in place a regulatory regime, 

a taxation regime, to facilitate economic development through 

the resource industry in our province, working with industry 

and working with governments. 

 

I can say and would make some comments with respect to the 

department. It’s been one of the arms of government that has 

been very stable in Saskatchewan. We have a number of very 

long-term and dedicated employees of the people of this 

province. And I think they serve the province very well as is 

evidenced by the amount of investment that we’ve seen in the 

oil and gas sector and in the mineral sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s really a fairly condensed overview of what they do, 

but I think the bottom line, I would say to the member, is that 

the department attempts to facilitate job and job opportunities, 

revenues, so that we can support our school and our health care 

system and our highways system and other elements. It’s one of 

the largest generators of revenue in Saskatchewan, and I think I 

can safely say my time spent with the department has given me 

very good insight into the work that the people within the 

department do and have done over the past years. It’s a small 

department, it runs very efficiently, and it’s, I think an element 

in and an arm of government that we can all be very pleased 

with. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I got word that we 

may have a student . . . bunch of students watching the 

proceedings of this debate this evening, so please don’t mind if 

we ask questions for the sake of them as well, just to try and 

simplify processes and answers here. 

 

But in terms of the general purpose of Energy and Mines, what 

are some of the . . . like obviously, Energy and Mines, you look 

after SaskEnergy, you look after some of the oil wells being 

drilled. Is there any other specific areas in terms of what your 

department’s responsible for — is it responsible for coals or 

natural gas, all the oil, and so on and so forth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I say to the member and to the 

students . . . and I want to welcome them here tonight. I hope 

they find this evening interesting as other members of the 

general public will. 

 

Basically, the department is in charge of non-renewable 

resources and that includes oil and gas; it includes uranium, 

potash, coal, gold, diamonds — all of those types of resources 

that we will and are entrusted to be stewards of as members of 

this legislature and the department reporting to us through my 

office. And so the role and the responsibility over the long term 

is to ensure that we maximize the potential of the development 

of those things for the people of Saskatchewan, in particular for 

the young people. 

 

I think sometimes I would want to say it’s easy and very 

expedient, I guess, to put in place a regime that maybe takes a 

short-term view of the province. And sometimes we’re tempted 

to create many, many jobs in the short term without looking to 

the future and without remembering that we in fact are only 

here as caretakers of the resource that really does belong to the 

young people of Saskatchewan — our children and their 

children. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. So just to quickly summarize, 

and correct me if I’m wrong, you’re looking at . . . through the 

areas of coal, natural gas, oil, potash, uranium, and that’s it in 

terms of your departmental responsibilities. And some of the 

revenues that you get in each year, is it fair to say it’s $752 

million per year? Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes. To the member opposite, that 

is the number that we have budgeted in the ’97-98 forecast. It’s 

752.7 million. Hopefully, if things work right, we can even 

surpass the amount that we’ve estimated in our estimates. 

 

We attempt to take a very realistic but a conservative approach 

to our budgets and to our budget figures. And I think the 

member, having followed the Energy and Mines estimates over 

the past number of years, will know that we are reasonably 

accurate but sometimes we get a little good fortune in that oil 

prices are maybe higher than what we predict and what the 

market can anticipate. 

 

We have certainly a lot of fluctuation in terms of potash prices. 

It’s a market-driven commodity — the price is — uranium as 

well. So in good years we fair very well. We think this is a very 

realistic figure for the year ’97-98 and certainly it’s a fair   



832  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

amount of money. If I would put it in the context just for the 

young people in the Chamber tonight, the amount that we spent 

on health care as an example is about $1.5 billion. So this 

amounts to around half of what we spent in health care just on 

this particular revenue initiative alone. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 

on behalf of my colleague, the member for Regina Coronation 

Park, I am pleased to stand to introduce to you 7 members of 

the 81st Scouts of Regina who are seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery here tonight, who are here on a legislative tour and to 

watch proceedings. They are accompanied by their leader, Andy 

Vanderveer, and on behalf of all of us present this evening, I’d 

like to extend a welcome, and especially again on behalf of my 

colleague, the member for Regina Coronation Park. Welcome 

to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. One of the questions I have in 

reference to some of the estimates that we speak about in terms 

of the oil, we have 1996-97 estimate of $687.2 million and for 

’97-98 it’s 523 million. That’s almost $150 million difference. 

Could you explain that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The projections this year are I 

guess two-fold. We’re expecting lower, and projecting lower, 

land sales and we’re also projecting the price of crude oil to be 

a little bit lower than what it was last year. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of my 

questions are going to be based on northern Saskatchewan as a 

whole in terms of some of the natural gas, and some of the 

exploration, some of the uranium mining that’s happening 

throughout northern Saskatchewan. But in reference to natural 

gas and all the exploration for oil and gas in northern 

Saskatchewan, are you able to give me a brief summary of the 

companies that currently have leases in the North and where 

these companies are from and what areas they’re exploring, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I will share with the member 

opposite the main players in the area that you refer to are 

Crestar, Canadian Occidental, Wascana Energy, and Grad & 

Walker. The one corporate headquarter is here in Saskatchewan, 

that being Wascana Energy. The others are corporately 

headquartered in Calgary, I believe they all are. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  How many of these companies are actively 

drilling for oil around the Dillon area — Dillon, St. George’s 

Hill area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I think the area that you refer 

to would probably be north of the Primrose Air Weapons 

Range. And the two people that have opened up in there are 

Canadian Occidental, that I’ve referred to a little bit early, and 

Crestar. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  When a oil company wishes to go and drill, 

or explore for natural gas or oil or whatever, what’s the 

process? Do they approach your department first or do they 

approach SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management) or is there a joint meeting with both departments? 

How is that generally worked? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member, in terms of that 

area, because of the nature of the topography and the area that 

you’re referring to, the process includes first of all the purchase 

of mineral rights through the Department of Energy and Mines, 

which gives them the opportunity to go in and explore. But 

more than that, they have to attain surface access and that is 

done through the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management. 

 

So it’s not only one department that they have to work with. 

They have to work with the two elements, both the regulatory 

— the development side — Energy and Mines, and the 

environmental side through SERM. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in essence to begin to explore for natural 

gas what they have to do is they got to go to you guys and ask 

for a lease to search, and also surface access by SERM. And 

then once SERM and Energy and Mines says okay, you guys 

have permission, then they find that there is oil or they find 

there isn’t, what’s the process following your initial approval? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the process I guess there 

would be really quite straightforward. Once they’ve attained 

approval, both environmental and through the Department of 

Energy and Mines, they would do their drilling activity and 

hopefully they would be fortunate enough to find some of that 

resource to a degree that would make it viable to transport to 

markets, which would then give the people of Saskatchewan, 

through the royalties and the taxation, the ability to generate 

revenue and the companies themselves for their shareholders. 

 

(1915) 

 

And I guess I would want to say it really does come full circle 

because what does happen for . . . and I understand and I 

appreciate your note with respect to the students in La Loche 

watching tonight, because that’s really how we deliver the 

programs to northern Saskatchewan and other parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

Our role is to collect revenue from this resource. It comes to the 

Consolidated Fund which is our general pool. It’s sort of 

government’s piggy bank, I guess you could say. And that 

money comes into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

And then once a year we go through a process that we call 

budget, and we allocate a certain amount of money for health 

care and a certain amount for education. We will allocate a 

certain amount of . . . actually in fact special funds for speaking 

to northern Saskatchewan for job opportunities for residents of 

northern Saskatchewan. Some of it goes to highway 

construction in the North, and those are the kinds . . . that’s sort 

of how the money finds its way back into northern communities 

and other communities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So really I guess what I’m saying is it really is important — the 

work that happens in the non-renewable resource sector. 

Because in no small way funds, much of what we do — I think 

the figure this year is somewhere around 13 per cent of 

provincial revenue — comes from non-renewable resources. 

And so it is really an important element of what it takes to keep 

our programs funded and keep our schools open and keep our 

highways repaired. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. So I guess in essence a lot of the 

resources of northern Saskatchewan, be it uranium, forestry, 

natural gas — they all contribute to the economy of the 

province. And certainly northern Saskatchewan is doing their 

fair share in supporting the province as a whole. 

 

I think the other aspect, questions and reference to the Dillon 

area where there is a lot of natural gas being, I shouldn’t say 

expected, but there’s a lot of activity in that general area and the 

assumption that there is natural gas there. Obviously a lot of the 

companies will not spend a lot of money exploring for, you 

know, a mineral or a gas that’s not there. So we can assume that 

a lot of their research and their information suggests a lot of 

natural gas there. 

 

Have you got any information to that effect, as to what kind of 

reservoirs they have in terms of the natural gas or what they’re 

anticipating in terms of gallons or litres, or whatever the case is 

in terms of their projections to you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can say to the member that what 

we do know of the exploration activities that have taken place 

in that area thus far have been somewhat disappointing, I’m 

told. But that doesn’t mean that exploration won’t continue. 

There is I guess some speculation, given the nature of the 

geology in that area, that there still is an opportunity to find 

some viable natural gas resource. But I can say at this point, the 

companies have expressed some disappointment in that they 

were much more optimistic a while back than they are now. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I think several years ago there was . . . I’m 

not sure what report but I’ve heard through the grapevine that 

there was a report that indicated, why does Alberta have such an 

abundance of natural gas, and Saskatchewan and neighbouring 

communities in Saskatchewan — Dillon being one of them — 

there’s no gas in that area. It just doesn’t make sense. 

And I’m told that at one time the reason why Saskatchewan 

hasn’t had a boom in natural gas and Alberta has, is simply for 

the fact that the top soil, or the top part of the earth’s crust, is 

much shallower in Alberta than it is in Saskatchewan. Would 

that be attributed to some of the oil companies’ initial happiness 

that there was something there, to their disappointment in 

finding there wasn’t? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess just to comment on the 

depth of the resource on the Saskatchewan side. I’m told by my 

officials that in fact they are shallower than Alberta, but it just 

hasn’t panned out. That sort of . . . That’s the nature of the oil 

and gas industry, as I understand it. There is a lot of money to 

develop; no one knows for sure with a 100 per cent certainty 

what is going to be found after seismic studies are done, and 

test holes may be drilled. No one knows for sure what is going 

to be found. And I guess it’s a bit of a poker game. It’s a very 

high risk industry and a high risk operation. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Just in reference to some of the 

exploration of natural gas in the Dillon, St. George’s Hill area, 

was there any consultation done with the Indian band being 

near the place as well as the smaller communities, St. George’s 

Hill, Michel village, Dillon? Those are the areas that are 

immediate adjacent to some of the exploration areas. Was there 

any consultation, first of all, with the treaty Indian bands; 

secondly, with the co-managing boards; and third, with the 

municipal governments within that immediate area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that there have been some 

discussions with respect to creating work opportunities for 

people in that area in terms of doing seismic and things of that 

nature, clearing bush for allowing the seismic to take place. I’m 

told as well that there have been and are some discussions with 

first nations in that area. 

 

But I think with respect to co-management and the operations 

of co-management, those questions would probably be better 

answered by the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management because, as you will know, that’s basically the 

arm that is working to facilitate co-management agreements. 

 

And we certainly encourage, I will say to the member, 

cooperation from the developing corporations with people, local 

people, whether it be first nations in the northern part of the 

province or whether it be landowners in the southern part of the 

provinces who are also impacted when that kind of activity 

takes place. 

 

So we encourage operators — oil companies, gas companies — 

to do due diligence, get to know the people in those areas, work 

with them in a cooperative fashion because ultimately that’s 

what’ll make for success in terms of their initiatives and in 

terms of developing the industry in the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I think the important thing when 

it comes to natural gas and the protection of the environment 

and what not, a lot of northern people are concerned, and when 

the time comes and permits, we certainly will bring the 

concerns to the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management. 

  



834  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

However in the meantime, Mr. Minister, I think it’s very 

important, being the minister responsible for Energy and Mines, 

that when you do have exploration, as you’re probably aware, 

the initial excitement that the communities felt in terms of 

having oil companies in their backyard so to speak, drilling for 

natural gas, and there’s optimism in the air, and there’s 

excitement, and yet they haven’t been approached by anybody 

to explain to them as community members what’s going on in 

their own backyard. 

 

So I think in the future that it should not be just an 

encouragement, that your department insists that the companies 

that are exploring do go and see these communities. I think it 

should be a policy. Is there any chance of you instituting a 

policy in which they have to have consultation with the 

communities of the impacted area, not a long-drawn-out hearing 

and certainly not a long EIS (environmental impact study) — 

simple courtesy call, a discussion, and to keep the lines of 

communication open? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess I will want to agree 

with the member because I think that kind of consultation and 

that kind of involvement of local communities will do much to 

facilitate a positive working relationship within communities. 

And certainly we attempt to coordinate with Environment and 

Resource Management and they consult with us as we consult 

with them on initiatives. And I would want to say that the 

member’s point is certainly well taken. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Is there any clear date as to when 

the companies that are drilling for natural gas, if it is natural 

gas, in which your department has to find out if there is 

anything down there? Is there a six-month, one-year, 

one-and-a-half-year permit that’s given out? When do these 

companies have to come to you and say we’re now prepared to 

go to phase 2? Because I think that it’s important that the 

communities be made fully aware of the schedule and the time 

lines of that industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The length of the term in which 

they can explore is three years. I am told by the officials that 

when they drill and when they’re involved in some activity, the 

department has to be informed within 30 days. So quite clearly 

it’s a monitoring process, as I indicated early, that the 

department is responsible for. And so the regulations and the 

guidelines are there to ensure that that happens. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess the second part of the question is, 

how soon is the public actually advised that there is a 

significant find and that there is indeed some oil or gas down 

there and that they can expect to participate in the process either 

as employees or trainees or partners? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We as a general course don’t do 

announcements in terms of the discovery of natural gas or 

discovery of oil. That is pretty much the responsibility of the 

individual company. And I know I get across my desk on many 

occasions press releases from individual oil or gas companies 

announcing that they’ve done a discovery here, or they’ve done 

this, or that the future looks bright in this area, or sometimes in 

fact that things haven’t worked out well for them. But it’s pretty 

much up to the individual corporations in terms of what kind of 

public pronouncement they might make. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the point I’m trying to 

make here after all those questions is that one of the things that 

was immediately brought up to my attention when all this 

activity was happening was that there should be a direct line of 

communication between the minister’s office of . . . and the 

communities in terms of what’s happening, so month by month 

we are able to tell our own people the actual truth you know and 

exclude the rumours. 

 

So I think the dialogue and the consultation that you offered 

here with the communities and the Indian bands that are 

impacted or affected, or could be potentially affected, is 

certainly well taken and I will certainly present the chiefs and 

the mayors of the north-west, in particular those communities 

affected, that the offer was made. 

 

And if I could just shift my discussions and my questions now 

to the uranium industry in terms of northern Saskatchewan. And 

I refer to a March 12, ’97 press release in I believe the Prince 

Albert Herald, in which the northern Saskatchewan leaders 

wanted to discuss revenue sharing in reference to the mining 

industry in northern Saskatchewan — could you elaborate — in 

which the Premier said he’s going to wait for 30 days before he 

meets with the leaders of the North to talk about some of these 

issues, and what the situation is now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member from Athabasca, as 

I recall it and I haven’t got the article in front of me, but I 

believe that the Premier was suggesting that he wanted to await 

the completion of the 30-day process whereby the panel would 

have comment from the general public. And then after that had 

taken place, that he was willing to sit down and discuss at some 

point in time a forum for future discussions. And I think that’s 

what the member’s referring to. 

 

And as I understand the Premier’s comments, that’s what he 

was saying. Allow the public process to take its place, public 

comment to be delivered to the panel, and that then after that at 

some point he would be willing to sit down with northern 

leaders and discuss a process for future discussions. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Again with this uranium 

industry, I notice that in the statements of revenue that you’ve 

got for this particular industry a mere jump of a million dollars 

from forecasted in ’96-97 to ’97-98, where you go 54 million to 

55 million. Obviously with the opening of quite a few mines, in 

particular McArthur River mine, how much does your 

government anticipate in terms of the jump in revenues from 

the northern revenues such as natural gas, some of the 

McArthur River mine dollars, and other associated industries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member, we don’t break 

down the north/south revenue with respect to oil and gas. I can 

give you the figure for uranium which, as you will know, is all 

northern. We have no mines in the southern part of the 

province. We’re forecasting revenue of 55.6 million for the   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

1997-98 fiscal year. So that gives you some idea of the amount 

of revenue generated from that. 

 

You will know that there are no coal mines. And I’m referring 

you to page 16 of the statement of revenue in the Saskatchewan 

’97-98 Estimates; 55.6 million for uranium; there’s 113.5 

million for potash; oil, at the figure you and I discussed earlier, 

523.3. Natural gas is an aggregate figure in the province, 42.1 

million; and coal, which I guess can be identified easier because 

the coal development is all in the southern part of the province, 

and revenue is anticipated to be around 16 million for that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  There’s been a lot of speculation in different 

papers in reference to the McArthur River mine in which the 

figure of $1.5 billion in royalties to the province over the next 

10 to 15 years . . . Are you able to confirm that these figures are 

indeed within ballpark and within reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s fair to say that, given the 

assumptions that were used when those numbers were put out, 

if all of that remains status quo, if the markets are where they 

should be or where they were projected to be and all of the 

things that go into making those assumptions stay the same, and 

as I understand it those assumptions were over the lifetime of 

that mine, that revenue figure would probably be accurate. 

 

I would want to caution the member with respect to that number 

though, and to understand that the McArthur River project is 

basically a replacement for the Key Lake mine. So we’re not 

looking at wildly expanded revenue. Certainly the activity that’s 

going to be winding down in Key Lake will have an uptake and 

those job opportunities will manifest themselves in the 

development of McArthur River. 

 

So that’s I guess how that works. But if all of the assumptions 

are accurate, that would be the number over the lifetime of that 

mine. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the only, since the ’70s, 

the only two mines that were really quite active in terms of 

uranium mining has been the mine at Key Lake and the mine in 

Cluff Lake. But now, Mr. Minister, we have mines at McClean 

Lake, we have mines at Cigar Lake, we have mines at 

McArthur River, and there’s mines popping up all over the 

place. 

 

However, in reference to my point — again, a simple yes or no, 

you know, would be sufficient — is your government 

anticipating from the one mine alone, the McArthur River mine 

anywhere in the neighbourhood of 1.5 billion over the next 10, 

15 years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I hesitate to give the member a 

simple answer, yes or no, because it isn’t really quite that 

simple. What needs to be understood is that these mines are 

developing a finite resource. It’s not that you drill a hole and 

you’re into the uranium ore body and you just keep drilling 

indefinitely, because that’s just not the case. 

 

All of these projects will have a lifetime projected on the 

amount of ore that is there in place. As I’ve indicated earlier, 

Key Lake is going to be completing its economic life span. 

Cluff Lake will be completing its economic life span. Rabbit 

Lake as well, over a period of time, will be experiencing a 

depletion of the ore body. 

 

So what’s happening is we’re putting in place McArthur River, 

McClean Lake. And I would want to just hearken back — but 

I’ll want to check this — but I believe the $1.5 billion figure 

that you refer to for McArthur River is over a 30-year period, 

which is the life and expected life of that mine, but I’ll want to 

double-check that. I’m going to ask my officials to ensure that 

I’m not misleading you in terms of the length of the projection 

of operation of that mine. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Once again, talking about some 

of the benefits of the uranium mining industry in northern 

Saskatchewan, there’s been a lot of discussion of course over 

the years with communities and Indian bands, and discussions 

have been going on for the last 20, 30 years. And I quote again 

from the same article in which Chief Allan Adam of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . the quote goes: 

 

“The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations wants to 

use the McArthur River project as a test case to see how 

the courts will rule on the issue of resource development 

and revenue sharing,” said Vice-chief Allen Adam. “We 

want to establish this as a basis of future government,” said 

Adam. “In 40 to 50 years first nations people will be the 

majority in Saskatchewan and when to start the change is 

now.” 

 

I guess in essence what he’s saying there is that perhaps we 

should begin to start sitting down talking about how we can 

participate more in the process, not just in the employment 

aspect but also the decision making, the environmental 

monitoring, and of course sharing in the profits either through 

ownership or through some other arrangement. Again you’ve 

made the point that these mines aren’t going to last for ever — 

20 or 30 years from now we could have seven or eight big holes 

in the ground and that’s it; northern Saskatchewan will not 

expand. 

 

Could you kind of elaborate on your position as minister on 

how you would approach a lot of the people that are involved 

with northern Saskatchewan, be it a mayor or chief, when you 

talk about playing a greater role and being a greater partner in 

some of the resource development of northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s fair to say that the 

government is very much aware and very cognizant of some of 

the comments and I guess the position taken by some of the 

northern aboriginal leaders with respect to resource sharing and 

the development of these particular facilities. And I think it’s 

also fair to say that there will be, in due course, ongoing 

discussions with respect to involving first nations people in a 

greater level in terms of our provincial economy, not only in 

northern Saskatchewan but in other areas and in other initiatives 

throughout the province. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that this government has recognized the 

need to more closely integrate and allow opportunities —   



836  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

business opportunities and economic development opportunities 

— for first nations people. And I think the evidence of that is 

quite apparent in the support that this government gave to the 

first nations people with respect to partnering on the gaming 

industry in this province, just as an example. 

 

These are not simple issues, and they’re certainly not issues that 

are going to be dealt with in a period of a week or of two 

weeks. They’re issues that have been on the plate for a long 

period of time, and we are working with first nations and with 

the federal government to address some of these issues. And I 

think that this is one of the initiatives that certainly is on the 

foremost of the minds of many Northerners and that being 

revenue sharing. And I think in due course these discussions 

will need to take place. So I say to the member opposite, there 

are many issues that have been outstanding for a long, long 

period of time, and I think all of us wish that it could be solved 

overnight, but it’s just not . . . it’s a complex world. It’s a 

complex province; and these are complex decisions. 

 

I certainly want to say to you that, as someone who lives in the 

middle part of the province, not northern Saskatchewan, but in 

the middle part of the province, I’ve become very much aware 

of the concerns of first nations people. And I’ve become aware 

as well of the logistics and the fact that the growth of the first 

nations population would indicate quite clearly that we need to 

do more as a people in this province to involve them in 

economic development opportunities. I think that’s clear, and I 

don’t think anyone on this side of the House will dispute that. 

And it’s one of the challenges that we’re going to face in 

Saskatchewan over a long period of time. 

 

You know, I’ve often found it interesting when I look at our 

province . . . such a small province, such a small population that 

we have and the fact that we have a large population of senior 

citizens. We have a large aboriginal and growing aboriginal 

population. And one of our goals has to be to include more and 

more people in the development of this economy. And it will 

only come through one way. It’s going to come from resource 

revenue. It’s going to come from agriculture. And it’s going to 

come from the industriousness of the people of this province, 

and that’s really what I think is important to the future and the 

success that we will have, I believe, as a province. 

 

So I guess what we need to do is work together in a cooperative 

fashion — northern, southern, eastern, western, urban and rural 

— because there’s only one province. And what we need to do 

is, I think, work cooperatively to ensure that we all have the 

opportunity to share in what are some very, very, bright 

horizons, I think, in terms of job opportunities and in terms of 

business opportunities for all the people of Saskatchewan. So I 

think that it’s something that I could say to you that we are 

aware of as a government. We are aware of the concerns 

specifically of Northerners with respect to resource revenue 

sharing. And I think that it’s fair to say that over time . . . and 

I’m not suggesting I can’t put a time frame on it; I wouldn’t 

want to do that tonight. 

 

But we’re well aware of the concerns of Northerners and those 

discussions will, over a period of time, take place. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I think the important thing in the 

message that’s been out there for years and continues to be 

echoed to this day from many leaders from the past, including 

Louis Morin and a few other people that spoke about some of 

these issues . . . And I think in general to summarize what 

northern Saskatchewan people are talking about is yes, we want 

to do our part for the province of Saskatchewan but we also 

want to benefit from some of the resource development 

happening in northern Saskatchewan. And as Minister of 

Energy and Mines, a lot of those responsibilities fall under your 

portfolio. 

 

And there is no question, and I support your statement a 

hundred per cent, that we have got to involve the aboriginal 

community in a lot more than we have been when it comes to 

some of the mining activity in northern Saskatchewan. We have 

not been duly recognizing some of the problems that they’ve 

had. And again you know, we’ve said this thing 10,000 times in 

this Assembly already; you’ve heard it 10,000 times before. 

 

So I think the key thing here, the key thing here, Mr. Minister, 

is that we have got to make an effort, every effort, to involve 

these northern people in any decisions regarding Energy and 

Mines in northern Saskatchewan. We haven’t got a choice. 

 

And I think the key thing here is because if we don’t deal with 

the problem now, you’re going to see what’s going to happen is 

you’re going to see more and more people coming up and start 

talking about some of the negative or the downsides of the 

industry of northern Saskatchewan. And again I quote for 

another article here, “Panel urges approval of mines.” In here it 

says, quote: 

 

But environmental groups say the panel wasn’t allowed to 

probe the crucial issues of storing nuclear waste or using 

Saskatchewan uranium to create weapons. 

 

“Canada currently sells the resource to countries that could 

be abusing the mineral to create nuclear weapons,” says 

Peter Prebble of Saskatchewan Environmental Society. 

 

And with McArthur River on stream, Saskatchewan will 

produce 25 per cent of the world’s uranium; that the 

province isn’t prepared to store the nuclear waste yet. 

 

“Nobody wants to be responsible for the garbage the stuff 

will ultimately become,” said Prebble, a former NDP 

MLA. “We don’t think there’s any safe, demonstrative way 

of disposing any high level of radioactive waste.” 

 

End of article. 

 

So I guess the point is, there’s a lot of questions out there, Mr. 

Minister, about environmental safety, about decommissioning 

and about storing this nuclear waste and they’re all being 

considered by a lot of people. 

 

So in northern Saskatchewan, if you want to support the 

endorsement of the people of the North in terms of dealing with   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

these issues, then they’re telling you not only the first nations 

— they play a critical role — but also some of the northern 

leaders in northern communities, the mayors and councils. 

They’re the counterpart in northern Saskatchewan of the treaty 

and band councils. 

 

So I urge you, Mr. Minister, to begin to really treat the mayors 

and councils of the North, and the chiefs and the councils of the 

North, as equal partners in this whole process of developing the 

uranium industry. They want in, Mr. Minister. And in spite of 

all the problems associated with that industry, they’re still 

willing to work. So we need to see some really positive 

movement and some very encouraging signs, if not by this 

government but certainly with the next government. 

 

So going to a few other points in terms of these articles. I could 

be sitting here all day shooting off stats and figures but we 

know, and many of these northern groups know, that when we 

talk about northern participation we’re not only talking about 

job creation, Mr. Minister. And again I quote from the same 

March 12, ’97 article: 

 

The panel’s recommendation to increase northern 

employment from the current 50 per cent at Key Lake to 

67 per cent at McArthur will only increase northern 

employment by 4 to 5 jobs per year or 60 or 75 jobs over 

the next 15 years. 

 

And this quote was by John Dantouze, who’s a vice-chief of the 

P.A. (Prince Albert) Grand Council. 

 

So the point is the employment benefit of northern 

Saskatchewan may not be that significant in the shifts from 

different mines opening and different mines closing down. So 

the fact of the matter, Mr. Minister, is we have to have the issue 

of decision making, environmental protection, and perhaps 

revenue sharing through either a new fund or perhaps this 

sharing in the profits as partners. Something’s got to be done. 

So could you elaborate on some of these points, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well as a matter of fact I would, 

Mr. Chairman. I feel very strongly about some of the things the 

member from Athabasca talked about. 

 

You know I guess one of the first experiences I had, when we 

invited the first nations people of this province to participate in 

a Canadian mines ministers’ conference, and after the 

presentation and the description of what mining has done for 

the people — the first nations people, the aboriginal people of 

northern Saskatchewan — as it related to the development of 

uranium and the development of other mining opportunities in 

our province, I found it very interesting when other jurisdictions 

in this province, ministers and deputy ministers, would come up 

to us and say as a Saskatchewan delegation, people from 

Saskatchewan, we can only wish we had achieved in our 

province what you have done. 

 

We can only wish that our industry had involved hundreds and 

hundreds of northern people in the development of the 

resources in our province. We’re decades behind you. And I 

want to say to that member that those are comments that came 

directly to me as a new minister, a new Energy minister, in this 

province, and I want to say that I felt very proud of it. 

 

To say that there isn’t more that can be done I don’t think is 

accurate because there’s always more that can be done. But I 

don’t want that member for one minute to downplay the 

benefits that the mining industry has had for his people in 

northern Saskatchewan because I don’t think that that’s 

appropriate, and I don’t think it’s accurate. You should be 

commending this government for the foresight to ensure that 

northern people have job opportunities in that area of the 

province. And I want you to remember the number of dollars 

that come as a result of resource revenue, not only uranium but 

from potash and from oil and from gas, to deliver services to 

people in northern Saskatchewan and other areas around this 

province. 

 

I say, Mr. Chairman, that the member will want to keep in mind 

the fact that this government has been very diligent with respect 

to environmental concerns. This government and the federal 

government spends hundreds of thousands of dollars along with 

industry dealing with environmental issues and the development 

of this resource. And I want that member to recognize the 

number of businesses in northern Saskatchewan that have 

begun and started and employed people as a result of mining 

initiatives that have been put in place, working industry with 

governments both north, both provincial, both federal, and both 

municipal. So don’t downplay the benefits that we’ve made, 

Mr. Member, because I don’t think that’s fair. I think we should 

recognize that we have achieved some gains. 

 

Is there more to do? The answer is of course there is. And we’re 

going to, as a provincial administration, to continue to work 

with our federal counterparts and northern politicians, whether 

they be first nations politicians or whether they be municipal 

politicians from some of the northern communities. We’re 

going to continue to work with them. I don’t deny that there’s 

more that can be done, and I don’t deny that there is a lot more 

that we need to do. But I say that this government is committed 

to meaningful involvement of all people in terms of developing 

this economy, and that includes northern people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues that the member raises are important 

issues, and I’m not going to downplay them, and I don’t want to 

play politics with them. I know and I understand some of the 

housing conditions in northern Saskatchewan, the 

infrastructure, the water and sewer in areas where we need to be 

doing more. And I understand the community of La Loche. I’ve 

been to their hospital, and I understand exactly what you talk 

about when you mention that particular issue in this forum and 

in this House. And that’s your responsibility, and I appreciate 

that you do that, because I know and I say and I admit that 

we’ve got a lot more to do in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But as we can, I want you to know that this administration sees 

northern Saskatchewan and living conditions in northern 

Saskatchewan as being of a big and a great priority. Your 

colleague, the Minister of Northern Affairs, is well aware of 

these issues. And my seat mate and I talk about it on a regular 

basis, and what we can do and what we need to do to improve 

northern communities and northern people’s living standards. 

  



838  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

And we’re going to do that. And we’re going to do that in a 

very responsible way and in a sustainable way, because in order 

to have a long-term impact in effect for those people and for all 

people of the province, we’ve got to ensure that we don’t be 

adding more debt load for the young people in this province, 

because that’s what’s constraining our ability to do many of 

these things right now. 

 

So I want to say to the member, I thank him for his comments. 

And I know he’s sincere, as we are. There is a lot more to be 

done, and we’re going to continue to work with you because we 

need to repair some of the shortcomings of the programs from 

past mistakes. 

 

So to the member opposite, I say I thank you for your questions. 

What you raise are very important. But don’t lose sight of the 

gains that we’ve made and don’t downplay the successes that 

we’ve made because they’ve been many, and there will be 

many more in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess, some of my closing 

remarks . . . and I’ve got other people that are going to take 

over. I guess the key thing here is that in a business where you 

have the benefits . . . there’s three benefits associated with 

owning a business. 

 

One is revenue sharing or sharing in the profits. Two is making 

the decisions. And the third benefits is the jobs, the jobs of the 

business. Now in northern Saskatchewan for years and years, 

we have been certainly talking about the benefits of jobs. Jobs, 

jobs, jobs, jobs — every time we speak, we speak about jobs. 

But nobody refuses to talk about decision making, and nobody 

talks about the bigger benefit of profit sharing. 

 

So I appreciate the minister’s comments in reference to 

understanding some of the issues of the northern roads, the 

northern housing, the social problems, the devastating social 

problems in many northern communities, the lack of 

infrastructure. I’m glad you understand that. 

 

And the closing remark: if you guys understand that, if you 

appreciate that and you know it, then why don’t you fix it? 

 

So in closing, Mr. Minister — we have many other questions — 

but in closing, if you understand it, I urge you to fix it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker. And you know I sense 

a hesitancy in terms of speaking about the successes, which tells 

me this might be a little politics being played here. And I don’t 

hear him say that $8 million into sewer and water in northern 

Saskatchewan was a good initiative but it’s not enough. I don’t 

even hear that, don’t even give credit for the $8 million that 

went into that. 

 

I don’t hear anything about the ten and a half million dollar 

multi-party training plan that’s been put in place for northern 

Saskatchewan. I don’t hear anything about that. Did that just 

disappear when you became a politician? Is that where it went? 

Because I’m having a difficult time to understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this government has done more 

with respect to consultation than any administration in the 

recent past in this province. And all you’ve got to do is look 

back to the 1980s and the consultation that took place under that 

administration. 

 

Have we got a ways to go in terms of improving? The answer is 

yes. And I mean I get a little offended when the member 

doesn’t want to talk about revenue sharing; revenue sharing 

through the Consolidated Fund takes place on an annual basis. 

 

Where do you think that money goes? The money from 

royalties and taxation, as I described to you earlier tonight, goes 

into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

How do you think we fund programs in northern 

Saskatchewan? How do you think the $8 million in sewer and 

water expenditure came to be? Do you think it was just plucked 

out of mid-air? Or do you want to start separating potash 

revenue that should go to the potash folks in one corner of the 

province? 

 

We take the position that the resources belong to all of the 

people of Saskatchewan, and I think that’s a reasonable 

approach because the only way that you can share it is based on 

that kind of a scenario. 

 

And the member may have differing views, and that’s fine, and 

I think that’s all a matter that’s going to have to be discussed 

and can be discussed. And that’s part of consultation and that’s 

what I’m saying this government is committed to. And those 

discussions will take place. 

 

The Chair:  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I move that we rise and report progress. 

Or I move we report progress not rise. Thank you. 

 

(2000) 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is Dr. 

Murray McLaughlin, deputy minister of Ag and Food. Behind 

Murray is Jack Zepp, director of administrative services branch. 

Behind Jack is Ross Johnson, budget officer, administrative 

services. To my right, Hal Chushon, director of policy and 

programing development branch. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d 

like to welcome you and your officials here this evening to 

discuss some of the Ag estimates. I think, Mr. Minister, what   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

we will do this evening is just start out with some general 

questions that I think I’ll be needing at a later date when we’re 

dealing with, probably Committee of the Whole on the Bill 

regarding Ag Credit Corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you have — and perhaps you even brought 

this stuff with you, so we’ll get right into it — do you have the 

. . . I don’t know what would even be fair, the last 3 years, 4 

years, 5 years of the number of accounts and the dollars 

involved with all of the . . . well the complete loan status of 

ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan)? Let’s 

start that way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, we have that for you. For April 1, 

1996 the total balance was $391,176,900; at January 31, 1997, 

was 290.999 million or a reduction of a hundred million dollars, 

one hundred and seventy-seven thousand. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Minister. Mr. Minister, do you 

have documents that you can send across instead of quoting 

from? Because I’d like to see if you can also supply us with 

number of accounts, and I’ll go through a number of questions, 

and then you can decide if you can send them over tonight or if 

it’s something we can have at least before we get into the Bill. 

Is that fair . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . okay. So it’d be the 

dollars involved, the number of clients, the number of 

write-offs. And I think we’re talking about all loan accounts and 

you . . . 

 

I can’t remember what the loan was when it went from a spring 

seeding loan and that acreage loan, and they were then 

combined into . . . you’d have to help me out on that, Mr. 

Minister. So if you can give me the breakdown on each 

individual one, that I think is probably all we’d need then for 

Committee of the Whole stuff too. 

 

Mr. Minister, in regards to ACS and because of course you’re 

able to have a lot less by the sounds of your figures that you’re 

giving me, in one year there was a reduction of a hundred 

million dollars. Would you be able to tell us, Mr. Minister, what 

approach you took with banks or Farm Credit or credit unions 

in — I don’t like to use the word offloading — selling, I guess, 

some of the loan accounts of ACS? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well there was a few things that we did. 

We provided the institutions with some global numbers. We 

couldn’t provide them of course with any details on individual 

accounts because of confidentiality. But they were provided 

with sort of a global picture of what the portfolio of ACS 

looked like. I met with them a year ago or so, and we just talked 

about the potential of them taking over some of the accounts as 

we wind down but nothing specific. 

 

And they, banks . . . Anybody dealing with an ACS creditor 

who has another loan, of course, will have that personal 

information because you have to list all your outstanding 

accounts. So I don’t think . . . While some banks won’t know all 

portfolios, many banks will know most of the portfolios 

because there’s very few individual farmers who only have one 

account with ACS and no other loans. And as you know, if 

you’re like me, you’ve had a few loans over the period of your 

farm life, that you have to list all your accounts. 

 

So basically the institutions know what the good accounts are 

and what the bad accounts are. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, when you referred to 

“them,” I think in my question I was hoping for more detail. If 

you’d tell me was there a specific bank you were dealing with 

or credit union or Farm Credit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, we met with the association; so that 

was all many different banks together — at same time, all at 

once. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  And negotiations with Farm Credit, were 

they in that same group? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, it was done previously with the 

credit union and the Farm Credit as well, just to give them sort 

of a global picture. But we certainly . . . And talk about the fact 

that we were winding down ACS and to see if there was any 

interest in the banking community, the credit unions, or Farm 

Credit that they might have with ACS. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, where are we with this then 

today? I noticed in an article only a few weeks ago, it was still 

. . . and in fact in your words, that’s there’s a chance that you 

can still sell part of it. So I was just wondering where we’re at 

today because it leads into some other stuff I want to get into 

later. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well part of the problem, of course, we 

have run into is the fact that Farm Credit Corporation, while 

they’ve made some changes, aren’t really filling the gap that we 

thought they would in agriculture and we’re hoping that they 

will continue to listen to our pleas of expanding their portfolios 

in Saskatchewan. I know they do some things in Manitoba they 

don’t do in Saskatchewan. That really puts us, I think, at a bit of 

a disadvantage, and I’d hope the hon. member would join with 

us in expressing those concerns. 

 

We are basically where we started with. There was no show of 

concern to purchase ACS by any of the institutions. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, we would then assume that 

the loans that you have outstanding are probably ones that 

you’re going to take a substantial write-down on those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well there’s really no reason to assume 

that we’re going to be taking a write-down. Write-downs do 

occur through a normal procedure at ACS, and what we decided 

to do a number of years ago is to handle every case on an 

individual case basis. Which means that if the customer doesn’t 

have any assets, it doesn’t make much sense to continue to try 

to pursue collecting that outstanding account. If customers have 

assets, then we will pursue collection of the account in normal, 

in standard fashion. 

 

But as to what we’ll write down and what we won’t write down, 

there’s really no way of knowing right now. I mean if someone 

is in arrears a great length of time right now then we   



840  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

will, at some point in time, have to make a decision whether the 

government is wasting money trying to chase these dollars or 

should we just get a write-down, try to get the customer in a 

stable position, and therefore being able to farm again so he’s 

not driven out the farm. And that’s the purpose of it, to try to 

make the customer viable again if we know there’s absolutely 

no chance of collecting that debt. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the reason for the question 

was not one of policy nature asking whether it was right or 

wrong to do it, rather than to get sort of a better financial 

picture where ACS is going to end up being. 

 

And one of the reasons I asked all this is I have received a copy 

of a letter just today. In fact it was from Crop Insurance and it’s 

regarding . . . I guess it’s the outstanding GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) balances where Crop Insurance is now 

having their loans taken over by . . . not loans, but those GRIP 

bills taken over by ACS for collection. Is this normal? Like has 

ACS been used as a tool of the department to take over other 

loans throughout your department or is this something new? 

 

(20l5) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes the ACS are just acting as 

collections agents for lands branch and Crop Insurance. And 

they’re doing that. We’ve gone to this route for the sake of 

efficiencies and they’re very experienced in the loans area and 

the collection of loans. So therefore they’re doing it on behalf 

of these other two departments. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, do you also have the 

services of private collection agencies or I guess any of the 

loans that fall under Ag and Food? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  For the most part, no. There are two 

areas. One we have used, Creditel for collection of accounts . . . 

Creditel for collection of accounts out of province. And more 

recently we have used Creditel to review and see if there’s any 

possible collections from accounts that we basically have 

written off, because we think there may be a chance that they 

may be able to get some collections out of that. But for the most 

part we do our own collecting now through ACS. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I guess as you well know, 

many of those accounts, those GRIP bills that were sent out, 

you know you’ve talked to thousands of farmers the same as I 

and there’s many out there that don’t feel that they are going to 

pay it for, you know, reasons of the government changing 

legislation retroactive against the farmers. 

 

And whether it’s more of a political stance, moral stance, 

whatever it be that the farmers are taking against GRIP and 

Crop Insurance, the concern that they would perhaps have now 

is if their GRIP accounts are going to be taken over by ACS for 

collection, would the farmers be in a worse position or would 

they have to give up certain securities. What will it actually 

mean to the farmer, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well let me first say that it won’t be any 

difference than any other client who has an outstanding 

account. The procedures will be the same and they’ll be handled 

on a case-by-case basis. 

 

I just wanted to tell you . . . I’ll give the numbers on the 

outstanding GRIP accounts. Can I send them across . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we can include them in the 

package that we send to you. But out of the whole total of 

nearly $12 million, there’s 1.5 million remaining outstanding, 

or 13 per cent, which is considerably lower, you know, than 

some people thought it might be. And it continues to decrease. 

So farmers are understanding they have to pay these bills. And 

anything that’s outstanding of course, like I said, will be 

collected in normal procedure. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I think perhaps that the 

GRIP bills could still be seen as something different and you 

probably won’t agree with me, but with these GRIP bills being 

before the courts at this time, do you not feel that perhaps 

you’re jumping in just a little too quick? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well really, Mr. Member, they’re fairly 

unrelated. And because the judgement has not come down on 

the court case, I’m not going to go down this road very far, as 

you know. But as far as treating a collection of a bill, we have 

ACS doing our collections for lands branch, Crop Insurance. 

Crop Insurance administers GRIP, so therefore it will be 

standard procedure. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, we’ll get into the GRIP stuff 

in a little while but just to stay with ACS. Upon its wind-up, do 

you see the staff that you now have in ACS working in I guess 

some sort of a central collection group and then staying on 

within the department? You know, if in fact that rationalization 

of collections is working well, are you going to create that 

group permanently? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’ve introduced legislation to help us 

proceed with the wind-down on GRIP. But the collection 

agencies or the collection practices by ACS will not be any 

different now . . . in the future that it is now. And we have not 

discussed . . . or not even discussed, let alone decided, whether 

we would keep a unit in place. 

 

What will happen at the end of a period of time, we don’t 

exactly know, but we’re going to give ourselves some 

flexibility and through this legislation we’re trying to give 

ourselves some flexibility to wind down the corporation. 

Simply because we’ve gone away from . . . a decision was made 

by government because of the economic activity, the economic 

opportunities that have been placed before us, to remove 

ourselves from lending to primary agriculture. 

 

Because we know, and I don’t have to repeat them, but there are 

a number of programs in the past that contributed to many 

farmers having more debt than they wished, like the spring 

seeding loan, like the production loan program. 

 

And so at the end of the day . . . I mean at the end of four years 

we don’t know exactly what will be left, but we decided to wind 

down this corporation, put our money into adding value to 

primary products of Saskatchewan. 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

Because for example, if you take the food processing industry 

in Saskatchewan, we have about 270 food processors that 

employ several thousand people, from the small kitchen 

operations doing jams and jellies to the Drake Meats, Thomson 

Meats, Harvest Meats, many other meat processing plants 

around. 

 

We believe we should be putting money into these types of 

operations simply because of all the employees that these 

people have; 70 per cent of them are outside Regina and 

Saskatoon. That bodes very well for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And what was happening in the past with the subsidies and the 

political remedies of governments, federally and provincially, 

we found ourselves in a situation where the farmer was in an 

unreal economic climate. And so we’re treating everybody very 

humanely, and in terms of their operations, if they have debt, 

giving them lots of flexibility based on the asset value that they 

maintain now. 

 

We’re moving into putting the taxpayers’ dollars into the fastest 

growing area . . . one of the fastest growing areas of the 

economy and that is the value added area. You will know the 

whole process of . . . I mean of food processing and the value it 

has for those areas where it’s involved in. 

 

So I think we’ve made a fairly wise move putting ag innovation 

fund, ag equity fund, and ag development fund in place and 

focusing those on the adding of value to our primary products 

and moving away from the financing of primary production. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear that you are 

interested in putting more money into the value added industry. 

We have certainly had a number of farmers in the Humboldt 

constituency that have been asking time and time again whether 

or not you are in fact serious about that because there is a 

farmer or two that want to get into grain cleaning and 

processing of organic grains. They tell me the fact that in order 

to facilitate that they would need to have natural gas, which of 

course is what most people in the rural communities need yet. 

 

The natural gas in this one instance would cost the farmer 

$20,000 if he had to pay for it entirely himself. And there’s also 

an $80,000 tag for underground electrical development. That 

combination makes $100,000. 

 

And so as we hear your government talking endlessly about 

promoting rural Saskatchewan and getting agriculture industry 

moving and we hear them talking also about their concern for 

young farmers — I do believe that many of these farmers that 

I’ve been speaking of have got young sons and daughters that 

would like to get into any kind of value added industry — it 

would certainly be a help if this government could continue the 

natural gas program that so many have been able to take 

advantage of earlier on that was discontinued by your 

government, and also the underground electrical development 

program. 

 

Could you give us some indication, Mr. Minister, whether or 

not your government is intending to reinstate these programs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I know the member must be a little 

confused because this is Ag and Food estimates, but I’ll wonder 

off into Environment estimates and give an answer to that 

question. We have nearly $400 million in that program. And the 

problem that’s come about is that where do you start and where 

do you end now if you say we want to extend the project to a 

couple of groups in your area? That’ll be great. What about 

everybody else? 

 

And the fact of the matter is, Madam Member, unlike your 

wanting to continue the old Tory program of tell everybody 

they can have everything, spend her all, we’re not going to do 

that. We’re going to work on a basis that we can sustain this 

economy, can sustain the growth, can sustain our tax cuts, can 

sustain our services, and can . . . that will continue to promote 

economic development in this province. So I just want to tell 

you, you can’t have it all. And even though we would all like to 

stand up and say yes, you name it, make your list, we’ll say yes 

to everything, we can’t do it that way. 

 

But let me end by saying I’ll give you a few examples of 

projects that we’ve got into with the agriculture equity fund. 

And these projects that they need natural gas or power in areas 

that they don’t have them, they have to build that into their 

capital project requirements and work from there just like 

farmers who are expanding the hog operations. Many new hog 

operations are going into areas where they have to put power in, 

where they have to put natural gas in, and they have to build 

that into their capital requirements. I mean you just can’t do 

everything for everybody. 

 

I’ll tell you what we’re trying to do is put some regulation in the 

system so that we can move everything along evenly and not 

just sort of say okay, well here’s our list for this year, you know 

the money runs out so everybody else is done. You can’t run 

government that way and that’s why I think you’ll be over there 

for a long time. 

 

Anyway, we’ll be . . . Randolph & James Flax Mill — their 

business is organic milled flax and bakery products. Through 

the agri-food equity fund of taxpayers’ money we put in 

$300,000. Schneider’s Popcorn — processing and making of 

candy corn, popcorn seed, and poppers; $300,000. Thomson 

Meat — meat processing in Melfort, $500,000; Popowich 

Milling Ltd., Yorkton, oat processing, $360,000; Northern 

Genetics Limited in Yellow Grass, they collect and process 

freezing and storage of export elk semen, a very value added 

growth industry in Saskatchewan, $500,000; Canadian Select 

Grains at Eston, processing, packaging, and marketing of 

chickpeas and other speciality crops, $500,000; Rinkles Foods 

in Yorkton, processing durum flour into flavoured chip-like 

snack foods, $50,000; and LLD General Care Products in 

Eastend, they manufacture and market foot-care products from 

plant-derived ingredients, $25,000; and this list is always 

growing. 

 

(2030) 

 

So what we are doing is using our taxpayers’ dollars to ensure 

that we have some value added activity in this province. And 

you will notice, you will notice, Madam Member, that every   



842  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

one of these, I believe, is outside Regina and Saskatoon except 

for Schneider’s Popcorn, Yorkton. That’s rural economic 

development. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I would be very pleased if you 

would table that document for us. And in addition I would just 

like to comment on your comment mentioning that you are not 

going to pick and choose, or you don’t pick and choose. In fact 

when you give the tax rebate to the livestock industry and you 

left out the grain processors, etc., you are picking and choosing 

already. And on top of it, with the amount of the rebate that you 

give back, a person would have to certainly have $7,500 worth 

of building going on in order to even get into that program or 

take advantage of it. 

 

So tell me, Mr. Minister, who in fact are you giving advantage 

to in this province? Is it those that are already doing very well; 

that are very, very, very affluent already in their field, or are 

you helping the small farmer? I don’t see any small farmers 

being helped at all by your government. 

 

I’ll turn over the questioning to my hon. member here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’ll just reply to the member. Again I 

want just to clarify something about picking and choosing. That 

is not true. About a month and a half ago we just announced 

through the ag innovation fund about $12 million for the pulse 

crop industry, directed at peas — green peas, and lentils. They 

were very, very happy. You can talk to that industry. 

 

We put in, about a month ago or less, $15 million to the 

bio-tech industry for new projects there. This is not picking and 

choosing. This is trying to do as much as you can with the 

money you have, in many, many sectors. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, the money for the agriculture 

innovation fund primarily comes from the federal government 

and fine, I’m glad you’re putting in $27 million compared to 

their 64 million. However, that is not doing a lot from your 

government for the farmers of this province. I would just 

suggest that you would look into maybe money that you are 

saving in the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) this 

year, take that 600 million plus and put it into the farming 

industry in this province so that our smaller and medium-sized 

farmers can thrive, and so rural communities can thrive from 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I just want to give the member some 

information. In the areas — just so that you don’t think we’re 

picking and choosing — the areas we’re putting money into: 

biotechnology, food processing, horticulture, information 

technology, non-food sector, specialty crops, special livestock, 

and sustainable agriculture — totalling $58.7 million. 

 

And that’s right, we are very pleased to have the federal 

government contribute on the traditional 60/40 basis in the ag 

innovation fund — something that we’d like to see them do in 

the transportation area for infrastructure, something we’d like to 

see them do . . . would have liked to see them done in many 

other areas of agriculture. 

 

That $60 million that you’re talking about they put in ag 

innovation fund is dwarfed by the $320 million Crow buy-out 

that they put forward, taking out of the farmers’ pockets every 

year; a $260 million of crop sector money that they’ve reduced 

in the last number of years, adding to the problems for farmers 

in this province; the $75 million in lack of support for the 

transportation industry on demurrage and lost grain sales. 

 

So I think . . . And the list goes on. If we want to talk about 

contributing to economies, let’s get into it. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Why not? Let’s get into it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to make comment about a fine 

gentleman in my constituency who had a construction 

machinery industry and had to close up shop and lay off 12 

workers and put their families at a disadvantage because of that. 

And his note to me was, it’s because of your high income tax 

and your high corporate tax that he could not bear any more. 

Had to close it down. 

 

How is this helping farmers out there who need to get another 

job, an extra job, in order to continue with their medium-size 

farms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, I’m not, I’m not . . . I don’t know 

the reasons but there, over the years, have been many 

businesses in Saskatchewan to start and there’s always a few 

every year that continue to . . . or that do not continue to 

operate. 

 

All I know is that we’ve dropped the corporate income tax by 

20 per cent. We’ve got the lowest PST (provincial sales tax) in 

Canada. We’ve cut the personal income tax last year . . . or the 

deficit reduction tax by 50 per cent. I don’t know the reasons 

behind your individual case but most people are saying that 

they are very pleased with the tax situation in Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s only one other 

question and possibly your officials could answer. The ADF 

fund (Agriculture Development Fund), I’d like to know how 

much money of that comes from the federal government and 

how much is contributed by the provincial government every 

year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Unfortunately the federal government 

doesn’t put any money into ADF. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Actually, Mr. 

Minister, the member from Humboldt raises some interesting 

questions so we’ll have to revisit the GRIP debate here after 

awhile. But maybe you can explain, Mr. Minister, why we have 

a duplication with the ag innovation fund and ADF. Can you 

just explain the different roles of the two? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the ag development fund is 

basically project-specific funding where people can apply to 

that fund on an individual project. With the ag innovation fund, 

we basically have broken them down into the eight areas. And I 

can repeat those areas for them. Biotechnology . . . and I’ll give   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

you the budget as well. So it’s much more broad based than 

ADF, which is very more project specific. Biotechnology, 16 

and a half million; food processing, 13.4 million; horticulture, 

2.1 million; info tech, 2 million; non-food, 2.5; special crops, 

12.3 million; special livestock, 3.4. And sustainable agriculture, 

7.5. So it’s a broader base. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, with the ag development 

fund then, those projects are decided by a board I take it, a 

board appointed by yourself. Do you have a list of the board 

members with you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The board of directors of the ag 

innovation fund is chaired by my deputy minister, Dr. Murray 

McLaughlin . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . ag development 

fund — What did I say? Ag innovation? Thank you, I’m sorry 

— For the ag development fund, ADF, Dr. McLaughlin, my 

deputy minister; Don Russell from Rosetown, Gordon Dorrell 

from Ottawa, which is a federal rep; Dr. George Lee from the 

University of Saskatchewan; John Buchan from our department; 

and Gloria Parisien from the department; Bob Virgo from 

Regina; Alesa Verrault from Saskatoon; Gary Wellbrook from 

Ponteix, who I’m sure the member knows; Meg Claxton from 

Saskatoon; Elizabeth Althouse from Humboldt, the member 

from Humboldt will know; Everette Bear from Birch Hills; and 

Ernie Spencer from the department in Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, do you yourself give . . . Mr. 

Minister, do you yourself give final approval for the projects or 

is it left entirely in the board’s hands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think the member would know that I do 

not give final approval to any of the programs. As you can 

imagine what the result of a minister approving one program 

would be, you’d have everybody applying and knocking at your 

door to have you approve their projects. So no. 

 

This is a very democratic structure. We have a broad base of 

very knowledgeable people on these boards. And the people 

apply to ADF; they are reviewed, short-listed, and then a 

project is approved on a case-by-case basis in terms of what the 

mandate of ADF is. And the mandate is to provide funding to 

increase the competitiveness of agriculture and food industry in 

Saskatchewan. So on a case-by-case basis if we . . . you know, 

the projects are approved by the board. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, I have a list of the ADF 

approved projects as of December ’96. I’m not going to go 

through them all but I just . . . While you were answering the 

member from Humboldt’s questions, I was quickly looking at a 

few of these projects. Biological control of scentless camomile, 

$40,000 to the Alberta Research Council, Vegreville, Alberta. I 

mean is that normal that we would have . . . that our taxpayers 

would be funding research projects in other provinces? I don’t 

know, you can answer that one. 

 

There are some others — some Smart Choice Foods market 

expansion. To me that would almost look like a private 

company that . . . you know, I’m just curious as to whether 

you’re giving help, you know, to one and not another. 

There’s a different one here, one that maybe you would like to 

explain. The use of trainer cows to reduce stress in newly 

arrived feed lot calves: to determine the effect the presence of a 

trainer cow would have, for $15,000. Do you think those are 

good uses of taxpayers’ funds? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would say in general terms that all 

projects that are approved by the board of directors of ADF are 

a good use of taxpayers’ funds. Now I know where you’re 

going, and you can go down that road, you can go down that 

road if you like but I think it’s a dead end. 

 

Because you talk about scentless camomile. That’s where the 

science is . . . the scientists are who are doing the work. If we 

wanted to start all over, and scentless camomile — I don’t 

know about it in your area, but I know in many areas of the 

province it is a very serious weed . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And it is in question, yes. And there is . . . very difficult to 

control this weed and if we can get a biological control, it will 

certainly go a long way to help the farmers who have a difficult 

problem with scentless camomile. 

 

So sometimes in order not to have to duplicate and start way 

back in research, we will do cooperative projects and help out, 

or put money into projects that will help Saskatchewan in the 

end, in this case in Alberta. That’s, you know, not very much 

money does that, but it just makes common sense. Why start all 

over again here when they’ve got . . . We can put a little bit of 

money in, not near what it would take us to get there, and have 

maybe a quicker result. 

 

(2045) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I did make a slight 

mistake when I was addressing you a moment ago. I talked 

about the ag development fund and I meant the ADD 

(agriculture development and diversification district) boards. 

I’m wondering how much money the federal government puts 

into our ADD boards and how much provincially is put in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’re going to double-check what the 

federal contribution is, but right now there is no funding 

because it was funded through the Green Plan and there is no 

funding for the ADD boards. But we’re going to double-check 

that with the federal government and we’ll add that to our 

package. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, my 

constituents were really wondering about something. They 

noted that you were really in favour of single desk marketing 

through the Canadian Wheat Board and they said, well that’s 

interesting. We’re wondering why the Minister of Agriculture 

does not take the same stand as far as SPI goes. Could you give 

me a comment on that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think traditionally or historically 

in this province many governments have governed from a 

philosophical base that from time to time made them inflexible 

in terms of what’s needed to best serve the agricultural 

economy of this province. I know that to be the case, and there 

are times when decisions are made for policy that make very   



844  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

much sense. And in the past we’ve had marketing institutions in 

Saskatchewan that have served this country very, very well. 

 

Although the world is changing very quickly so we have to start 

reassessing the roles of our traditional institutions. And to be 

quite honest, for a New Democratic government to sort of be 

questioning the roles of a marketing board is not in line with the 

traditional philosophy. 

 

But I guess we have to roll with the changes of the world. That 

is why we went to . . . we took the advice of experts who 

researched the Canadian Wheat Board, who found out that 

there’s 320 . . . or $50 million to be gained by the board being 

there because of the guarantees they put in place, because of the 

premium market they put in place, because of the fact they get 

about $75 million a year for barley producers for malt barley 

premium. That would be gone if the board was taken away. 

 

Then you have to look at the same . . . you have to go institution 

by institution and ask yourself. And if you look . . . I’ll give you 

another example where government isn’t leading the role, but in 

the dairy. Used to be until very recently, that every province 

had its own dairy pool. Because of the World Trade 

Organization, starting with the GATT (General Agreement on 

Tariffs and Trade) rules, now WTO (World Trade 

Organization), there is the possibility, as we had last July when 

the Americans had a challenge that Canada was dumping some 

of their product, if the American challenge, to make a long story 

short, would have succeeded last July, we would have instantly 

lost our marketing boards. We would have instantly lost our 

dairy pools. So some of the people in some of the areas are 

looking at how they can prepare themselves for what may come 

down the road. 

 

So in the dairy industry, they went to western Canada pooling. 

They’ve just signed the agreement. I signed their agreement a 

few days ago that allows for western Canadian pooling. It 

allows for a shift in production. 

 

Now dairy, as you may or may not know, the production will 

tend to gravitate to the most efficient plants. Saskatoon has a 

state-of-the-art plant, one of the best in Canada. Because of now 

the western pooling, we’ll be able to see some of the quota shift 

from B.C. (British Columbia), where in the delta area of B.C. in 

the Fraser Valley and in delta areas, land is phenomenally 

priced. So as a dairy farmer who is retiring retires, there is . . . 

very, very difficult for a young farmer because of land price for 

sure, to get started. 

 

So this new concept is going to allow people . . . and we already 

have a number of people who will be coming. One’s coming, I 

know, from Alberta to Saskatchewan. I believe another one’s 

coming from Europe. And you will see in the future, I’m 

predicting that there will be some B.C. dairy production coming 

to Saskatoon. 

 

So what these people are doing is they’re saying we’re not 

hidebound by our old, single-desk, milk marketing board 

controls. We’re preparing ourselves for the future. So you can 

do three things. You can stay the status quo. You can blow the 

whole thing up and go like the U.S. (United States), entirely out 

market. Or you can make some changes that will best suit your 

industry. In this case they are. 

 

Now if you look at the hog market industry, like you have put 

forward, there are many differences in the marketing board of 

hogs and the Canadian Wheat Board. In the Canadian Wheat 

Board, you have a western Canadian geographic area, three 

provinces. With hogs, you have one province. So if there’s 

some factors in production and marketing and processing that 

come into account, and they’re different in one province than in 

another, then you may or may not be putting yourself at a 

disadvantage. 

 

We have done some analysis of the hog industry. We’ve talked 

to producers. The producers themselves are in the process of 

looking at the SPI Marketing Group to see whether they should 

maintain the board; to see whether they should go to a Manitoba 

concept of a private board; to see whether they might go to a 

marketing cooperative like many . . . there’s many large 

marketing cooperatives in the United States. But the industry 

themselves is not being hidebound by the philosophy that 

worked so very well for them in the past. 

 

So what I’m saying is you have to analyse each marketing 

institution case by case, sometimes against what you think 

historically has been so good you shouldn’t change. But be 

very, very pragmatic about your approach, and if it’s not 

working to the best advantage to the industry in the short, 

medium, and long terms, then you better be analysing as to 

what you do to become more modern and make sure that 

Saskatchewan is the best and most efficient hog producers . . . 

has the best, most efficient poultry, dairy, egg, and every other 

producers. I think we can do that if we work cooperatively and 

be very pragmatic to our approach. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have had 

certainly enough comment from my constituents and people 

around the province that are talking about the idea, in fact an 

idea that should have and could have come forward a long time 

ago, about a western Canadian wheat board possibly rather than 

a federal Wheat Board. Is there some comment that you could 

offer as explanation as to why that’s not happening to the 

people out in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think the answer might be fairly 

evident, but maybe I don’t understand your question. If you 

were to go to a western Canadian wheat board, how would you 

maintain the very, very important advantage the Canadian 

Wheat Board has to the tune of some $111 million, the fact that 

the government guarantees the $6 billion that the board handles. 

If you went to a western Canadian board, I think the federal 

government might say, well no, if you’re going to call it the 

western Canadian wheat board, then maybe the western 

provinces should be providing the guarantees. I don’t think you 

want to destroy this. 

 

Secondly, if you want to Balkanize, like some people want to 

do, the marketing of our grain, breaking up the marketing 

advantage we have from a large region . . . And if you look at 

any other crop bloc in the world, look at the European 

Community. What did they do? They went together to provide   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

strength in their marketing. 

 

The NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) was 

supposedly put together to provide a larger marketing bloc. I 

don’t know why you’d want to fragment or Balkanize our 

country’s trading potential, marketing power, by breaking it up. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, we already know that Ontario has 

their wheat board, as do the Atlantic provinces as far as I know. 

So I’m wondering why this is any different, you know, why we 

can’t have the same thing? They seem to be doing fine with 

theirs. What’s the difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can stand up here 

all night and tell her what the differences are because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well let’s hear it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Start now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I’ve already gone through some of 

them. But we have a reputation of some 50-odd years where the 

national government, through the Canadian Wheat Board, has 

been into China. That gave us an advantage over many other 

countries. I don’t know how many bushels of grain the Ontario 

Wheat Board sell to China. Maybe they sell a few but not a 

great lot. The national advantage is what we’re talking about 

here. 

 

Maybe the member could give us her reasons for wanting to go 

away from a Canadian or national board to a regional board. I’d 

like to hear . . . I’ve never heard any logic on this that made any 

sense. Maybe yours will make sense. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What I will do is I will 

bring you to a meeting of people that will certainly talk to you 

about the advantages they feel are here. However I don’t want 

to bring up any specific names in this Assembly, and so I’d be 

pleased to talk with you later about that. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Minister, for responding so openly and 

accurately to my questions, and I’ll just turn it over to my 

colleague now. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

guess it’s time we return to some of the GRIP debate. I know 

that your argument is going to be that it’s before the courts, and 

you don’t want to respond to it. But I think there is an amount 

that you can respond to because without giving your hand as to 

the government’s argument or what your strategies may be, one 

thing that is for certain is that your government would have to 

have the amount of money required in the event you lose that 

court case. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, would you be able to tell us how much money 

you think it would cost the Saskatchewan provincial 

government in the event of a court loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think the member knows that I can’t 

answer that question specifically, and the court case is on. 

There will be a judgement. And at the end of the day, 

governments have to pay bills that they’re legally bound to pay. 

 

But I want to ask the member why he continues — what you’re 

talking about is subsidies versus non-subsidies — why you 

continue to think that there should be some type of subsidy 

program, because I think that most farmers, in fact the majority 

that I talk to, simply say, let’s just get me out of this subsidy 

game; it did more to hurt me than help me. So I would like the 

member to answer this question: why do you continue . . . and 

what advantages do you think it would have for the government 

to continue subsidy programs? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you’re definitely getting off 

track a little bit. I think the question was plain enough. No 

doubt that you have had people within your department 

calculate out what the cost to the provincial taxpayer in the 

event that you lose the court case. And it’s . . . I’m not saying 

I’m for or against subsidies. It’s just a simple question. We’re 

doing estimates; I’m trying to ascertain where we would be 

financially in the event of a court loss, simple. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The problem is . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well the member from Kindersley says 800 

million. I would certainly hope it wouldn’t be that much, but let 

me put it to you this way. How would we ever know what the 

liability is until we hear what the judgement is? The judgement 

could dictate some measures that would change liability. So for 

us to sit here . . . we can sit here and speculate what the liability 

may or may not be, but I don’t think that you could . . . I know 

you can’t really determine what the actual liability is until you 

get a judgement. So we can continue to discuss this, but just 

think about that aspect. The judgement could say many things 

which would affect liability. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I think though that you have 

to assume, based on the court action brought forward by some 

400 farmers, they’re saying that it would be based on the loss 

that they incurred because of the changes from one year to the 

next when you changed the program. 

 

Judgement aside, just based on that simple calculation that you 

no doubt have been able to come up with, just give me a 

ballpark within $25 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Number one, it relates to evidence that 

was put before the courts, so it’s inappropriate to discuss. And 

number two, I repeat, until you know what the judgement says, 

you really won’t know what your liability is because the 

judgement could put conditions on the case. How do you know? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you would have a 

worst-case scenario. You would have already figured it out, I’m 

sure, or your department would, a worst-case scenario based on 

simply what the judgement or the action as it’s taken by the 400 

farmers . . .  

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m simply not going to speculate on the 

liability. 

  



846  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

opportunity while we’re talking about the GRIP program to ask 

the minister a few questions about that program. Now 

obviously, Minister, you’ve made your point that this issue is 

before the courts. And you’ve made your point that you can’t 

speculate on the losses that might be the government’s 

responsibility when this judgement is finished, because there of 

course could be a judgement of certain segments of it that 

would have to be paid and others not. 

 

You might also have a judgement that would allow costs to 

these people that would amount to a lot of money for the court 

battle. You might also of course have penalties assessed. The 

judge might say, you didn’t pay these folks for the last three or 

five years. 

 

And the ones you took money back from on the durum 

overpayment, for example, you probably have charged them 

interest if they didn’t pay back the first year. So the judge might 

say, well fair ball, you charged them interest, now you’re the 

one that’s being judged against; you’ll have to pay back this 

money plus interest. So it could mount up to a lot more than 

folks could calculate, depending on that judgement. However 

the reality is that this is a very serious cost that could be 

incurred by your government, through your department. 

 

That could be enough money to possibly cause the balance of 

the budget, for example, to be gone. It might even be 

speculated, I suppose, that it could be enough money to cause a 

total wreck to your budgets for the next two or three years. 

Might destroy the whole program you set out. Might be so 

severe that your credit rating in the province could be 

deteriorated. You might have to borrow this money at a higher 

rate. It may then cause the rate of all your other borrowings to 

go back up again. This could cost the government and the 

people of Saskatchewan a lot in terms of the reality, that if you 

have to have all of these obligations facing you, this province 

could be in very serious trouble. 

 

So we would anticipate that you would, you would appeal any 

judgement that comes no matter what, on some grounds, and we 

would speculate that you would attempt to hold this off until 

after another election so that you could clean it up afterwards 

and try to refresh your mandate. I would suggest to you though 

that the people of this province wouldn’t accept that; that in fact 

the amount of money we’re talking about here, Minister, is so 

big that your government would fall. 

 

And so if your government could possibly fall and your 

balanced budgets could fall, the seriousness of this question I 

think makes it incumbent upon you to at least give the people of 

Saskatchewan some kind of an answer as to what risk is 

involved in terms, at least of generalities, of minimum possible 

amounts that would be available or might be available or might 

have to be available, and maximums. And when the member 

from Wood River suggests that he would like to have some kind 

of a ballpark figure, all he is really saying to you, I believe, is 

that you owe it to the people of Saskatchewan to give them 

some idea of the dollars that could be involved and how you, as 

a responsible minister, would handle that in order to stop all of 

the other calamities that could occur. 

I could quite easily see your problem escalating to the point 

where you would have to say to the Minister of Highways, sir, 

I’m sorry but your 15-year plan of double-laning No. 1 and No. 

16 Highways now has to be cancelled because we’ve got to pay 

off all these bills. 

 

So it is incumbent upon you to reassure the people of this 

province that the catastrophe of financing that faces us might 

somehow be able to be handled. And if you can’t handle it, 

obviously you’re going to sit in your place and say over and 

over, we can’t speculate or we haven’t got an idea. But that in 

itself is a clear message to the people of Saskatchewan that this 

catastrophe is not only knocking at the door but maybe walking 

through. 

 

So, Minister, rethink your position here and think about 

reassuring the people of Saskatchewan that the bottom hasn’t 

dropped out of their boat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Chairman, my mother always 

said if if’s and and’s were pots and pans, you wouldn’t have to 

buy them. And I think the if’s and and’s of the member’s 

doomsday scenario I totally disagree with. When the judgement 

is received, there will be a calculation if we were to lose the 

case of the liability. Of course if we win the case, there would 

be no liability. So when the judgement is received, we will 

proceed with that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 

Minister, as I pointed out in my question, which I’ve made 

lengthy enough in order for you to have time to think about 

your answer, we clearly pointed out to you, I think, that the lack 

of answer was in itself an answer. The choice not to make a 

decision to do things is always a choice, and it’s always a 

decision in itself. 

 

Your decision has been to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

clearly tonight that this province and this government are 

vulnerable to a judgement so big and so catastrophic that it 

could not only cause the government to fall, but it may destroy 

the finances of this province and all of the good planning that’s 

gone into good budgetary direction over the past five years. In 

fact everything that your government has worked on could be 

destroyed in one fell swoop. 

 

And this is not our doom and gloom scenario, sir. This is the 

one you have just given to the province by not answering. 

 

So we read into this that your answer is quite simply that we 

have got a judgement that’s going against the government. Your 

anticipation here by not answering is that the judgement will go 

in favour of the farmers. And I agree it should. You never 

should have taken this money away from those farmers to begin 

with. That’s when the catastrophe started, was when you started 

playing with the fundamental structure of contracts. 

 

And I heard a wise, wise man once say that when contracts are 

no longer honoured in the province of Saskatchewan, then this 

province isn’t worth 5 cents. And I’d be the last one to suggest 

that every time we turn around we should dig up Tommy 

Douglas’s bones. But he was the man that said that, and your   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

government has defied the fundamental logic of this wise old 

trooper. 

 

So, my friend, you have told us that this government is going to 

fall. I’m glad to hear that. But you’ve also told us we’re going 

to have a financial wreck, and that I’m not glad to hear. But we 

do know where the blame goes, and it goes to you. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the Department of Agriculture, you will have a 

lot of responsibilities and concerns with regards to the recent 

transportation announcements and the things that are planned 

with regards to our railroad system. I believe the front page of 

some of our newspapers this past week have indicated where 

the short-line abandonments are going to be, and we all had 

those delivered by the Minister of Highways a few days back 

and I want to say that I’m happy that he did that. 

 

But transportation and railroads are not just the problems of the 

Minister of Highways and Transportation. They also reflect on 

your department and the way that the agricultural industry is 

going to unfold. Now obviously you’re going to have some 

serious problems throughout this province as a result of those 

abandonments. I think it’s fair that you give your perspective as 

the Minister of Agriculture on what the impact’s going to be 

and how you plan on doing something to offset the tragedies of 

the loss of the Crow and the loss of our railroads and those kind 

of things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, well I’d be glad to answer this 

question. First of all, I guess it’s very unfortunate that the 

federal Liberal government is continuing the ways of the past 

Tory government in not only allowing but accelerating the 

branch line abandonment in the province of Saskatchewan 

which accelerates the off-load of dollars from the federal 

government onto the provincial government. Because when the 

transportation system is under federal legislation, as it is now, 

responsibility is that of the federal government. When the 

legislation no longer is under federal jurisdiction and a line 

becomes a branch line, of course then the responsibility is 

turned over to the provincial government. 

 

So while we continue to argue that things like changing the 

Western Grain Transportation Act into the Canada 

Transportation Act — going to a legislation that was much 

more railway friendly — for the life of me I don’t know why 

the federal Liberals want to do that because if you were to do 

that, you might want to get something for it. You might want to 

get some responsibility from the shippers. 

 

But what’s happened, when the federal government changed the 

legislation — it became shipper friendly instead of farmer 

friendly. And the result of that is . . . well you see what 

happened this winter. I hear today that the Canadian Wheat 

Board is launching some kind of a protest or a suit to the 

railroad companies, saying that they have some responsibility. 

On behalf of farmers, the board is saying you have some 

responsibility for the stoppage of grain. And this is what should 

happen, and this is what we’re continuing to promote to the 

Liberals’ federal cousins. Mr. Goodale, right from 

Saskatchewan, why don’t you now — while the time is 

appropriate, coming through a winter where we’re going to 

spend probably 20 million or more dollars just on demurrage — 

why don’t you put in place a system whereby everybody is 

accountable to get that grain to market. 

 

And the accountability has to be from me as a farmer, in that I 

should have to have that grain delivered when it’s called under 

the contracts, that the elevator companies have responsibility to 

move that grain to the rail as quick as possible. The railways 

have the responsibility to move that grain to the terminal as 

quick as possible, and the terminals have the responsibility to 

get it to the longshoreman. The longshoreman has the 

responsibility to get it into the ship. 

 

Everybody should have that responsibility. And this is why it’s 

opportune time now for the federal Liberal government to put 

forward some legislation. What did I hear last week? I heard 

Mr. Goodale say, or I heard him reported as saying, well we’re 

going to have some liabilities here. We’re going to have some 

responsibilities. And about four hours later we heard some 

officials from Mr. Goodale’s office saying, oh he was 

misinterpreted, misquoted. 

 

Well I don’t care if he’s misquoted or not. That doesn’t remove 

the fact that we need, we need a responsible government in 

Ottawa to make sure that there is some responsibility in the 

movement of our grain. Because I’ll tell you something, and I 

think we should all agree on in this House, it is ludicrous to 

have the farmers pay a demurrage bill for ships waiting at the 

coast when they are not responsible for those ships waiting. If 

the farmers would say, well it’s too cold, I can’t start my grain 

auger, it’s 30 below and I’m not going to haul my grain, then 

they should be responsible. But the way the system works now, 

that is not the case. The responsibility, the hold-ups, are further 

down the line. 

 

So whether it be a grain transportation system . . . and what will 

happen is your short-line railway should have, when they’re put 

forward, should have the same responsibility because short-line 

railways are and could be a very important aspect of our 

transportation system. We have the south-west transportation 

authority who have been working on a pilot project with our 

government to decide what the route should be for the grain to 

go. 

 

The local people are trying to make the decisions because they 

know there’s going to be some line abandonment. And that’s 

the right thing to do, work cooperatively. So I just ask maybe us 

to all support the federal government working cooperatively to 

get the line from that branch line to the ship in Vancouver. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 

obviously in most debates we agree on some things, we 

disagree on other things, and so, you know, I leave that part of 

your answer in that way because we agree with some of it but 

we don’t agree with the rest of it. 

 

Obviously you’re right, the responsibility put into the system is 

necessary. I wonder though, when you make comments about 

how the farmers have to be responsible to deliver when you   



848  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

crack the whip, what kind of a dictatorship you’re planning on 

organizing. Are you suggesting that the government should 

have the power to phone a farmer and say — when it’s 45 

below — it’s your granary full tomorrow morning, and if you 

haven’t got it there, we’re going to penalize you. You deliver it 

because we demand it. 

 

We also would wonder about your position on the contracts that 

are used with the Canadian Wheat Board and how they affect 

the farmers that you represent in terms of that kind of a system 

being attempted to be delivered at this time. Through the new 

contract system there is that attempt to put on people that 

demand that they deliver when somebody bigger with more 

authority calls. And you have a penalty system that is starting to 

be put into the process, the $6 a tonne penalty. 

 

I noted that the minister from Elphinstone said that we should 

listen up and take note of what’s going on here — and we did. 

Now it would be nice if he would take his turn and listen to 

what’s going on from the farmers’ point of view because that’s 

where we come from. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we want you to think about the reality that 

when you make statements like farmers being forced to haul 

when you call on them to do it, that in itself is a philosophical 

direction that a nation might take that I don’t think the farmers 

of this province, and even the people in our cities, would ever 

accept. I think communist Russia has fallen. I think those days 

are gone. That kind of an attempt to run agriculture by force is 

not here. And it’s not going to happen in Saskatchewan. This 

may be the last bastion of NDP support in the country but it 

may very well be coming to an end with this kind of an 

advocated policy. 

 

I know for very certain that on this issue I wouldn’t be afraid to 

go back to the polls tomorrow and back to the electorate. We 

could have an election on this issue alone. That’d be just a lot of 

fun. I think we’d have a ball with the party that just announced 

in the front page of the Leader-Post that they’ve already 

conceded defeat. We’d be quite happy to hand you the next one 

right here in the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, a few minutes ago you were commenting about 

the Canadian Wheat Board and you were making references 

about how the system worked . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Somebody in this Assembly really doesn’t know what’s going 

on. So you tell us one more time if there is in fact not a 

Canadian Wheat Board, or some kind of a wheat board, that 

works in Quebec and Ontario that is significantly different than 

the one that operates in western Canada. Is that a fact or is it 

not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I know that the 

member opposite is a master at trying to twist words and he 

almost, almost succeeded I think. But just if he listened, if he 

were to take the member from Elphinstone’s advice and just 

listen, I’ll repeat what I said. 

 

If it’s as a farmer I am responsible for the demurrage then I 

don’t mind, then I should pay for that demurrage. If I’m 

responsible for demurrage then I should pay for it. Grain is 

called all year round, as we know, and that’s my obligation to 

get that grain to the elevator when it’s called. And I don’t mind 

paying my share of demurrage if I am responsible. The point is 

what the federal Liberal government is missing is that if anyone 

else down the line is responsible, they should have to pay — not 

the farmer. And that is a fundamental principle that we should 

be applying to the movement of our grain. They have time to do 

it before the election. Put something forward. They’re not doing 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, as far as the differences between Ontario 

and the Canadian Wheat Board’s concerned, of course there is 

many differences. Ontario basically services the domestic 

market in Ontario where the millers are — a lot of the millers 

— and the Canadian Wheat Board services the world. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I see you 

have your Crop Insurance officials here tonight and that’s the 

area that I want to discuss with you a little bit. You and I, as 

you know, have had some private discussions about the crop 

insurance changes in the program that you made this year and I 

think generally speaking there’s pretty strong consensus that the 

program changes were good. I think the fact that farmers have 

some choice in terms of levels of coverage, I think are 

important. I think that they were looking for them as well as 

looking for some way of seeing some reductions in premiums. 

 

Now I don’t know, obviously I think it’s too early to see 

whether those changes have had a positive impact in terms of 

acreages covered but I suspect likely you will see that — maybe 

not right away — but I think you’ll probably see it as a growing 

response over time. And I would ask the minister if he wanted 

to comment on that relative to last year. I think we’re probably 

. . . I don’t know whether we’ll see an increase in crop 

insurance acreage or not, or whether you have any way or 

predicting that yet, or whether you know definitely about that or 

not yet; but could you provide us with the crop insurance 

information with respect to acreages covered dating back to 

1990, please. 

 

We want it to go back that far. 1990 the acreages covered from 

crop insurance; ’91, ’92. ’93, ’94, ’95, ’96, and then some 

prediction of acreages to be covered in ’97. I appreciate you 

may not have all of that information with you here this evening, 

but I would ask you if you could endeavour to come up with it 

if you don’t have it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Total insured acres from 1991 . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 1990, 24 million; 1991, 28.2 

million; 1992, 24.6 million; 1993, 20 million; 1994, 18.5 

million; 1995, 19.1 million; 1996, 18.7 million; with a 20-year 

average being 19.9 million. You will know that 1991 when 

GRIP started, if you wanted revenue and . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, we can supply you with these numbers . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we can put in the package for 

the Liberals as well. 

 

One thing to note — and I appreciate your support of the crop 

insurance changes — we have about 2,000 new contract holders 

this year. We also have some cancellations, which is the normal 

order for people who aren’t farming any more. But we really   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

won’t be able to supply you with an accurate measure of how 

the program was until we get our seeded acreage reports. 

Because we have something like 75 per cent of the farmers 

covered with contracts, but they only cover about 55 per cent of 

their acres. 

 

So with the new people in we are also going by Manitoba. Their 

numbers were similar before they put in a similar program and 

they’ve jumped to about 85 per cent . . . 80 per cent coverage. I 

think this year you will see an increase, as I am predicting, and 

probably next year you’ll see an even greater increase as people 

learn about the program. Because if you look at it — I don’t 

know if you’ve looked at your own — but even if you had very 

little money, you could put 50 per cent coverage on with 

spot-loss hail and you could get probably about $70 an acre 

coverage of hail insurance that would be nearly half price to 

other forms of hail insurance. So I think all farmers should take 

a real good look at the options here because it is quite 

reasonable. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Were you going to 

send that information across, if you could? Does that also 

include, in the estimates that you have there, the revenue 

coverage under the GRIP program, the number of acres I mean, 

covered in terms of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, those are all crop insurance 

numbers. We only have one copy of this thing, so we’ll provide 

you with a few copies tomorrow or . . . and any others that you 

want during the debate. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Now as you said, and I can appreciate, that you 

don’t have the figures for 1997 yet and you’ll have to wait for 

the seeded acreage reports to come in and that . . . I would 

almost make the prediction as well that you’ll probably see an 

increase. 

 

Premiums are, in large measure, going down in a lot of areas. 

Some areas are fairly similar, depending on the risk area. So 

you’ll likely see the coverage levels . . . or the number of acres 

increase perhaps, and likely to see it continue to increase over 

time. I think that’s a positive thing in terms of keeping as large 

a base of acreage to cover the program in terms of its total 

liability and that sort of thing. 

 

When you make your calculations in terms of crop insurance 

and the total liability of the package, do you base it on some 

sort of, I don’t know, some sort of formula as to what you feel 

is likely to happen in the upcoming year? I know we have never 

had the situation where there’s a total wipe-out of the entire 

crop, but I think it is useful to know, and for the farmers of 

Saskatchewan to know and for the general public as well I think 

to know, the total number of acres that are covered and the total 

liability that the province has in terms of that, if you had the 

absolute worst-case scenario and you didn’t have a crop at all in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that’s impossible to . . . likely impossible to 

happen, but I think, I think I would like to know in terms of the 

program what the total liability of the program is. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Of course because we don’t have the 

acres for 1997, we won’t be able to give you a liability. But last 

year’s total liability is about — this is in the annual report too, 

so you can check the annual report for actual — but about 1.5 

billion. Maybe I have it right here. 

 

Yes, they’re all in the Crop Insurance comparative statistics, 

liabilities and premiums. This is in the 1995-96 annual report. I 

can give you back to . . . what do you want? — ’91? ’90 . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . ’91 total liability, these are in 

billions . . . 1990 total liability, these are in billions, 1.7 billion; 

’91-92, 1.4 billion; ’92-93, 1.7 billion; ’93-94, 1.2 billion; 

’94-95, 1.2 billion; ’95-96, 1.3 billion. And that’s on page 13 of 

the ’95-96 annual report. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Now I think that’s very significant, and I’m sure 

the government, your government, does as well; $1.5 billion of 

coverage, insurance coverage, is available to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that is a very good thing in terms of 

guaranteeing some measure of protection for the economy of 

Saskatchewan to the tune of, in ’95-96, $1.5 billion. 

 

And you know we all, I think, are concerned that if you saw that 

kind of loss it would put the province at, you know, significant, 

in a crop insurance program, at significant risk. And that’s 

unlikely to happen, but it’s also good to know that there is that 

kind of level of coverage. 

 

Does Crop Insurance, as other insurance companies do like hail 

insurance companies, do they carry any kind of reinsurance 

through any vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, Saskatchewan and other provinces 

have a reinsurance agreement between the federal and 

provincial governments and it’s not exactly the same as any 

other insurance company where they buy or purchase their 

reinsurance. We have an agreement worked out whereby we can 

handle the debt in a reinsurance fund. And there’s a formula 

worked out — how much of that debt is paid, how much of the 

premiums go toward that debt. 

 

As you know now, we this year totally paid off our reinsurance 

debt to the tune of $150 million down to zero. The federal 

government, we would have liked to see them come down to 

zero, but they paid theirs down to $90 million, and that 

pay-down is one of the reasons we have been able to 

significantly reduce the premiums to farmers this year. 

 

And if you get into a series of bad years again, of course your 

insurance will go up. But historically on average years, you 

don’t have a whole lot of problem with the reinsurance debt. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Did those numbers that you gave us for the 

earlier years, did that . . . was that the crop insurance 

component alone or did that cover the revenue insurance under 

the GRIP program as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s all crop insurance. 

 

  



850  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

Mr. Boyd:  Do you have corresponding numbers for the 

revenue insurance program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, in the same annual report on page 

4, that being the ’95-96 Crop Insurance annual report. On page 

4, the revenue insurance statistics liability; now this liability, 

remember, is if you had zero production in the whole province, 

okay: 3.2 billion in ’91; 2.7 billion, 2.8 billion let’s say in ’92; 

2.4 billion ’93; and 2.3 billion in ’94. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  And the reasons for the reduction would be 

simply because the crop prices were increasing over time during 

that particular time frame. And that’s why there would be a less 

of a liability potential there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, there were a few factors, but the 

main factors are that the liability dropped due to the fact that the 

support price was dropping; therefore the number of customers 

on the number of acres dropped. Because in the same report 

you’ll see the number of acres went from 27 million in 1991 to 

23 million in 19 — or billion, sorry — 27 billion in 1991 to 

23.6 billion in 1994. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Million. I get my b’s and my m’s mixed 

up here. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I’m glad you’re not figuring out our 

taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Oh I can figure pretty good. A number 

of customers, same charge, went from 49, almost 50,000 in 

1991 down to thirty eight point seven thousand in 1994. So 

therefore the liabilities would reduce accordingly. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Yes, I think I can understand that, Mr. Minister. 

The changes in the program came in . . . they came in the spring 

of ’92. Is that correct? And then over a period of time the 

revenue insurance program wound down essentially in ’94. Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That is basically correct. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  So from ’91 through to ’94, we saw the revenue 

insurance program changes resulted in the total liability 

difference from 3.2 to 2.3 billion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  What were the changes in terms of the program 

in the, I guess you would call it the acreage coverage levels that 

you . . . an average acreage coverage level between ’91 and 

’94? 

 

Excuse me, do you work that out? Do you have a coverage? I’m 

not sure how you arrive at your estimate of what it’s going to 

be. Or do you just total up the total number of acres, the total 

number of dollars per acre covered, and then that’s how you 

come up with the estimate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, you have your total acres times 

your long-time term yield times the IMAP (indexed moving 

average price). That will give you your total liability. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Do you have an acreage coverage level for those 

years that we were talking about, from 1990 through to ’96? An 

average of what that coverage level for a farmer of 

Saskatchewan would be. Like I don’t know, on my farm — I 

can’t recall the numbers any longer — but I suspect it was 

somewhere in the neighbourhood, under the revenue insurance 

program, of about 130, possibly $140 an acre. Do you have 

those coverage levels for crop insurance and for the revenue 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just a little bit of homework for you 

here. All you have to do of course is divide the total liability by 

the number of seeded acres or the number of contract holders. 

What I’ve done is just divided the liability for 1991, about 

$65,000 per contract holder; and 1994, about nearly $60,000 

per contract holder. And if you want to do the dollar per acre all 

you’ve got to do is divide . . . get the annual report, page 4, and 

do the multiplication . . . division rather, and you’ll have an 

answer. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  You don’t have that information with you? I’m 

just wondering whether you do or don’t, or whether you would 

care to provide us with that information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, I mean I guess we can do it if you 

don’t want your research to have to do it. We can provide you 

with the multiplication of ’91 to ’94 seeded acre value and 

customer per contract holder value. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Can you do that for both the crop insurance 

component of it and for the revenue insurance component of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  In the spirit of cooperation, yes, but 

really you could just do this yourself tomorrow morning. It 

would only take about two minutes. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well I’m trusting, I’m trusting your officials will 

have a better handle on how to make the calculations . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I can multiply and . . . I can 

multiply and divide pretty well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m 

just wondering whether you can. And we’ll await your answers 

on, we’ll await your answers on that. 

 

I think what I’m getting at here though is that through the years 

of 1990 through 1996, we’ve seen a significant, reasonably 

significant, number of changes in terms of the crop insurance 

programs. Coverage levels vary from year to year depending on 

grain prices; acreage goes up and down; all of those kinds of 

things. The gross insurance program starting in 1991 after the 

changes, and the gradual wind-down of it through 1994 resulted 

in differences in terms of the coverage levels available to 

farmers. 

 

I just wondered whether or not you had an average coverage 

level of what the farmer of Saskatchewan, a total average   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

farmer of Saskatchewan, would have in terms of a coverage 

level in 1990 through 1996. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well we have that. I assume you have 

the ’95-96 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Not with me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, but do you have access to it — 

annual report? Well on page 13 it gives you, from 1961-62 year 

all the way through to 1995-96, the average liability per 

contract holder, under Crop Insurance. For example I can give 

you the last few years: 1990-91, thirty-six point eight thousand; 

’91-92, twenty-eight point seven thousand; ’92-93, thirty-four 

point five thousand; ’93-94, twenty-seven point five thousand; 

and ’94-95, twenty-eight point nine thousand or basically 

29,000; and ’95-96, thirty-two point one thousand. And we can 

supply similar . . . well let’s just say for the revenue program 

from 1990 instead of going back to ’62. Would that be 

sufficient? Okay. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well it wasn’t in existence back to 1961. You 

can start it back from the beginning years of the GRIP program 

if you like but . . . 

 

Now I guess what I’m driving at here, Mr. Minister — and you 

may have figured it out — but what I’m driving at here, Mr. 

Minister, is I think you can come up with what the differences 

were under the GRIP program in 1991 and then after the 

changes, what they were in 1992. And I think that that’s 

potentially what you and your government is looking at in terms 

of the liability of your program changes and the potential for 

that liability to be exercised against your government in the 

court case that is on right now with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that’s the figure that you’re looking at here, of what it is. 

And I understand that your Crop Insurance officials made in the 

court case, they made some submissions with respect to the 

potential liability that there was in there. And I’m wondering 

whether or not you can share that information that was made 

public in the court cases involving the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well under the revenue insurance 

program, as on page 4 of the Crop Insurance annual report, 

you’ll see the liability does not change because of the changes 

in the program. It’s the indemnities that change. As far as 

liability goes, there’s very little change. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  The coverage levels though went from $3.2 

billion insured for 28.2 million acres in 1991 down to $2.3 

billion covered for acreages of 18.5 million acres in 1994. Is 

that not correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That is correct. But to answer your next 

question, it is a fact that the acres changed and the IMAP 

changed. So a liability is determined by acres times long-term 

yield times IMAP. So the liability doesn’t change. It’s the 

indemnity that changes when they’re changing the program. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  So maybe you could explain to me then the 

reason for your changes in 1991. What was the objective of 

those changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Now I don’t know if the member knows 

this or not, but that was evidence that was placed before the 

courts in the court case. And I certainly wouldn’t want to do 

any speculating or say anything that might have any effect on 

the outcome of the case. 

 

So after the judgement is received, assuming that neither side 

appeals, I’d be very willing to sit down with you and at length 

discuss the merits of the program and the merits of the changes. 

But because it was placed — and this is sort of the rule that I’ll 

be using tonight. I think you know I have to do this — if it was 

evidence that was placed before the courts, I will not be 

discussing it. If it’s general questions like you are building up to 

with this question, I certainly can answer those. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  I think the point is, Mr. Minister, is that as 

taxpayers in Saskatchewan I think they have the right to know 

what the potential liability in this case is. And I think you can 

figure it out. I suspect your department has the number. I 

suspect they have the number; I suspect they have the 

worst-case scenario number and a number of scenarios along 

the way in terms of that. And if you turn to your Crop Insurance 

officials I bet they can give it to you. 

 

But I know you’re not going to give it to the House here 

because it’s almost like an admission of guilt in terms of what’s 

happened there. If the farmers can — in their court case — can 

bring this government to terms in making the changes to the 

GRIP program, if they were done in a fashion that was illegal 

and in indeed that there was a . . . the contract was broken, then 

it’s a case of establishing the amount of liability. 

 

And at that point I suspect that you, if you lose this court case 

— which I think there’s a pretty strong likelihood that you’re 

going to, and you will probably appeal it to another court and 

all those kinds of things — but rest assured, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, if you lose in the next few weeks or however 

long it’s going to take to make that judgement, they will be 

feeling out there across Saskatchewan that you and your 

government and the member from Rosetown-Elrose, who 

brought in those changes, are responsible for paying the 

difference between what they had in coverage levels in 1991 

and what they saw those changes erode to in 1992, ’93, ’94, to 

the wind-up of the program. That’s what they will be doing. 

 

And each and every one of them, I predict, Mr. Minister, will be 

going back through their records relatively quickly after that 

judgement comes through, if you lose that court case, and they 

will be able to see, because you had those coverage levels in 

1991, and if it changed very much in 1992 it’s a pretty easy 

calculation to find out what your liability loss . . . or I mean 

your coverage loss was. So I think that it’s incumbent upon you 

and your officials to work out those numbers. 

 

And I’m surprised that you’re unwilling to give that out, frankly 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister says I’m not 

surprised. Yes, I am surprised frankly. I think you have an   



852  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

obligation to tell the taxpayers of Saskatchewan what kind of 

potential hit there is here, because I think we’re looking in the 

neighbourhood of $500 million. That’s the kind of 

neighbourhood that we’re looking at probably. It’s only after 

some very, very simple calculations that you’ve provided here 

this evening that you can come up with those kinds of numbers; 

$500 million is a potential that we’re looking at. We, off the top 

of our heads, said $800 million awhile ago. But it comes down 

. . . and you look at the numbers that you have provided here 

tonight, and it looks like to me there’s about $500 million of 

potential loss in there, and I wonder if your officials could 

confirm that for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the member knows he’s got me in a 

bit of a disadvantage because he can do all the speculating he 

wishes. And he knows there’s evidence that has been placed 

before the courts, and I’m not going to be . . . I would be very 

foolish to put myself in a position where I might be trying to 

influence anything the courts would decide. 

 

And so you can stand up here for the next 35 minutes . . . 

(inaudible) . . . and speculate all you want as to what the 

taxpayer liability is. But I’m telling you . . . and first of all it has 

nothing to do with admissions of guilt or innocence. It’s simply 

the fact that when the court cases like this are before us, we all 

know the rules that we have to play by. Your rules are much 

more looser than I because I am part of government. 

 

But I say to you that when the judgement comes down, we will 

look at the judgement. If we were to win, of course there is no 

liability. If we were to lose, there is a potential liability. That 

can then be calculated because you’ll know what the rules the 

judge sets down are. Until that time, we can speculate till we’re 

blue in the face. And that’s all it is, is speculation. I mean if you 

want to sort of try to get something going about the number of 

the dollars that are exposed here you can, but at the end of the 

day it won’t help you, because I just can’t simply provide those 

things to prejudice the decision. 

 

After this is over I would love to stand here and go toe to toe 

with you to discuss this and the many other subsidy issues in 

agriculture, because I think it would be a great time to have you 

describe to us why you believe that there should be continued 

subsidy programs rather than sort of having the market-place 

decide what the payment should be. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, no one’s talking about, and no 

one’s asking that I’m aware of, for continued subsidy programs. 

I’m not. What we’re simply saying here is though, your 

government was involved in a contract program that involved 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. You have a contractual agreement 

with the farmers of Saskatchewan. Each and every farmer that 

was involved in the gross revenue insurance program — 

insurance program, not subsidy program or anything else — it 

was called gross revenue insurance program, as we all recall . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Misnamed, the member from 

Lloydminster says, but she knows exactly that’s what it was 

called. 

 

If it was a subsidy program why weren’t the coverages exactly 

the same to everybody? Why weren’t a number of things 

exactly the same? Why were there some farmers, if you 

participated in the program . . . The only way you participated 

in it is you had to pay a premium towards it. I’ve never known 

of a subsidy program yet where you’ve had to pay a premium to 

get into it. 

 

It was an insurance program and you know it was an insurance 

program, Mr. Minister. Your officials know it was an insurance 

program. Every farmer in Saskatchewan knows it was an 

insurance program and the only ones that seem to make any 

objection to that now is you, because it’s convenient for you to 

try and call it a subsidy program. It’s convenient for you to cry 

and call it a subsidy program because that somehow is what you 

and your officials, and your department and the Minister of 

Justice and all of the other smart people over there have come 

up with as the excuse to try and get you off the hook. That’s 

what it is. You’ve come up with this half-baked scheme and 

calling it a subsidy program rather than an insurance program, 

because you think that’s the one key word in here that’s going 

to get you and your government off the hook. 

 

I think that’s what it is, Mr. Minister. I think that’s what the 

farmers of Saskatchewan are out there saying; because lots of 

them are calling and saying, what is this minister and his 

officials and his government talking about in court when they 

say this program is a subsidy program? I had to pay a premium 

to belong to that plan, they say. It was no such thing as a 

subsidy program. 

 

If, for example, the crop prices increased, or if, for example, 

your crop was a bumper crop, you got nothing out of the 

program, you got nothing out of the program in terms of any 

support. The only way you could get support out of that 

program is if you had an average crop or a below average crop 

and the price changed, the IMAP changed. That’s the only way 

there was any coverage levels available to you. It had nothing to 

do with any kind of a subsidy program in terms of anything like 

that. It was an insurance program, and the farmers of 

Saskatchewan participated in it in the full knowledge that it was 

an insurance program. 

 

(2200) 

 

And for you and your department to go into court and try and 

malign the motives of the farmers that have brought this suit 

against you and somehow or another suggest that it was a 

subsidy program, I think belittles the intelligence of each and 

every single farmer that participated in that program. 

 

I think you owe the farmers of Saskatchewan an apology for 

trying to get off your . . . get rid of your contractual obligations 

by coming into court with that kind of a half-baked scheme to 

try and absolve you of any liability under this program. 

 

Your program . . . your officials had to go into court and they 

had to talk about the differences in coverage levels, didn’t they? 

They had to talk about what there was in terms of coverage and 

what those farmers were potentially at risk for. They had to 

provide that kind of information because the judge required that 

kind of information to make some kind of a judgement in terms 

of what that liability was. 

  



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

And I think that that information . . . and we’re going to go 

down to the court tomorrow and we’re going to find out what 

your officials said there. Because I think they said the kind of 

liability that you and your government are up for right now, and 

the potential costs that are there. And they tried to soft-pedal it; 

they tried to come in and say that it wasn’t anywhere near what 

the farmers themselves were suggesting it was. 

 

But as I said, I think the farmers of Saskatchewan know better 

because like other farmers in Saskatchewan, I along with the 

many, many others I’m sure, kept the documents from back 

then right through until today. They have them on their file 

sitting in their filing cabinet at home, stuffed away in their 

office boxes at home. 

 

They know what the difference is in their coverage levels at that 

time and they know what it was afterwards. And they know 

how much, they know how much of a beating they took at the 

hands of this government in terms of those changes. And the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, he knows what they were. 

 

The Minister of Finance knows what they were because the 

Minister of Finance, if you recall, when Mr. Romanow was 

crying poor to the whole world and saying that Saskatchewan 

was on the brink of bankruptcy, she was saying, well we made 

changes in the GRIP program and we cut back in terms of a 

number of other areas, and those were all savings to us, Mr. 

Mazankowski. That’s the kinds of things that farmers out there 

don’t believe from your government any longer, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Finance minister on one hand says, we made savings by 

making changes to the GRIP program, and here’s what they are, 

Mr. Mazankowski. But on the other hand you and your officials 

march into court and say oh no, there wasn’t any loss of 

potential revenue to you as a farmer. No, no, no, it wasn’t an 

insurance program, it was a subsidy program. 

 

What you’ve done is insulted farmers by coming into court with 

that type of defence. And I think they will remember it. And the 

other thing that you insulted when you brought in this whole 

changes to it, is you brought in legislation that said you can’t 

take them even to court to find out. 

 

Well they finally got you there didn’t they, Mr. Minister. They 

finally got you right where they wanted you in the end. They’ve 

got you to where now you aren’t in control of the situation any 

longer. They got you to where there’s a judge in this province 

that’s going to make a decision about you and the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose . . . as changes to this program and every 

single one of the other members over there that voted in favour 

of those changes. 

 

This side of the House walked out of the legislature for a 

number of days — 18 days — over that until the Speaker of the 

Assembly at that time came in with a bunch of half-baked 

reasons to change the rules of this Assembly and stop the bell 

ringing at that time. And you remember it the same way I 

remember it, Mr. Minister. 

 

And again it was another one of those examples to the farmers 

of Saskatchewan of how this government doesn’t care one iota 

about what farming is all about in Saskatchewan or how it was 

going to impact on them. The only thing that you were 

interested in was discrediting whatever kind of program any 

previous administration had brought in. The same kinds of 

things you do right today in this Assembly all of the time. When 

there’s something wrong it’s either the previous administration 

or the federal government of today. Nothing to do with anything 

you’re doing over there. Not a darn thing to do with anything 

you’re doing over there. It’s always somebody else’s fault. 

 

It’s always somebody else’s fault. The GRIP program had to go 

and the reason it had to go in your mind is because you wanted 

to save money. And the only way you could come up with to do 

that was to break the contract. 

 

And as the member from Cypress Hills says, even your own 

former premier, Tommy Douglas, says if a contract . . . if you 

don’t honour contracts the whole province isn’t worth a thing. 

And I think that’s what the farmers of Saskatchewan have in 

terms of support from your government, not a thing — not a 

thing. 

 

Not a thing of support from your government in terms of those 

things. Nothing but utter contempt for farmers is what they can 

expect from you and your government. And at that time . . . and 

all the farmers of Saskatchewan, they were supportive. They 

were supportive of us walking out of the legislature. But you 

finally got the Speaker of the House at that time . . . We 

wondered how it happened, incidentally. I still wonder about 

that from time to time, how you finally convinced him to break 

that bell-ringing session. I wonder how that happened? 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Point of order, Mr. Chair. I don’t believe 

that in this debate, which is actually a very good debate, that the 

Speaker should be brought into the Chair, or any of the 

Speaker’s judgements should be brought into the Chair . . . 

brought into question by the member. And I would ask the 

member that he withdraw any allegations he made about the 

Speaker at this time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, to the 

point of order, I find it interesting . . . yes, it is a good debate. I 

think the member from Prince Albert recognizes that. But 

sometimes, sometimes debate certainly does start to gnaw at 

members, especially when the truth is starting to hit home. And 

it seems to me that while the question of a ruling of the 

Speaker, the former Speaker of this Assembly, whether or not a 

person can reflect to that, but realities are some rules changed 

that made it difficult to address an issue of the day. 

 

So I guess when I raise the question, I raise it on the basis of 

debate in the past and how the debate has been allowed to 

proceed, and certainly just want to bring that to your attention. 

 

The Chair:  I thank the Government Whip for raising the 

point of order, and I thank the hon. member from Moosomin for 

speaking to that point of order. It is the practice of the 

legislature that Speakers not be involved in debates. 

  



854  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

I was listening to the debate as it unfolded, but I would have to 

say I must review Hansard to form a firmer opinion on this. If 

it’s the wish of the whip, I can bring a ruling down tomorrow. 

Or we can proceed with the general understanding that the 

long-standing practices of this legislature are that the Speaker is 

not brought into the debate. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the whole 

point of the exercise here tonight, on our part anyway, is to 

illustrate the differences in terms of crop insurance coverage 

levels over the number of years, the revenue insurance program 

levels over the number of years, and things of that nature. And I 

think what you will find is, is that in the information that the 

minister has provided to the Assembly here tonight, there is a 

significant difference in the levels of coverage that were 

available to the farmers of Saskatchewan prior to the changes in 

1991 to the GRIP program. 

 

I think every farmer out in Saskatchewan, as we grind down 

closer day by day to whenever the judgement is made on this 

very, very important court case, they’ll be making those kinds 

of determinations themselves on their own farming operation. 

And it will be very significant, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I think you will find that — I can’t recall how many farmers are 

involved in this current . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Four hundred. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Four hundred are involved in this current class 

action lawsuit brought against this government. And it may not 

result in too significant of a total overall liability because we’re 

talking about 400 farmers. 

 

But how many participants were there in the GRIP program? 

How many potential lawsuits are coming forward if there is a 

lawsuit . . . if this one is successful? How many class action 

lawsuits will there be coming forward with? How many farmers 

will say, if those 400 farmers were wronged, was I wronged as 

well? 

 

And I suspect every single one of them will feel exactly the way 

I do when I say I think I was wronged as a farmer. I think the 

member from Cypress was wronged. I think the member from 

Shaunavon was wronged. I think the member from Saltcoats 

was wronged. I think the member from Moosomin was 

wronged, Souris-Cannington was wronged, and any other 

farmer in Saskatchewan, I think, was wronged. 

 

And I think what we’re going to find, Mr. Member, and Mr. 

Minister of Agriculture, is that the only way you’re going to 

hold off massive numbers of lawsuits coming forward against 

you and your government is to simply say at the end of the day 

at this court case . . . And not take it any further, because I think 

we got it right where we probably have to have it, right here in 

Saskatchewan, for decision; you’re probably going to opt to go 

to the Supreme Court or something like that and try and drag 

this thing out for a few more years and spend a few million 

more of taxpayers’ dollars in terms of legal fees and everything 

else. 

 

But I suspect at the end of the day, if you lose this one, and 

there’s a good chance you’re going to, every farmer in 

Saskatchewan is going to say, I lost X number of dollars 

because of that member from Rosetown-Elrose’s changes in the 

program. And you are responsible for that now today. 

 

And you and your government are going to be in, I would say, a 

pretty deep kettle of hot water with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan because finally it will be confirmed for all to see, 

finally it will be confirmed for all to see that the changes that 

you came in did result in lower coverage levels and that the 

contractual obligation that you had to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan was broken. 

 

And I can’t help but think that that will be a glorious day for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, because it will be the kind of thing 

that they’ll stand up and they’ll say: finally, finally somebody in 

this province has brought this government under control. It took 

a number of years — it took six years or five or six years for 

that to finally happen — but finally there’s someone that is a 

higher authority than the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, 

and the member from Rosetown Elrose, who marched those 

changes through this legislature. 

 

If you recall, Mr. Chairman, at the time the debate went on for a 

long period of time in this legislature and finally the opposition, 

the official opposition of the day, walked out of this Assembly. 

We walked out for 18 days. The bells rang continuously for 18 

days. And then what happened? Do you remember what 

happened? I remember what happened. There was changes 

made in the way the bell ringing could happen. It was stopped. 

It was stopped. It was stopped. The bell ringing was stopped 

and the Speaker of the day said that there was going to be a 

decision made on this. And there was. 

 

(2215) 

 

There was a vote taken and every single one of those members 

of the day at that time came into this Assembly and voted but 

for one . . . there was one significant difference in a vote at that 

time than what normally takes place in the House on a regular 

basis. They voted without any opposition whatsoever. The 

opposition did not come into the Assembly. 

 

We did not recognize, and we still do not recognize to this day 

— we didn’t recognize then and we do not recognize to this day 

— that that vote was legitimate. The vote was not legitimate at 

that time, I believe. And I think every other farmer in 

Saskatchewan believes that that vote was not legitimate. 

 

That vote wasn’t legitimate because of the fact that the way the 

changes were made in the Assembly in terms of its . . . the rules 

of the Assembly. I don’t think it was legitimate then. The 

farmers of Saskatchewan don’t think it’s legitimate. The 400 

farmers that have dragged you into court kicking and screaming 

don’t think it’s legitimate. Nor will all the other farmers of 

Saskatchewan that bring class action lawsuits think that vote is 

legitimate. Because you know why? Because the judge that 

comes down with this ruling is going to say: it wasn’t 

legitimate. He’s going to say those contractual changes that you 

broke in this program were not legitimate ways of going about   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

it. And he probably should also say that the kinds of things that 

you brought in terms of what the farmers could do about that 

court case were illegitimate as well. Brought in the legislation. 

No one to this day, no one up till now, has ever seen that kind 

of legislation. We’ve never seen it since. I don’t think you ever 

had to since use that kind of onerous type of legislation to stifle 

debate or to stop actions being brought against you — never 

had to do it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You did it against the judges. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well that’s true. My colleague mentioned the 

judges. And that’s interesting because I think it’s an interesting 

kind of little debate that’s going to be going on. It’s going on 

right now, Mr. Chairman, in the legal community. There’s an 

interesting debate going on in the legal community right now. 

They’re saying — friends of mine that are in the legal 

community — they’re saying to me, you know what, they’re 

kind of wondering what’s going to happen with this whole 

thing. 

 

You’ve got a government on one hand that’s got farmers 

dragging them into court to try and get what they believe was 

their contractual obligation. On the other hand, on the other 

hand what do you have, Mr. Minister of Justice? He knows 

exactly what I’m going to say. On the other hand what do you 

have? What do you have? You have a bunch of judges that have 

got you in court as well. They’ve got you into court the same 

way, kicking and screaming the whole way along for breaking 

what they feel is a contractual obligation for them. 

 

So the legal community out there, and I think a lot of farmers 

out there, are saying to themselves, I wonder how this thing’s 

going to shake down? I wonder how a judge — supposing a 

judge out there felt that they somehow were wronged — feels 

about farmers in Saskatchewan that feel they were wronged. It’s 

going to be an interesting debate. It’s going around the legal 

community just wildfire these days wondering what’s going to 

happen here. It’s going around the legal community out there 

and everybody is saying to themselves, this is going to be an 

interesting test for this government and for democracy here in 

this province. 

 

It’s going to be an interesting contest to see whether or not . . . 

what happens in this, Mr. Member, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, 

Mr. Member from Rosetown-Elrose, and the Premier of this 

province and certainly the Finance minister, who as much as 

admitted a little while ago in terms of her comments about Mr. 

Romanow’s thoughts on the province going bankrupt, that the 

changes resulted in less pay-out to agriculture producers in this 

province, and it saved the Government of Saskatchewan money, 

the changes that they made. And that was one of the reasons 

why they’ve been able to hold off the bankruptcy of Canada . . . 

or the bankruptcy, pardon me, of Saskatchewan. 

 

And there was an interesting cartoon in one of the papers. I 

think it was in the Star-Phoenix. It had the Premier of this 

province, if you can imagine, like some kind of a beggar 

standing beside a car asking if he could wipe the windows of 

the car, like you see in some of the poorest neighbourhoods in 

the United States where you’ll have people coming out and 

wiping the windows of your car. Like that. And the people 

inside the car . . . I can’t remember exactly what the caption 

was, Mr. Chairman, but it was something like that, you poor 

soul, I wonder if you’d mind coming and moving to Alberta 

along with us. What it did is I think it made a mockery of the 

Premier’s office because he made a mockery out of the fact that 

he cried “fire” one too many times in a theatre. It was a similar 

type of thing in my mind, exactly a similar type of thing. 

 

The Premier of this province . . . we’ve been pulled back from 

bankruptcy so many times by this benevolent Premier here that 

everybody in Saskatchewan owes him a debt of gratitude for the 

hard work and effort and the late nights that he stayed up to 

pore over the books of Saskatchewan to ensure that he can hold 

us back from the brink of bankruptcy. 

 

It’s just an interesting way of looking at it, isn’t it, Mr. 

Chairman? It’s an interesting way of looking at it. I think that’s 

the kind of thing that farmers are looking at here in this 

province today, Mr. Minister. I think they’re looking at it, and 

they’re saying, I wonder how this government is going to come 

up with that money. I wonder how the Government of 

Saskatchewan, if this judge says they owe $500 million to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan, how they’re going to come up with 

that money, how they’re going to balance the budget of 

Saskatchewan and still maintain that. 

 

Well you’ve still got some Cameco shares; you could sell them. 

You could do it that way. You still got some Wascana shares; 

you could do it that way. You might be able to come in and say, 

well we’re forced to as a result of this judgement against us, 

we’re forced to privatize SaskTel and we’re forced to do a 

whole bunch of other things. 

 

And the member from Athabasca says, what about the PC Party 

fund? Well I’d ask you, does the Tommy Douglas fund have 

$500 million? Is that what it’s going to take? Does the Tommy 

Douglas House have 500 million that they could cough up? Do 

you have that ability to raise money as a government these 

days? It’s going to be an interesting test for the people of 

Saskatchewan and for this government. It’s going to be a very, 

very critical test for the members of this government and the 

cabinet and Executive Council to come up with some way of 

paying for this judgement. 

 

And you look at this judgement and you have to wonder. You 

have the Canadian . . . wasn’t it the president of the Canadian 

Bar Association saying that this government is likely going to 

lose this case? This government’s likely going to lose this case 

because some . . . there has to be something that people can 

hold onto in terms of what they can expect from government. 

 

Contractual law is one thing that people kind of . . . and there’s 

many, many lawyers over on that side of the Assembly. The 

member from Saskatoon, the current Health minister’s a lawyer. 

He knows that contractual law is an important thing. He also 

knows that when you go out and you buy a product and it’s 

misrepresented, that the natural course is to take the party who 

feel you have been done by, aggrieved by, you go into the court 

system and you get what’s right back from the process. 

 

  



856  Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1997 

And everyone knows if you went down to a car dealership here 

in Regina and bought a car and the car turned out to be other 

than you expected it to be and you took it to court and the 

government . . . or I mean the judge says yes, you’re right, sir, 

you’ve been wronged, that then provides a judgement against 

that car dealership. They are obligated to pay. They don’t have 

legislation that they can walk into the court with and say, no we 

don’t have to do that. We don’t have to do that because we’re 

the government and we know what’s right for all of 

Saskatchewan. We deemed it to have happened. We deemed 

that contract out of existence. 

 

Boy it must be nice to be as high and mighty as the folks on that 

side of the House like to think they are, brought in legislation 

and all of us remember it that were here at that time. All of us 

remembered at that time that said it deemed . . . the contract was 

deemed to have not existed. I remember being in the legislature 

and I remember bringing my own personal contract in at that 

time and saying, look at here, I thought I had an agreement. I 

thought I had an agreement that said that the government was 

on the hook for this much; I was on the hook for the premium. 

 

And I think that’s what every other farmer in Saskatchewan 

thought as well. They thought because they had a contractual 

agreement with government that everything was going to be 

okay. So what did they do? What did they do at that time? 

Many of them went out and they made agreements with their 

landlords in a lot of cases, saying to them, I got a guarantee here 

for — well we’ll say round figures — a hundred dollars an acre, 

crop insurance, and GRIP revenue insurance, a hundred dollars 

an acre. I’m seeding 600 acres. They’ll say to themselves, I got 

$60,000 worth of revenue. My cost of seed is this much, my 

cost of crop insurance is this much, my revenue insurance 

premium — premium — is this much, my fuel is this much, my 

repairs are this much, here’s what my rent on that particular 

parcel of land is going to be. And they pencil it all out and they 

said, wow, I think we can probably make her through another 

year here. 

 

Farming being what it is, it’s sometimes difficult in 

Saskatchewan as we all know. And they said, it’s pretty 

unpredictable. But for once they had what they thought was a 

contract with a government that had no way of getting out of it. 

Just like the farmers had no way of getting out of it. 

 

They opted into the program. They went into the program and 

they said, okay, here’s my money; I’m putting it on the table in 

terms of a premium. Here’s my money; I’m putting it on the 

table in terms of a premium. Here’s what’s going to happen if 

this program . . . or if my crop doesn’t amount to what I hope it 

will amount to. Or here’s what’s going to happen if the price of 

grain slips, as it started doing through that time frame, as we all 

know. 

 

But they thought to themselves, well at least, at least I’ve got a 

contract here with the government. At least I’ve got a contract 

with the government. And if anybody should be setting an 

example of how to live up to their obligations in terms of 

contracts, it should be a government, shouldn’t it? Shouldn’t it 

be a government? Should it not be a government, all you 

members over there? 

 

If you were wronged in any kind of way, if you were buying a 

car and thought that you got beat on the deal in some kind of a 

contractual agreement, would you not think it is right that the 

laws of this country uphold your right to take them to court, 

first of all. 

 

An Hon. Member:  They do in everything else. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  They do in everything else, that’s right. They do 

in everything else. Every single other thing that you can think 

of that you have a contract with, if you think that you’ve been 

beat on the deal, you have the opportunity to take it to court and 

find out whether people agree with you in terms of a judgement. 

You have that opportunity to do that. That’s what democracy is 

supposed to be about. 

 

That’s what democracy is supposed to be about. It’s not about 

gang rule. It’s not about gang rule, and that’s the way you 

people seem to operate. It’s not about that way of doing and 

being in government. It’s not about just coming in and saying to 

the people, that never happened; we deem it out of existence. It 

didn’t happen because we are the government now and we 

make the rules, and we’re going to make it such that you can’t 

even take us to court. 

 

And the member from Rosetown-Elrose, I remember him 

bringing in that legislation, and I couldn’t help but think at that 

time, I think that that member and every other member of 

cabinet and every other member of that government knows that 

this is wrong. But what motivates them? What motivates them 

to make these kinds of changes? What made them take, what 

made them take that leap of faith? What made them have that 

sort of moral hazard that said, I think I can jump between what I 

believe is a right of people to take us to court, what I believe is 

right in terms of contractual law, and what actually happened 

there. 

 

Somehow or another you made that jump, didn’t you? I wonder 

what it was. Was it one of those stirring speeches by the 

Premier of this province in caucus, as he is so famous for being 

able to do? We have an obligation to make these changes 

because the province is on the brink of bankruptcy and we’re 

going to pull it away from the brink of bankruptcy. Was it one 

of those kinds of ones, Mr. Member Saskatoon Northwest, was 

it one of those kind? Because I’ve sat here and I’ll have to 

admit I’m pretty impressed when he goes into that kind of stuff. 

I have to admit. I suspect there’s a lot of other people, they’re 

pretty impressed too. They’re pretty impressed when he goes 

into one of those kinds of things. 

 

But the difference between what, the difference between what 

he is saying, the difference between what he is saying in terms 

of that and whether it is right or wrong is what you should be 

basing your decision on. It’s not on the convenience, the 

convenience of making the changes and how this will fit in in 

terms of your budget. That’s what it was all about. 

 

There was this nice little way we can beat some farmers of 

Saskatchewan out of a few bucks. It turns out it might be 500   



April 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

million bucks. We can beat them out of 500 million bucks and 

we can . . . 

 

(2230) 

 

The Chair:  Order. It now being the normal time of 

adjournment, 10:30, the committee will rise, report progress, 

and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Energy and Mines Vote 23 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 831 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 831 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Agriculture and Food Vote 1 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 838 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................. 838, 842, 845 

  Julé ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 841, 843 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 846 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 

  Kowalsky (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 853 

  Toth (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................................. 853 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 832 

 

 


