



















































Hansard: May 06, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1423 

 May 6, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome to you and your officials. 

 

Just a couple of brief questions and those pertain to our water in 

Saskatchewan, in particular I think the term that you would use 

would be surface water — talked about wells. I’m wondering 

what your department, Mr. Minister, is doing in terms of 

ensuring that our water system is safe, given the continuing 

upward trend of chemicals in this province. 

 

And also, with the arrival of large hog operations, and the 

concern that of course has been raised south of the border in 

terms of a safe water supply, what role does your department 

play in that area to ensure that our groundwater is safe and 

indeed safe for us to drink? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman. I would 

like to, if I might, also introduce another official that is here this 

evening — Donna Kellsey, director of financial and 

administrative services. 

 

I thank the hon. member for the question. Certainly water 

quality, which we all depend on, is very important and we do 

work very closely with communities in monitoring water. And 

if problems are suspected or detected, we are quick to work 

with the communities to resolve these issues. And you’re 

correct in saying that there’s always new chemicals on the 

market, new industry — in this case potential hog barns. 

 

We have with Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food developed 

very stringent guidelines for the development of hog barns and 

in fact it may require an environmental assessment. We just 

compared our guidelines with those of Manitoba and Alberta 

and we feel that we have more stringent guidelines than our 

neighbouring provinces. But none the less we have to be very 

vigilant in monitoring our water and certainly whether it’s small 

communities or even farmers that have potential problems, we 

will do whatever we can to help them out. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you maybe 

in a little more detail tell me, number one, in the area of a 

community that has dugout water for example, does your 

department play any role there in regular monitoring of the 

water and testing of the water? And as well with many towns 

that have wells that supply water to the community, a lot of 

those are quite often near undesirable locations. Do you do any 

regular checking of those water supplies or is it up to the 

community to ensure on their own that the water supply is 

indeed safe for the people that live there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  We have a process whereby every  

community is required to at least once a year, preferably more 

often depending on the size of the community and where it’s 

located, to submit water samples to the government and they are 

tested through the provincial health lab. 

 

As far as dugout water, if a community is relying on dugout 

water — or a farm — we would certainly provide the service 

for testing that water as well. So also we certify the town 

foremen and workers to monitor their wells and sewage lagoons 

and we work with them and there’s a certification process 

whereby the workers are more informed all the time as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there a cost 

associated with that to the communities? Do they pay for the 

annual testing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The only cost incurred by the communities 

would be the actual getting the sample and getting it into the 

provincial health lab and I believe it’s been a long-standing 

tradition where the testing is done free and the results are 

reported back to the community. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Now if the communities choose, Mr. 

Minister, to test semi-annually or four times a year, does that 

same apply there in terms of cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  That is correct. 

 

Mr. McLane:  In terms of the hog operations, can you tell 

me what role your department plays, Mr. Minister, in the 

monitoring of hog operations in terms of water supply . I’ll give 

you an example possibly where a hog facility is being built or 

located. A neighbouring farmer or a resident has a problem or a 

concern about their water. What’s the process there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  With the hog barn scenario, there’s a 

number of conditions that are in place through the Department 

of Agriculture and Food before a barn may be established. For 

an example, groundwater would be a concern, if it is an issue, 

that would be taken into consideration, and the site may be 

rejected on that basis. 

 

Also proponents of the projects are actually offering to put in 

monitoring wells next to lagoons. And because this is a new 

industry, we want to make sure that we are taking every 

safeguard possible and available to ensure that there aren’t 

problems. 

 

And in fact if it is a large project and there’s some considerable 

or some public concern, we can require an environmental 

impact assessment in addition to the regulations in place 

through the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. In terms of an ongoing 

safety precaution after the facility, the hog operation, has been 

established, under whose jurisdiction does it become then to 

ensure that the surrounding groundwaters are maintained at a 

safe level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  In large hog barn operations monitoring  

  



1424  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

wells are required near lagoons and such like and those reports 

are relayed to us at a regular basis. A smaller operation where 

perhaps there’s no monitoring wells, if there was any indication 

of a problem from a nearby farm or community we would be 

quick to take action to resolve the problem. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Of course there’s also the 

problem of the disposal of the waste from these hog operations. 

What happens if the product is being hauled 5 miles from the 

location of the industry? Whose jurisdiction and whose 

responsibility is it then to ensure that someone else’s 

groundwater isn’t being affected through seepage or through the 

ground, through a creek? A 7-inch rain can do a lot of things. 

Tell me who’s responsible and who covers that off. Is it your 

department or Health or where does it lie? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Manure management is part of the overall 

licensing of these hog barns. The proponent would need to 

indicate where the land would be located, where the manure 

would be disposed of, and Department of Agriculture and Food 

would be responsible for monitoring the disposal and make sure 

it’s put at the right place at the right time. And again if there’s a 

problem we would do what we could to resolve it along with 

the proponent and the Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. For individuals then, 

who would bear the cost? If I as an individual think that I want 

my water tested — I might be 10 miles from one of these 

operations or I could be 10 miles from a town lagoon or 

anything — is there a cost associated to an individual who 

wants to regularly check their water quality annually? 

Semi-annually? And if not, who will monitor that in the event 

of water getting into a system that could end up 20 miles or 30 

miles down the township affecting somebody’s water quality? 

Whose jurisdiction is it to ensure that those types of things 

don’t happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again the idea of having monitoring wells 

around the site — the lagoon — and perhaps the facility itself, 

is to detect any groundwater leakage or contamination long 

before it got 20 miles downstream. And the costs of controlling 

the effluent in the lagoons and what not is the responsibility of 

the proponent. If a lagoon is discovered to be leaking it’s up to 

the proponent or the manager of the project to cover the costs of 

repairs. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The former minister 

of Highways, I know he’s just dying to ask some questions — 

and his seat mate. And I wish they would come across and help 

me out here. But just a couple more questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

I guess we all know what happened in Saskatchewan . . . and 

you keep talking about the lagoon. I guess I’m talking about in 

terms of where the refuse is being spread on a piece of land. 

Tonight we have a 7-inch rain. The water carries some of the 

stuff away and it goes into . . . it can go 20, 30 miles away and 

your test holes will do no good there because you don’t have 

them there. Who monitors that? I guess that’s the question I’m 

getting at. 

 

(1915) 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well again, Mr. Chair, the manure is part of 

the management plan. It must be worked into the soil very 

quickly, and theoretically it would not be spread at an 

acceptable manner or depth on the soil, and there is always the 

chance of some of it washing off. But part of the plan is that it 

would be worked into the soil as quickly as possible. And 

granted there is always the potential of a 7-inch rain that may 

carry some of the organic fertilizer into the waterway. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You have to 

remember you’re talking to an old farmer here so I . . . I don’t 

think I’m going to get the answer I’m looking for. What I’m 

trying to do is, and I think I know the answer to the question 

I’m asking . . . and you’re kind of . . . you’re beating around the 

bush on me. 

 

Well I’ll just ask it once more and then I’ll take my place and 

let the members . . . is somebody has to be responsible for our 

water. And the question will be, is it your department that’s 

responsible for groundwater in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  To give you a straightforward answer, yes 

it is our department responsible for the monitoring and basically 

looking after groundwater. We also work very closely with 

Saskatchewan Research Council, who have a network of 

monitoring wells throughout the province and we are able to 

look at long-term changes in groundwater flows and potential 

contaminants. So we feel we have the best handle on the 

situation as possible, realizing that groundwater is very 

important to many of us here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Minister, 

and good evening to your officials. Mr. Minister, just moments 

ago you were speaking to my colleagues about . . . with my 

colleague rather, about the quality of groundwater. And I think 

that it has been brought to your attention and certainly the 

attention of the people in Saskatchewan through the news media 

that there is a major problem with this at St. Denis in 

Saskatchewan. And I know that you have commented on this, 

from the media. And they have mentioned that you made some 

remarks on this. 

 

Apparently there is a hog barn within that vicinity and there is 

increased sludge evident in the groundwater and it’s obvious 

that the quality of this water is deteriorating. So I would like to 

know what is being done in this particular instance, if you could 

let me know what the minister, what his department, are doing 

and what the responsibility is to respond to this kind of a crisis. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much for the question. I’m 

sorry I do not have the details on this specific case, but if we 

could get the information from you, we’d be very glad to 

provide you a formal, written response. 

 

I can say that since 1974 we have had the livestock pollution 

control Act, which has been recently replaced by the . . . I can’t 

remember the title from last year but new legislation and it is 

certainly . . . if there is a potential or actual pollution from a hog 

barn or any other operation, we would be very pleased to look 

into it. I’m sorry I don’t have the particulars here but if we  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

could get that from you later. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d be pleased to get the 

details of the situation for you. 

 

I noted from just listening to the news on TV regarding the 

situation that a number of the residents in and around St. Denis 

are saying that it looks as though their only option is now to 

have water hauled in from Saskatoon or from some other source 

in order to ensure that they have got good drinking water. So 

I’m a little bit concerned about that and I was hoping that 

maybe you had more details so that we could see what was 

going to be done. But I will try to compile them for you and 

bring them to you, and I just would like to make sure that the 

concern of these residents are being answered. 

 

Along another line, Mr. Minister, is there some legislation in 

place right now that ensures that topsoil is not being eroded 

because of water drainage through fields? Is there something in 

an environment Act? 

 

I understand that someone referred this to me, and they know of 

situations where there is a great deal of water being funnelled 

through certain areas of land, and apparently there is some 

legislation that they know of, through the Department of 

Environment, that really requires that this does not happen — 

that topsoil is not being unnecessarily eroded. And I was just 

wondering if you could maybe comment on whether there is 

anything like that in legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you for that question. We don’t have 

any specific legislation to prevent soil erosion on farm land. 

 

We all know that it’s a very detrimental effect on the land, 

whether it’s wind or water erosion, and many landowners of 

course are taking steps to reduce erosion with the planting of 

trees, putting erodible land in a permanent cover and something 

very successful is continuous cropping and zero till. 

 

It is illegal to drain water onto somebody else’s land without a 

permit which may result in water erosion, and that would be 

under the department . . . or Sask Water, but soil erosion is a 

very big concern here in the Prairies. But I think many 

landowners, realizing this, don’t want their soil to erode away. 

It decreases the value of their property and also the production; 

so there are a number of things landowners are doing. But as far 

as legislation to prevent soil erosion, there isn’t such a thing. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Along one more line, 

what is available to persons in the province that recognize or 

have some evidence that there are toxic wastes and so on being 

dumped into the river? Where should they report this, and how 

can they make sure that this does not continue, as it is certainly 

a grave concern to many citizens. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly the illegal dumping of toxic 

wastes or pollutants into waterways is totally illegal, and if 

anyone knows of this happening, contact your local 

conservation officer or my office right here in Regina. This is of 

great concern if this is happening. We do have basically very 

good cooperative arrangements with industry, where effluents  

are being disposed of, where strict monitoring is in place. So if 

there is illegal dumpage, we want to know about it. 

 

Ms. Julé:  That’s all the questions I have. So if any one of 

my colleagues would like to present more questions, the floor is 

theirs. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Deputy Chair of committees, I’d 

like to welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 

You received, Mr. Minister, a letter from some people in my 

constituency dated May 1, so it’s a very recent letter and 

hopefully you’ll be familiar with it. It comes from the Antler 

River Outfitters and Blaine Hjertaas. Now I don’t know if you 

know Blaine, but you probably know — I’m not sure if it’s his 

brother or his cousin who works for the Department — so one 

of the two, I’m not sure. I’m not sure if it’s a brother or cousin. 

But you probably know some of his other relatives also. 

 

But what Blaine is writing about is an alternative to some of the 

hunting that is being carried out today. It would be of benefit to 

the local area, to the local landowners; it would be of benefit to 

wildlife depredation because it would eliminate a few more 

animals; and it would be of significant benefit to the 

government because there would be more taxes spent and 

collected by the government in our area. What he’s talking 

about is opening up the south area of the province to 

non-Canadian hunters. And right now I’m not sure where the 

boundary line lies; it may be No. 1 Highway; it was at one time; 

it may be further north than that, I’m not sure. 

 

But in our particular area non-Canadians are not allowed to 

hunt in our area, and they’re proposing that the area be opened 

up. I’d like to read you a part of one paragraph just to 

familiarize yourself a little bit with it. And I quote: 

 

As you are aware, the problem becomes worse each year as 

more wild lands are converted to agricultural production. 

The remaining habitat has to support additional deer 

populations, exacerbating the problem for landowners. The 

landowners pay the entire cost of supporting this resource 

and receive very limited compensation. We believe that if 

nothing is done to address the problem, the existing 

wildlife habitat will very quickly be converted, and there 

will be large scale die-off due to the lack of habitat. Within 

a few years, hunting as we have known it will be lost for 

ever. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it’s not that they are trying to wipe out the 

deer herds in our area. If that was the case, there would be a 

very significant effort needed to do that because deer are almost 

like vermin in our area. And if you ask most landowners with 

livestock, they will tell you they are vermin. But most of us 

enjoy the wildlife and like to see it protected and harvested in a 

proper manner to everyone’s benefit. 

 

Unfortunately though, Mr. Minister, the wildlife, because it has 

been reproducing so quickly, is becoming a serious problem . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well there isn’t any moose . . . or I 

shouldn’t say there isn’t any. It’s a rare moose in our area, 

although they do travel back and forth between the Moose 

Mountains and the Turtle Mountains in Manitoba. I think the  

  



1426  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

moose that we do see are mainly Manitoba moose that are 

trying to head back home. Even the moose are leaving; they 

can’t afford the taxes here. 

 

Mr. Minister, what they’re proposing to do is bring in U.S. 

(United States) hunters and possibly others, but he specifically 

talked about U.S. hunters; that they would charge a fee which is 

probably comparable to the going rate, $2,500 for a five-day 

hunt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it’s a significant 

amount of money, but they’re prepared to pay those kind of 

dollars to come to hunt here because we do have record animals 

here for them to hunt. And a significant portion of that money 

would be returned to the landowners, based on the amount of 

habitat they have on their particular pieces of land, because this 

is mainly agricultural land. The people who would be doing the 

outfitting and the guiding obviously would be paid for it, but 

approximately two-thirds of that $2,500 would be returned to 

the landowners. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, are you familiar with the letter? Are you 

familiar with Mr. Hjertaas’s project that he’s trying to get off 

the ground and the proposal for a pilot project for the area to see 

how it would work out? Have you made any determinations on 

this kind of proposal? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I’ll thank the hon. member for the question. 

I haven’t received a letter yet, though I do know Blaine. And 

I’m familiar with what his ideas are, and I certainly respect 

those ideas. 

 

Most recently, the wildlife diversification task force, which 

consisted of a couple of dozen agencies, organizations around 

the province such as SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) and the wildlife federation, said no to 

American hunters in southern Saskatchewan, American big 

game hunters and outfitting. The American outfitting hunters 

are restricted to the forest area of the northern part of the 

province. There’s a number of reasons for this. The local 

hunters view that the land would be tied up; the best habitat 

would be tied up by American outfitting. 

 

But at the same time we realize the significant contribution that 

landowners make towards wildlife. And that is why we have a 

very successful waterfowl crop damage program, and we’ve 

implemented the big game damage compensation program this 

year to help the landowners out. And we’ve got a number of 

programs, such as conservation easements, which we want to 

get up and running to reward the landowners for keeping habitat 

on their land. 

 

So I will look forward to Mr. Hjertaas’s letter and will be 

responding to him. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Perhaps I 

should read another sentence or two from Mr. Hjertaas’s letter, 

because he goes on to talk about the concerns that local hunters 

have. “We think this will retain wildlife habitat for all of us and 

keep our environment healthy. Local hunters will have access to 

private land which will have habitat on it to sustain  

white-tailed deer.” 

 

As is probably happening in your area or certainly happening in 

my area — I know it’s happening up in the member for 

Moosomin’s constituency — more and more farmers are 

pushing the bush off of their land to try and produce from that 

land agricultural crops. When that happens, Mr. Minister, 

you’re very aware that there are no white-tailed deer left on that 

land if they push every stick of bush off of it. 

 

Now we are coming to the point where we have some 

alternatives. Either farmers in a lot of cases are going to push 

that bush because they need every dollar just to survive, or we 

can have some lands with wildlife habitat on it that pays some 

kind of a return to the landowner, and continue to have our 

resources. 

 

And it’s not too far into the distant future that we’re going to 

have to make that choice. We’re either going to have habitat 

and wildlife or we’re not, because farmers need the land to 

produce some income for themselves. And you have the 

opportunity to have some direct input into that and make some 

long-term recommendations and provide some long-term 

solutions, Mr. Minister. 

 

If you move to provide the wildlife federation’s membership 

with access to private land, as is currently the case, in short 

order, 20 years at the very most, there will be very little habitat 

in southern Saskatchewan. People will be going up to the forest 

fringe to hunt, and if all the hunters in southern Saskatchewan 

have to go to the forest fringe, there is going to be very few 

animals left in that forest fringe or there is going to be a very 

small hunter turnout. And then your department is going to be 

in serious trouble because you’re not going to be getting the 

revenues you need to support the wildlife. 

 

So you have a choice, Mr. Minister, and I’d like to hear your 

thoughts on this because there is a move and a need to allow 

more hunters in to have access. Either our local hunters are 

going to have to start providing some form of compensation to 

the agricultural producers of this province for the habitat they 

have on their land or there will be no habitat. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I just said we are doing a number of 

programs to compensate landowners. We have the big game 

damage program most recently, and conservation easements. 

 

And the way wildlife management is operated in Saskatchewan 

and in Canada, it’s a publicly owned resource. And I don’t think 

anybody is prepared to have wildlife privatized, at least here in 

the south part of the province. And if an American hunter is 

going to come in and hunt on a farm, for $2,500 probably he 

won’t want two or three other people stumbling around to spoil 

his hunt and that land would be posted and resident hunters 

would be excluded. And once that door is open, the people on 

the wildlife diversification task force are very sceptical and 

scared about it and they were not prepared to allow outfitting, 

as you suggest, in the south and the people of Saskatchewan are 

not prepared. 

 

But we also recognize that landowners do make a great  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

contribution to wildlife and many of the people do keep habitat 

on their land. And I have more faith in landowners that the 

habitat will not all be destroyed; and by helping them out with 

compensation, conservation easements, and other programs, we 

will be able to ensure that we do have a good balance here in 

agriculture Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think you can keep 

your faith that agriculture producers won’t push the land, and if 

you drive around with blinkers on you can remain that faithful 

to that. But you drive down into our country with your eyes 

open and you are going to see a lot of bush being pushed every 

year. And that bush is being pushed in a lot of cases by good 

Saskatchewan wildlife members. 

 

People who proudly display their membership are the guys that 

are pushing the bush, Mr. Minister, because they have to make 

a living too. Because the wildlife on their land returns nothing 

to them but a headache. Because it’s eating their crops and it’s 

eating their hay that they have stored and their grain that they 

have stored, with little or no compensation. And, Mr. Minister, 

that frustration is going to only grow. 

 

Why when you say the American hunter isn’t prepared to come 

into here to hunt white-tailed deer and pay those kind of fees to 

have a local hunter along side of him, when he pays exactly 

those kind of fees to have the local hunter hunting along side of 

him in the North. There’s no difference. When he’s out after 

that moose, the local hunter is out there just as much as he is. 

There’s no difference, Mr. Minister, whether he’s hunting 

moose at Hudson Bay or he’s hunting white-tailed deer down at 

Carnduff. It’s the same thing, Mr. Minister; they both have 

access to that land. The American hunter and his guide — the 

guide can keep other guided hunts out of there, but he can’t 

keep the local hunters out; he can’t keep the native hunters out; 

he can’t keep the Metis hunters out. Everyone else has access 

along with that American hunter. The only others that are 

excluded are other guided hunters. 

 

It would be the same thing down in the South, Mr. Minister. 

Americans used to be allowed to come in and hunt. They’re 

allowed to come and hunt birds. It’s only the big game animals 

that they are restricted to the North. 

 

And certainly the northern people have a vested interest in 

trying to ensure that big game hunting is not allowed in the 

South because that forces it all north. The wildlife members in 

Regina and Saskatoon have a vested interest in ensuring that no 

out-of-province hunters can hunt in the South because that 

allows them better access. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well we have a very interesting discussion 

going here, and I find it passing strange that the member 

opposite is, I guess, so critical of our wildlife federation 

members. Wildlife federation members have signed up well 

over a hundred thousand acres of land voluntarily without 

getting a penny through Acres for Wildlife and Wildlife 

Tomorrow. 

 

And again the member relies on all of the good points of the 

American hunter. It’s the Saskatchewan hunter that stays here  

and farms, provides job opportunities, pays taxes, contributes to 

the big game damage compensation program, works with 

landowners on conservation easements, and so on and so forth; 

feeds deer in the wintertime. It’s not the American hunter that 

. . . maybe he’ll pay $2,500 but he’s only after the big buck, the 

cream of the crop. And American hunting will do very little, if 

anything, to reduce the number of deer. They aren’t going to 

shoot a fawn or a doe and take it home and hang the head on the 

wall — they want a trophy buck. 

 

And our Saskatchewan hunters I believe, need that opportunity 

first and foremost. And granted right now we do have a fairly 

high deer population or at least we did until the last couple of 

years. And we are able to manage this through regulations of 

adjusting seasons, and so on and so forth, and I believe our 

wildlife management is next to none. And that is why the 

American hunters want in here in the first place. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, when you talk about 

a hundred thousand acres having been contributed through the 

wildlife federations, you’re talking of a hundred thousand acres 

out of 50 million acres — very small, small portion. Certainly 

it’s important to have that. But for those farmers that farm 

around that particular piece of wildlife land, it’s a serious 

problem for them and you know well, Mr. Minister. 

 

If the American hunter is only going to come in and take big 

bucks he’s . . . Mr. Hjertaas is talking of 20 hunters — 20 

hunters. If he takes 20 animals out of the area, what kind of an 

impact? And that is if. He’s talking 20 hunters for five days 

would return $9.92 an acre to the landowners in that area — 

$9.92 for every acre of bush they have, not for the cultivated 

land. That encourages them to keep their bush land and not tear 

it up, because it costs them money obviously to tear it up. 

 

But you, Mr. Minister, are not prepared to accept that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s right. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, I find it very interesting that the current minister, 

who is one of the real pains in the backside of the former 

government when it came to wildlife enhancement, is now all of 

a sudden quite protectionist in some degrees; and in some other 

areas it’s interesting, some of his views. 

 

I want to commend the minister for his views on uranium 

development in the province of Saskatchewan. I certainly think 

that’s an economic benefit, and I think the economy certainly 

has a major role sometimes to play. And it’s funny how 

members with certain political persuasions can all of a sudden 

change when the green bucks start floating by. But we’ll get off 

the uranium and back to wildlife. 

 

Mr. Minister, my colleague was just talking about offering 

people the opportunity to be guides in southern Saskatchewan. 

One of the things that has been a problem, and this past winter 

was still a problem, is wildlife damage. 

 

And you’re quite familiar, I think, with the letter from the ADD 

(agriculture development and diversification district) board, the  

  



1428  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

District 5 ADD Board, and the problems that arose in their area 

as individuals became frustrated with your department — not 

the local conservation officers, although it ended up with a 

problem with the conservation officer. But some of the 

difficulties that were associated in some of the understandings 

that they thought they had with the department as to how to 

manage wildlife population or deer damage on their properties, 

specifically in their feedlots. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department is doing to 

address this for the long term. Not the short term, because it’s 

maybe here, maybe gone for a couple of years, but then it’s 

back — it’s a cyclical thing. What’s your department doing to 

address wildlife damage in the long term for individuals that 

tend to have an ongoing problem with wildlife damage to 

especially feed stocks more so than crops. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I appreciate the question, and in fact 

when we met with the District 7 ADD Board, which the 

member refers to, a year ago, just over a year ago, we adopted a 

number of their recommendations such as allowing hunters to 

drive in fields with written permission. We also extended the 

seasons. We also provide permanent fences for landowners 

which incur continuous damage. Some farmers are happy to 

take these fences; we supply the material free of charge. And 

others have, through their own choice, refused them. That is 

their choice. But if they refuse these fences the question is, 

should the taxpayers be compensating them for their loss of 

haystacks? 

 

So we are prepared to work with landowners and we will 

continue to do so. And again, having the crop damage program 

in place was a very successful program this year and something 

that the District 7 ADD Board had asked for as well. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, this year you came up with $11 . . . 

I believe they call it depredation fee, to hunters. And I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, what were the number of licences 

issued in the 1995 year for big game? What were the number of 

licences issued . . . how many in the 1996? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I don’t have the exact figure here but I 

believe in 1975 . . . or in 1995 we sold about 7,600 white-tailed 

deer licences, and this past year it’s about 66 and we can get 

you the exact figures if you so desire. 

 

There was a number of factors which contributed to the reduced 

number of white-tailed licences sold this year. One being an 

early snowfall in November which plugged many back roads 

and it was very cold. And many hunters just said, to heck with 

it; I’m not going out hunting. We also had the court case with 

the Metis situation where Metis hunters did not have to 

purchase licences. And we did expect 5 to 10 per cent drop in 

licence sales because of the $11 licence. 

 

And that $11 does go strictly towards crop damage prevention; 

it does not go to general revenue. It’s an ear-marked fund and 

many people are very pleased to know that that $11 is going 

towards what it is to be used for. 

And we’ve also put $2 million into the fund this year and we’re 

looking for another $2 million from the federal government to 

top it up. We do expect upwards of a million and a half dollars 

in claims this year. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 

mentioned . . . your last comment was I think you said you’re 

expecting about a million and a half dollars in claims. Is that . . . 

when you look at those claims . . . and I think part of the thing 

you’ll find, Mr. Minister, if I’m not mistaken, when a person 

makes a claim there’s a 500 deductible on that claim. And 

going by memory on the basis of one individual that talked to 

me, he had a conservation officer out, looked at some damage 

in a haystack where they had estimated about a thousand dollars 

worth of loss. The conservation officer said, by the time you 

pay your $500, and then there was another nominal fee there, 

you’re left with about $250. The individual said, well why 

should I waste my time and effort to even apply for that. 

 

So how many . . . when you’re talking 1.5 million, my guess is 

there may be a lot of producers, because of the restrictions you 

have in place, really don’t take the time and won’t take the time 

to submit a claim for loss because of what’s happened in the 

past. 

 

And I guess I would like to know is . . . what has your 

department done to inform individuals as to what is available 

and the fact that they will actually see some valuable dollars 

versus just a token appreciation for their bringing this concern 

to your attention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well commodity prices do change, and this 

happened — as a good example — last fall. When we initiated 

the pay-out on hay losses, we set it at $50 a tonne. And because 

of the long, cold winter and the shortage of food, hay was worth 

a lot more than that, so we in fact bumped it up to 70, $75 a 

tonne. 

 

We recognize that this is a first year of operation for the fund, 

and we’ll be looking at fine-tuning it to make the fund more fair 

to landowners who experience damage — and particularly with 

hay crops. At the same time we’ll be hopefully fixing these 

problems permanently by providing permanent fences to 

landowners that experience annual damage. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, before I forget, we sent off a series 

of global questions awhile back, and I’m wondering if you have 

the answers, responses to those global questions or if your 

department’s received them. We want to make sure you’ve 

received them, and as well, when can we expect to receive 

responses to them? 

 

I see some puzzled looks. Is that an indication that the questions 

haven’t arrived? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I can assure the hon. member that as soon 

as we get the questions through the system that you will get a 

response, and we’ll do that as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when you’re saying through the  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

system, you do have the question on hand? You just . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I don’t believe they’ve reached our 

department yet, but we’ll be pleased to do a check on that and 

see where they are at. 

 

Mr. Toth:  That’s interesting because about three weeks or a 

month ago I signed a number that I was responsible for, 

departments. I’m surprised that you wouldn’t have received 

yours because I think our staff are pretty efficient at getting 

them out. So we’ll double check, and we’ll make sure we at 

least get another copy off to you if they got lost in the mail 

sorting or whatever. But you should have had them. 

 

And when you’re responding to those questions, we’d like you 

as well to give us a list of the amount of travel conducted by 

yourself on ministerial duties this year, including all officials, 

MAs (ministerial assistant), that were with you and all expenses 

incurred, if you wouldn’t mind providing that as well with the 

global questions that we’re sending to you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m not going to take a lot more time here tonight, 

but I just was going to ask you . . . one of the big questions and 

concerns over the past number of years has been the 

underground storage tanks. I’m wondering where we sit today 

regarding that. And has your department been able to come to 

an understanding with a number of people, and certainly 

communities and local governments, in regards to how they 

deal with underground storage tanks. In view of the fact that a 

number of these facilities aren’t really creating a problem for 

anyone, I wonder where we sit today and what’s being done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I can tell the hon. member that the whole 

issue of underground fuel storage tanks has come a long way 

since he and his colleagues introduced the legislation about 

eight or ten years ago. 

 

We’ve made a number of amendments in making it more 

palatable, more practical for operators. And in fact 85 per cent 

of the service station owners have complied with the new 

regulations. And basically if your tank isn’t leaking, you want 

to put in a $200 monitoring well, your tank can stay in the 

ground. There are some areas of concern where groundwater is 

close to the surface. And we are still working with a few 

individuals, but we’ve come a long way. 

 

And of course there’s a whole issue of abandoned sites. And 

we’ve put together a task force to deal with that, and they’ll be 

reporting to us very shortly as to the recommendations. Again, 

we have stakeholders from various areas of the public, and we 

will be getting that report to see what we do with orphan sites 

and other problem areas. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m pleased to hear that 

you’re at least consulting and working together with groups and 

individuals on this issue because it’s become a contentious 

issue. And certainly even locally I know a number of situations 

where people walked away from . . . basically they hadn’t paid 

for the property and just handed over the keys and said, here it 

is. They didn’t want to deal with it because of the fact that if  

you were to look at it, if there were any problems there, it 

would probably go back 30 years to owners that had been there, 

the fifth owner before this or previous to. 

 

So it was an issue that needed to be discussed in view of the 

fact that a lot of people entered into sales agreement under one 

set of regulations. Then they changed on them and they had no 

knowledge prior to. 

 

One other question I want to raise — and I’ve raised this before 

in question period — is the whole question, matter, of Metis 

hunting. And it’s a concern to a lot of people. It’s certainly been 

a concern in our area. And I just want to have you reaffirm, Mr. 

Minister, that your department actually has a handle on it. 

 

The concern along our area is that there may be hunters from 

the Manitoba side actually hunting in our area. And I’m not 

exactly sure if you can say they are or aren’t because an 

imaginary boundary line, for someone just to come in and shoot 

an animal and leave, it’s pretty hard to tell whether or not they 

have or haven’t. 

 

But what are you doing to address that concern out there? I 

know in the Hudson Bay area, one conservation officer 

suggested it is bad. Not only are there a lot of Metis hunters out 

there; we’ve seen a substantial increase in the reporting of 

trafficking of wildlife. And I suppose he’d be making that based 

on a number of the calls that they would get. 

 

And so there’s very serious concern. I think it’s important and 

imperative that the ruling by the judge certainly is appealed and 

looked into. Is that process under way, and what else is the 

department doing to address this concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  You raised a very valid concern among a 

number of people, and that’s the whole well-being of our 

wildlife resource. The member is quite correct in saying that 

Metis, as of the recent court decision last fall, as well as treaty 

Indians, can cross the Manitoba-Saskatchewan boundary and 

hunt on either side of the border legally. 

 

As the member knows, the province of Saskatchewan has 

appealed the decision called the Grumbo decision, and that 

appeal will be in the courts in June. So we will wait until after 

that appeal to see where things are at. 

 

But in the meantime we are working with the Metis Nation 

groups as well as the Indian bands, first nations, to better 

manage, better control . . . to give us more opportunity to see 

what the harvest is in particular areas. And certainly the 

well-being of our resource is very important to everyone. 

 

And you make mention to the trafficking of wildlife. We are 

strongly opposed to that, and we’ve put more enforcement, 

more officers, on to cracking down on the trafficking of 

wildlife. We simply will not tolerate trafficking of wildlife. And 

again if anybody suspects this is happening, we urge them to 

call our TIP (Turn in Poachers) line or contact the local 

conservation officer. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t have really  

  



1430  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

any other questions at this time, other than to thank you and 

your officials then. Maybe one other question. Is that why all 

the conservation officers appeared in our area . . . 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have had a couple more 

questions brought to my attention, and I hope we can just get 

right to the point with them and make them quick because our 

House Leader is trying to ensure that the Education critic has 

got ample time to present his questions. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that the contract for printing of the 

fishing licence and other game licences is being contracted, in 

fact, out of this province. Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  That is correct. Under the western Canada 

accord, for any printing job over $10,000, we have to advertise 

across western Canada. And that firm came in with the lower 

bid. It met the credentials of western Canada accord. But seeing 

that they were late this year, they may not meet it next year. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m just concerned 

about economic opportunity for people within Saskatchewan 

and find it quite amazing that no one in Saskatchewan could 

match the bid. 

 

But I’d like to be able to present another question to you. I have 

had it brought to my attention, by a taxidermist just north of my 

constituency in fact, that there was a great delay in their 

receiving of permits so that they could ship items associated 

with taxidermy to the United States. The delay has caused some 

anger on the part of the taxidermists and their customers in the 

U.S. Now I’m wondering why such a delay in them receiving 

these permits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  We would appreciate receiving the details, 

but of course when you’re crossing international borders, 

probably the import country was more concerned about the 

issue than we were in Saskatchewan because we knew the 

background. And there’s a whole bunch of legislation, the 

Lacey Act and other pieces of legislation, which has to be 

cleared. But if you would like to give us the details, we would 

get you more specific answers. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In fact I asked what 

their understanding of this delay was, and they said that they 

understood that it was the printing was being delayed and 

taking . . . you know, that whole issue of where the permits 

were being printed was causing the delay. So this is why the 

two questions, one associated with the other. So I thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just want to 

share with the minister the letter I referred to earlier in 

estimates, before 5, a letter from the chairman of the 

co-management board, Green Lake, Mr. Gilbert McKay; and 

also a letter from the trappers that are concerned addressed to 

Mr. McKay. So I will forward that letter to you. 

 

And also to make a point in reference to the recent decision on 

McArthur River mine — that we’re sincerely and consistently 

looking at the services in northern Saskatchewan to make sure 

that SERM is not affected because if we’re going to have a lot  

of mining activity, what you don’t want to do is have 

environmental resource management positions be withdrawn 

from an area where we have heavy activity in mining. 

 

So we’re certainly hoping that the result of the positive news 

with the McArthur River, that your department will no longer 

cut any services or transfer any positions or facilities out of 

northern Saskatchewan to any other location within the North or 

out of the North for that fact. Thank you. 

 

The Chair:  While we’re waiting for the minister to 

formulate his response, I thank the hon. member for Athabasca 

for not taking issue when I referred to him as the member for 

Cumberland. Both Cumberland and Athabasca are beautiful 

parts of this province, and of course we just had the member for 

Athabasca make a statement and ask for a question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well thank you very much for this material. 

We will respond to you. 

 

And also for your information, we’re moving the whole 

uranium operation of the department up to La Ronge so it is 

closer to the North, closer to where the actual mining is 

occurring. And we’re looking forward to this opportunity. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 26 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chair. I’d like to 

thank the hon. members for some very good questions, a wide 

cross-section of questions, and I appreciate their interest and 

concern for the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management. 

 

(2000) 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

 

The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to introduce his official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m pleased to have with me this evening, 

Darcy McGovern from the Department of Justice. 

 

Item 3 agreed to. 

 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

General Revenue Fund 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. One question 

to the Minister: Mr. Minister, when the freedom of information 

officer — I’m not sure what his title really is — when he is or 

she is on holidays there doesn’t seem to be anyone there who 

can continue issuing the freedom of information requests. And 

as an opposition party we find this very inconvenient. And I’m 

wondering if you have a solution in mind that would ensure that 

the process can continue all year long. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to this is that 

when he is away on vacation he still has support staff in his 

office. And they’re able to reach him; so that if there is an 

urgent question he can be reached. But if it’s not an urgent 

matter, well then it may wait until he comes back. We have 

looked at this and I’ve talked with him directly about this 

question and he didn’t realize that there was any problem with 

that. But practically, he does have support staff who are 

available and he said he was available by telephone wherever he 

was on his vacation. So that’s one part of that. 

 

The other part of it was we are looking at, well should there be 

some kind of a back-up person that’s available when he isn’t 

around. And we’re looking at possibly whether that role could 

be fulfilled by another officer of the legislature, like the 

Ombudsman. So we’re looking at some other possibilities. 

 

But practically, I think that right now the only time that there 

may be a real clear problem if there was an appeal that needed 

to be dealt with immediately. But the nature of these things that 

happen under the freedom of information Act, they often have 

more time involved with them and can usually work their ways 

around vacation schedules. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Everyone should 

have a holiday and I agree that the person needs to get away 

from work. But yet the directive that has to be there for staff has 

to ensure then that the process doesn’t become bogged down. 

As an opposition we found that it’s become a little bogged 

down. We appreciate the fact that you are aware of the problem, 

that you’re looking at the possible solutions, and we encourage 

you to ensure that the process continues to move. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Just a quick 

question to the minister; it’s probably something that maybe 

other members have talked about as well. But in my discussion 

with the Conflict of Interest Commissioner over the last two 

years, we brought up the issue of the forms that are being . . . 

that have to be filled out. And it would seem to me that we’ve 

got quite a complicated, antiquated form. 

 

There’s a lot of information asked of members which I don’t 

think originally members had a problem with, but to have to 

 basically put the same information down on the same type of 

form every year, it would seem to me that once you’ve got a 

conflict of interest form filled out it would be feasible to come 

up with just an addendum that you could add on a yearly basis, 

add or delete. 

 

I’ve talked to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. He 

certainly has a strong feeling that way too. 

 

It seems to me he’s beginning to realize that it just . . . the way 

the forms currently exist just aren’t really relevant. And I’m 

wondering what discussions have taken place and if indeed 

there is a process to address this concern and simplify it without 

taking away from the information that you require. 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well we have been in discussion about 

this point and I understand exactly what you’re talking about. 

And basically the commissioner has the power to make his 

regulations and set up his own forms, and so officials of the 

Department of Justice have been talking with him to help him 

create a short-form, if you want to call it that, that could be an 

addendum. And hopefully that will be in place for next year. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, and to your officials, welcome. 

 

The Chair: — Order. I’m sorry, I apologize to committee 

members. I neglected to invite the minister to introduce his 

officials, and I suspect that’s what you were . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is 

Dan Perrins, who is the deputy minister; behind me, Lily 

Stonehouse, the assistant deputy minister; beside Ms. 

Stonehouse is Mae Boa, who is the executive director of finance 

and operations. Also in the House at the back of the Assembly 

is Tony Antonini, of the New Careers Corporation. He’s the 

executive director of finance and technical services; Margaret 

Ball, the assistant director of facilities planning; John Biss, 

executive director, university services; Wayne McElree, 

executive director, training programs; and Brady Salloum, the 

director of student financial assistance, here to assist the 

committee tonight. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

And welcome to all of the officials who were here back on 

April 21, I think it was, and to any of the new officials that have 

joined in the team. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a couple of questions that we didn’t 

finish with last time around the area of job training, and the 

announcements regarding the Bridges to Employment. And at 

the time of the announcement, I know you had made reference  

  



1432  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

to the fact that the regional colleges were going to be the group 

that was going to oversee the strategy in terms of implementing 

the strategy province wide. 

 

When I take a look at Estimates and see the grant that has been 

allocated for regional colleges, and the fact that now you’re 

expecting, I think, a little more from the regional colleges in 

terms of an effort, in terms of involvement, in terms of work, 

how do you see the two tying together, and indeed do you see 

the budget for regional colleges sufficient to carry forward the 

ideas that were expressed in the Bridges to Employment 

document? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We think that they will have sufficient 

funds to carry out their new functions as well as their old ones. 

We think there is enough money in their budgets to be able to 

enable the planning and the accountability functions which are 

the new functions that the board must take on. 

 

The member will recall the partnership arrangements that are 

planned for the regional colleges where they will involve all of 

the people in the community, all of the organizations in the 

community that have an interest in the training subject, in 

planning and in delivery. And that will not be a costly item, as 

we see it; that will be very largely a volunteer effort. 

 

For example, where they’re partnering with the oil industry in 

Swift Current, the planning sessions around that will not require 

a lot of funds to take care of. We think that the existing staff of 

the regional colleges will be up to the challenge, will have the 

time available to do it. 

 

They will also have increased funding through ABE (adult basic 

education) programing and other programing in the course of 

time on the training side. 

 

So we think between the money that’s in the budget for 

planning and the increased funds for training there will be 

sufficient resources at the regional level for this to go forward. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, at the 

time of the announcement you described I think, a partnership, 

a delivery partnership between the regional colleges and SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) on 

how the campuses . . . I’m wondering, the principal role here 

seems to be being played by the regional colleges. What kind of 

reaction have you had from SIAST and are we still talking 

about compatibility and indeed an effort to meet the needs of 

what Saskatchewan people require? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Oh indeed we are. Mr. Perrins and Ms. 

Stonehouse have just completed visits to the four SIAST 

campuses over the last week. And at every place they had lively 

sessions, but they were positive, ranging I believe from positive 

to very positive. So we were quite pleased with their reaction to 

the training document and to the new approach that’s described 

there. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I’m very pleased to hear that, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I guess in terms of a new program that comes into 

place and new challenges that are being met, what kind of  

monitoring system or accountability system are you putting in 

place to ensure that the new job training programs are being 

properly administered and indeed meeting the goals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Madam Chair, and to the member, of 

course we’re all aware that within each region there will be a 

process for involving all of the so-called stakeholders — it’s a 

term that I don’t like; I imagine a bunch of people walking 

around holding stakes and wondering what they’ve got to do 

with training — but in any event, the interested organizations 

and the interested people in the community, to identify needs 

and priorize needs and to bring the resources together from all 

the partners to meet those needs. 

 

And these same partners who have made the plans will be the 

primary ones to hold the institutions, including the regional 

colleges, accountable for carrying out the plan. The first 

accountability will be at the regional level, to the very people 

who assessed the needs and put the plan together. That will be 

the first level. 

 

And we will be consulting in the system to develop a 

framework which will enable the institutions to demonstrate to 

the province, to the government, and to the public, the 

effectiveness of the system and the degree to which it’s 

working. Now that’s something that has to be . . . we don’t want 

to impose that. We want to work it out and get the consensus on 

the appropriate benchmarks or measures that will be used in the 

accounting process. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  One other question on the program that was 

put out, Mr. Minister. I think the document related to . . . it 

contained a section, I should say, that refers to strengthening 

partnerships with the first nations and the Metis people. 

 

And I’m wondering if you have specific objectives or specific 

ideas as to how you can see that develop within the framework 

of not only northern Saskatchewan; because we’re not really 

talking about only northern Saskatchewan, we’re talking about 

Metis people and first nations people that are throughout the 

province. And how are we going to meet the special needs that 

seems to be indicated in your document? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Madam Chair, I took a moment to be 

certain that I was able to give you a full answer. This is a very 

interesting part of the package and a very important element of 

it, considering the demographics of the province and the 

ambition of aboriginal people to get employment, become 

qualified for employment, and to better the quality of their lives 

as a result. 

 

Their involvement in the system will be in the partnership mode 

and will take place at various levels. It will take place at the 

regional level between the regional people, including the 

colleges and other organizations interested in these questions, 

with Metis locals and tribal councils and first nations. 

 

Then at the provincial level or the larger level with the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and with the 

Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. The aboriginal institutions are 

also important — SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

College) and SIIT (Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies) on the Indian side, and GDI (Gabriel Dumont 

Institute) and DTI (Dumont Technical Institute) on the Metis 

side. The member will know what those acronyms mean. 

 

And we plan to do as much as we can, particularly with GDI 

and DTI and SIIT, to enrich their programing and to make some 

changes to try and help them offer more training programs 

within those institutions and perhaps enlarge their enrolment 

and become more vital than they have been in the past. I’m not 

criticizing them at all, but I think we haven’t given them 

sufficient opportunity to spread their wings and fly here. And I 

think that that opportunity will emerge as part of our approach 

to these questions. 

 

(2030) 

 

There is also the question of the bilateral arrangements with the 

federal government respecting Pathways, both for the Indians 

and for the Metis. And I think everyone would be well served if 

those programs and our programs found a way to get closer 

together. The Pathways program do use our institutions, both 

SIAST and the regional colleges, and that’s to be expected. 

 

But they are going . . . it would be to their best interest to 

become actively involved in the planning, in the needs 

identification, and in the various kind, of partnership 

arrangements that will make this program run as I expect it to. 

 

Now we have made a considerable amount of progress with the 

Metis Nation on these issues, and I think we’re clear on the 

major lines of the program; we’re clear on the major elements 

of it, let me put it that way. And there is a high level of 

excitement there that should produce quite good results. 

 

On the Indian side, we’re at an earlier stage, and a good deal of 

work remains to be done there. But the FSIN and the tribal 

councils have an enormous interest in these subjects and we 

don’t expect to have any major problems there. We think we’ll 

be able to work out quite satisfactory arrangements. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for your response, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I know that you have received a copy of . . . or I 

should say the original letter, and I’ve received a copy of the 

letter sent to you by the Woodland Institute Students Union 

regarding the Saskatchewan training strategy. 

 

And I guess there’s two points that I want to raise with you, Mr. 

Minister. And I wasn’t aware, the gentleman has indicated that 

the tuition for the particular courses that he was taking 

increased 31.57 per cent in January of ’96 and then 17.39 per 

cent in September. Then he says another 12.08 per cent again in 

January of ’97. So as a result his tuition hikes, to me, from first 

glance, seem to be astronomical. 

 

And I’m wondering, is this accurate, that the tuition increases 

for a particular course at the Woodland Institute have increased 

that dramatically over that year and a few months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member’s figures are accurate. We 

haven’t checked it just now as we sit here, but I think the  

student’s numbers are accurate. And they represent increases 

that were agreed to as long ago as 1990 in a process involving 

SIAST and the students, and they laid down a plan that was a 

six-year plan, for a six-year plan of tuition increases, at the end 

of which the tuition would cover 10 per cent of the costs of the 

programing, so that the student’s figures are quite correct. But 

they were not recent decisions; they were part of an old plan 

arrived at in 1990 that was phased over a six-year period. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, is there a situation that arises 

that costs fluctuate during the year, and therefore tuition 

changes can occur mid-course? It seems by the letter from this 

gentleman there were surprise tuition increases. 

 

Now you seem to indicate that, you know, there was a plan that 

was put in place. It was a six-year plan. I would suspect that 

students then would know that those increases are coming 

about. This gentleman seems to indicate that there was really 

very little forewarning and that students midway through 

suddenly are overburdened by a tuition increase and as a result 

are in fact . . . he indicates that some have left the programs 

because they can’t afford them. Could you respond to that, 

please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We’re going to have to investigate that, 

Madam Chair, and I’ll get back to the member with the precise 

answer, perhaps with a copy of the letter that I send to the 

student. But our understanding of the SIAST system — and we 

have a good understanding of it — is that these decisions are all 

made in advance. They’re all part of the plan here and that it 

was all laid down. There should have been no surprises to 

anybody. 

 

There certainly couldn’t be the snap kind of increase that this 

student complains of. That would be unprecedented. These 

things are, these tuition fee increases, are the subject of 

consideration by the board. They act on recommendations from 

the management of SIAST, and then the tuition fee increases 

are submitted to my office for final approval. And in that 

scenario, snap increases just aren’t on. These things have to be 

decided way down in advance. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. My colleagues are 

making it difficult for me to concentrate here, and yours too; I 

can see that. I look forward to a response, Mr. Minister, and I’ll 

leave it at that. 

 

At the time that the training strategy was announced, I’m on 

record as saying that I supported the initiatives that your 

government was undertaking in terms of building partnerships 

with business and ensuring that we move to a better training 

strategy and indeed skills . . . producing people with skills that 

are required. 

 

The last comment that is contained in this gentleman’s letter, I 

think further emphasizes my point. And he says, to reiterate, 

“The Saskatchewan training strategy is bursting with great ideas 

and words.” But then he says, “Now we would like to see 

government back up their words with some real actions.” 

 

And that’s the point that I raised, Mr. Minister, at the time that  

  



1434  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

we were discussing the training strategy. I want to ensure that 

indeed we don’t have a document that has been put together 

with a lot of thought, a lot of good ideas, a lot of plans, that 

collects dust. And I know that there’s a three-year 

implementation plan and the like. And I would like to ensure 

that your department would indeed assure the people and this 

gentleman that yes, we will put some action into those policies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I will state that. The member has 

been quite actively involved in the various stages of the 

development of the strategy, as has the member from Rosthern. 

And no doubt that will continue in the future. And, Madam 

Chair, I’m going to sit down because the member’s not listening 

to my answer anyway. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, it’s difficult trying to listen to 

three people at the same time here. Mr. Minister, we’ve seen 

some restructuring around the finances for Post-Secondary. I 

see a new partnership developing between New Careers and in 

fact Social Services and Post-Secondary. Could you tell me 

how the plans were initiated and how we see transfers of 

finances from those three departments to now take care of job 

training? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Madam Chair, this is a very good 

question and it’s . . . I always have to go back and check the 

answer because it’s not simple. With respect to New Careers the 

programs remain out there as they were but the administration 

is absorbed into the department and restructured in that sense. 

The staff of New Careers — the field staff — will be attached 

to the regional colleges. 

 

The money saved from the administrative restructuring of the 

management of New Careers and the absorption of those 

functions into the department will be redirected to provide 

counselling services at the . . . in the regions. So that there’s a 

shift there from management to field services, but the New 

Careers programing continues. 

 

The provincial training allowances will no longer be paid by 

Social Services but will be paid by my department. And the 

basic education funding that previously was paid by Social 

Services is now a part of our budget at Post-Secondary 

Education. That in a nutshell is it, but it’s not simple. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 

And I guess if I see an explanation within the estimate maybe it 

will help me and maybe others understand. And if I could refer 

you to page 106 under training programs and subvote no. 4. 

 

When I hear you say that the function of New Careers will be 

now within the department, is that the reason why we see the 

New Careers Corporation there that had a $6 million budget last 

year and has a zero budget now this year, yet I see under basic 

education and literacy, dramatic increase of almost the same $6 

million? 

 

So is this just a reshuffling and a realignment of the dollars; is 

that something you were explaining in your first response? 

 

(2045) 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, sorry again to take some 

time, but as I tried to tell the member this is not an easy trail to 

follow. 

 

Referring to page 106, which is what the member was looking 

at, the 6 million that was opposite New Careers Corporation is, 

as the member guessed, included in the basic education and 

literacy item two lines above. So you were right — that’s where 

that is. And that’s basic education money — it was before, it is 

now. 

 

And if you turn back to page 105 you will see as a result of the 

administrative changes that I referred to, the regional college 

budget is increased by an amount equal to the amount of that 

difference. That budget has been increased by New Careers 

funds. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned that 

Social Services funding has been allocated into the student 

support and employment programs. And as I see that in section 

no. 3 on page 104 when you made reference to the provincial 

training allowances, I see an increase of $17 million there in 

terms of expenditure in that line. 

 

Could you indicate to me from the Social Services budget then, 

which line item in Social Services decreased the 17? Is that the 

income security and support? Is that where the $17 million 

comes from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Now in the New Careers 

Corporation as indicated in subvote no. 5, the third section, 

New Careers budget has virtually remained unchanged; in fact 

it decreased just a little bit there. What will be the role now of 

this particular function of New Careers? Is it still maintaining 

the program as it did before? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 

whole rescheduling and re-targeting for students, how many 

students do you think will be eligible for the income-support 

training programs that you’ve instituted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  For this fiscal year between 6 and 

7,000, and it’s projected for next year, 8,000. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 

area that we’ve had a number of concerns raised and expressed 

to us by individuals is in the area of student loans. And the 

section that you’ve indicated that you have in your estimates of 

course is that the support for the students hasn’t changed a lot in 

terms of student aid. The amount of dollars is very nearly the 

same. 

 

Could you indicate how the numbers have changed from ‘95-96 

to ‘96-97 in terms of — two points — the amount of money that 

was allocated for student loans and the number of students that 

actually qualified and obtained a student loan for those two 

years? 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  In 1995-96 the amount of money 

allocated was 35 million. In ‘96-97 it is 28 million. And in 

1997-98 it is projected to be 28 million. The reason for that 

drop is the different arrangements now. With the bank being 

involved, it requires less of an expenditure on our part. And the 

number of students are between 15 and 17,000. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for those statistics, Mr. Minister. 

Now that the student aid has been within the Royal Bank’s 

administration area for a full year, have you had a chance to 

analyse how this has worked with Royal Bank and can you tell 

the House what kind of changes may be necessary, if any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There was an initial break-in period in 

which there was some problems with the arrangement. A lot of 

that is because we in this province pay out on a monthly basis to 

students if they . . . so that they can budget appropriately. And 

that created different kinds of problems for the bank and it just 

took awhile for the system to get into effect. 

 

It went into effect August 1 last year so we’ve less than a year. 

We don’t have any numbers, like numbers of students or 

amount of loans or anything like that to share with you, but we 

can say that there have been no complaints at all recently with 

the way in which the system works. And from all reports we 

have, it’s working well. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Did Royal Bank assume the old student loans 

prior to August 1 of 1996? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No they did not. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Then, Mr. Minister, some very specific 

questions then about, I guess, the old loans. What type of 

collection methods does your department use for overdue 

student loan payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’ll tell the member the various steps 

that we take, Mr. Chair. First of all, a one-month overdue letter 

is sent to the borrower at the most recent mailing address when 

one monthly payment has been missed. A two-months overdue 

letter is sent to the borrower when two monthly payments have 

been missed; and then a final notice letter is sent to the 

borrower when three monthly payments have been missed. 

 

A default notice letter is sent to the borrower and to the 

borrower’s next of kin mailing address when the fourth monthly 

payment has been missed and a demand for payment letter is 

sent if the borrower breaks a repayment arrangement previously 

agreed upon. 

 

Several attempts are made to contact the student borrower by 

telephone to discuss repayment arrangements, and in some 

cases a registered letter may be sent if telephone attempts are 

unsuccessful. 

 

Students who are in contact with us but are unable to repay their 

loans — they may be unemployed or underemployed or ill or 

whatever — they are referred to the interest relief plan which 

can provide up to 18 months of repayment deferral. 

 

And once a student borrower has used up the maximum interest 

relief and still has no ability to repay, the account may be 

placed in postponement until the student’s financial situation 

changes. 

 

The accounts that are not collected by that process are referred 

to private collection agencies. This has been going on for some 

years now. In the 1996-97 fiscal year approximately 110 

accounts per month were referred to a collection agency. Once a 

loan goes into default, of course, the loan becomes immediately 

due and payable in full and the student is no longer eligible for 

further loans until the defaulted loan is paid in full. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  For clarification, Mr. Minister, did you say 

110 loans per month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I find that a staggering number. That was, I 

believe, statistics that you’ve quoted for 1996. Is this continuing 

into 1997? — first question. Second question, are we talking 

about a collection agency who is receiving a fee for monies 

collected that is a commission basis, or are they paid a flat 

amount to pursue the collection of a bad account? 

 

And the other point, Mr. Minister, I guess maybe that’s why 

we’re hearing the fact that collection agencies apparently have 

been very rude and have treated individuals with not much care. 

And we’re wondering what you’re doing about a situation 

where 110 referrals are made to a collection agency per month, 

and if that’s continuing I think we need to do something about 

that. And I wait for your reply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I want to 

put this in some perspective. There are probably a hundred 

thousand odd, a hundred thousand odd outstanding loans. We 

don’t know how many there are. They go back for years and 

years and years. Some of them are old and some of them are 

new. And the figure of 110 a month, while it sounds a bit 

startling by itself, taken in that context is explainable. And we 

don’t go to collection until . . . you know, if there’s any level of 

cooperation from them, any response, any kind of dialogue with 

us, we’ll try and work something out, work out some repayment 

schedule or something like that. So we’re not terrorizing these 

kids or being very, very heavy with them. 

 

But if they don’t pay and if it goes on as I’ve described through 

all of these months of receiving letters and phone calls and that 

sort of thing, and it’s referred to a collection agency, then it’s 

out of our hands. The department’s not in the business of 

collecting debts in a professional way. So for many years these 

matters have been referred to collection agencies and they 

charge a commission. They’re not paid a fee. They receive a 

commission on the amounts that they collect. And I am really 

disturbed to hear that there is rude treatment. There ought not to 

be. I suppose that collection agencies can be pretty aggressive, 

but they ought not to be rude. And I’d like to know of those 

cases so that we could correct that behaviour. 

 

One other thing I might mention is that there’s no longer 110  

  



1436  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

such cases being referred because since last August the new 

loans at least are in the hands of the bank, and we’re not having 

to deal with them. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Two follow-up bits of information required 

there, Mr. Minister. When you talked about commission, is it a 

percentage? And secondly, how many people in your 

department are actually involved with the letter writing and the 

follow-through to the 18-month period with loan . . . delinquent 

loans, I guess is the best way to refer to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are presently eight people in the 

department who are involved with these collection attempts. 

They’ll gradually work themself out of a job, of course, over the 

course of time, but at the moment there are eight. 

 

Oh yes, and the commission agents are paid on a percentage 

basis. We’re not sure. We just can’t recall, but that’s 

information I can send to you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There are a few 

things that I want you to send to me, and I think that’s where 

I’ll wrap up. 

 

But first of all, when you say that there is a commission . . . and 

we understand it to be somewhere in that 20 per cent range. I 

think that’s why we’re hearing the complaints from individuals, 

from students who are saying that these people are very rude 

because they won’t receive any money unless they can make 

commitment and can get a commitment from the student that 

indeed monies are paid. If monies are paid and they’ve 

collected it, then they’re going to receive a commission on that. 

 

And I think that’s something that we have to have . . . your 

department has to take a look at because we are also aware that 

certain collection agencies have offered discounts to students to 

say, well if you can’t pay the full 50,000 or 30,000, we’ll let 

you pay this much, and you’ll be absolved of your 

responsibilities. I think that should be instead of the province of 

Saskatchewan losing that money and turning it over to a 

collection agency to again get a commission . . . Is there any 

thought to your department looking at a better system at 

collecting those overdue ones? 

 

Now I know you’re talking about a new system, and I see your 

explanation last year indeed is that there’s going to be an 

additional 5 per cent paid to the Royal Bank now as a risk for, I 

guess, their bad debts. Now they have a different system of 

collecting debts, and I guess there’s credit ratings, and there’s 

all the kinds of things that people have to be afraid of. So could 

you comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It was of course, as I’ve mentioned, a 

decision that was made some years ago to use collection 

agencies, and I understand that decision because it’s not . . . 

government employees are not trained in collection techniques, 

and it’s really not the sort of thing that government likes to do, 

to hound people for money. 

 

And I suppose that lay behind the original decision to refer to 

collection agencies. They have no authority to make the kind of 

compromise that the member’s referring to. There is not one 

case that we are aware of where that’s been authorized by the 

department. We will consider those sorts of situations I 

suppose, but the collection agencies have no such authority at 

all. And if the opposition ever encounters a case like that please 

refer it to my office because we just won’t stand still for that; 

they don’t have that power. Now they’re paid by commission, 

which means they’ve got to collect money to make money, so 

they’re likely to be quite aggressive in their techniques. But 

what are you going to do, you know? 

 

I say again to the member we’re really at pains to establish 

some contact with the student and get some kind of response, to 

get some understanding of why payments are not being made. 

And if they will respond to our letters and to our phone calls, 

then we’ll try and work out something that they can live with. 

And it’s only if they don’t respond that we have to do 

something else, of course. 

 

Now sometimes the student moves and we can’t find them, 

can’t catch up with them you know. So then these letters are 

never answered and it gets referred to a collection agency 

without the student having the opportunity of relating to the 

department and working something out. But we really do bend 

over backwards to establish a harmonious way of working out 

the problem and seeing that the debt is repaid. And if there’s 

just no response or no cooperation then we really have no 

alternative but to do what we do. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and yes I would 

agree with you that long before we get to the point that a 

student loan should be turned over to a collection agency, I 

think every student should endeavour to do everything possible 

to ensure that they communicate with the department. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask your officials if they could supply 

me with some additional information in the essence of saving 

some time. You’ve indicated the number of delinquent loans 

that are referred to every month. Could you supply to me — and 

I guess it would be fine for the last three years prior to August 1 

and the new program coming into place — how many new 

loans were issued in each of the preceding three years prior to 

August 1? How many loans do exist overall in the province of 

Saskatchewan? And how many of those are in that delinquent 

category? And I know you’ve referred to maybe 100,000 or 

whatever that number may be. If you could supply those 

answers to me. 

 

The other thing I know that will occur long before we’re in 

another session is there will be a full year of administration by 

the Royal Bank. August 1 will be coming up. Could you supply 

those numbers when they become available in terms of what 

numbers of student loans were issued in this calendar year, 

‘96-97, and what numbers of dollars if indeed we reached that 

28 million. I would appreciate that. 

 

If your official would supply me with that, Mr. Minister, I 

would say thank you and I would say to your officials thank 

you very much for sharing that information and to you as well  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

for being open and upfront. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 

member, thanks very much for those remarks. We’ll certainly 

provide that information for the member, and I’d like to thank 

the member for the way in which we approached these issues. I 

appreciate it a great deal. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 37 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I neglected to 

thank my officials for coming and helping with the work of the 

committee tonight. I left it to my friend but I should also add 

my thanks to them as well. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

 

The Chair:  This item is simply if there are any questions. 

Are there any questions? Is that item agreed? Carried. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: — Before I ask the minister to introduce her 

officials I just remind committee members that this department 

was last before this committee April 17. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Chair, beside me is Deputy 

Minister Craig Dotson; on the other side is Michael Littlewood, 

director of third party funding and legislative services; behind 

Mr. Dotson, Ken Horsman, assistant deputy minister; and 

behind myself is Mae Boa, executive director of finance and 

operations. 

 

Also in the House tonight is Karen Lautsch, manager of school 

grants; John McLaughlin, executive director of the Teachers’ 

Superannuation Commission; and Cal Kirby, director of 

facilities planning. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Welcome, Madam Minister, and your officials. We’ll try to get 

through a fair amount of business tonight, and I appreciate the 

fact that we have a number of people here to assist. 

 

The last time we met our discussion centred around 

restructuring and amalgamation and the public consultation 

process that had been undertaken by the Department of 

Education throughout Saskatchewan and the fact that there was 

a consensus, as the minister explained, that there would be 

amalgamations but they would take place on a voluntary basis. I 

guess the question that I have for you, Madam Minister, is  

was the minister’s initial plan to have all school divisions 

participate in amalgamation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The plan is this. The expectation is 

such that we expect each school division to develop an action 

plan to consult with their neighbouring school divisions as well 

as their public to see whether in fact their public is interested in 

going forward with a restructuring initiative. 

 

Obviously there will be parts of the province where 

restructuring will make some sense, and there will be other 

parts of the province where it may not make sense because of 

demographics and distance and geographic area. So we are not 

in any sense of the word saying that every school board in the 

province has to restructure, but we are saying is . . . we want 

each school board to develop an action plan to consult their 

public and, based on the consultation, come forward with 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, as we sit here today, are 

you pleased with the number of voluntary amalgamations that 

you are aware of and that have come forward, and how many do 

you expect to see happen before the summer holidays? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as you know, there has already 

been one amalgamation that’s gone forward with the Blaine 

Lake School amalgamating with the Sask Valley School 

Division and the Hafford School amalgamating with the 

Battleford School Division. 

 

In addition, we have several examples where boards have 

served notice of intent, and it’s their intention to go forward 

with elections based on a restructured school division. An 

example would be the P.A. (Prince Albert)-Carlton, P.A. Rural 

and Kinistino school divisions. As well, the Wilkie-Kerrobert 

Division is going forward with an initiative. Last Mountain 

School Division-Long Lake are going forward. It appears as 

though we may have an initiative in the North 

Battleford-Battleford School Division areas, as well as 

Timberline and Canora, in addition, Arcola and Oxbow. And it 

looks as though there may be some initiatives in the area of 

French schools, as well some initiatives in the Catholic system. 

And we have another initiative with Wood River, Gravelbourg, 

and Lady of Fatima — it looks as though there could be an 

initiative there. 

 

So quite frankly I am quite pleased with the number of 

voluntary initiatives that have come forward since the 

government made its announcement in early December. And 

it’s my expectation that it’s quite likely that by the end of the 

year we will see what I consider to be significantly fewer school 

divisions in the province. And this has come about not as a 

result of the government drawing a map, but as a result of 

school boards on their own volition consulting with their public 

and making the decision to go forward with restructuring. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, with the number of projects 

that you’ve described, there are two questions I guess I have, is 

what will your department be doing in terms of providing 

guidance, in terms of providing leadership to all of these 

projects to make sure that everything is done correctly and  

  



1438  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

accurately? And when you start to look at restructuring the 

concerns that were expressed . . . I know a number of years ago 

that the boundaries that were drawn are boundaries that have 

been in place since 1944. And you’ve mentioned many 

instances, two school divisions that may be developing, 

restructuring, and in fact creating a new school division. 

 

Will there be the ability for either your department or the school 

divisions that are restructuring and amalgamating to take a look 

at their, sort of what I would call the external boundary around 

the two and say, can we do some shifts? Because I think your 

department has . . . I know I’ve made things aware to you, that 

indeed there are parts of school divisions that have to move 

from the entity that they’re in right now to another school 

division. What kind of plans are you putting in place to ensure 

that this is done consistently across the province rather than in a 

piecemeal fashion? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The member may know that all of our 

partners in education and ourselves are just in the final stages of 

developing a guide that will be given to school boards to assist 

them in the process of developing action plans and going about 

restructuring. We expect that that document will be released 

within weeks. 

 

The second point I want to make is that we’re not necessarily 

going to see the amalgamation of two or three school boards 

under one school division. The Blaine Lake example is a good 

one, in that the Blaine Lake town people wanted to go towards 

Sask Valley, and the Hafford people wanted to go towards 

Battleford because that was their natural trading pattern. And 

obviously we are not stuck on amalgamations of two or three 

school boards and keeping the boundaries whole; that there will 

need to be . . . some flexibility in this in order that local 

considerations can be taken into account. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, there have been a lot of concerns expressed by 

individuals, communities, school divisions, around on-reserve 

schools. Can you indicate to me how many on-reserve schools 

there are in the province of Saskatchewan right now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t . . . As you know, on-reserve 

schools come under the auspices of band control, and the 

federal government is involved in the provision of services to 

schools. We can get that information for you. But because band 

schools are not provincial schools, we don’t have that 

information readily accessible. But we can certainly try and get 

obtain that information from Indian and Northern Affairs. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 

know how many new on-reserve schools will open in this next 

year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I don’t know how many on-reserve 

schools will open. I do know that the federal government is 

spending approximately $42 million, I think, in this fiscal year 

to build on-reserve schools. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  That figure, Madam Minister, indicates to me 

that there must be a few, and we know that there are a few that  

have been built before. What impact do on-reserve schools have 

for existing school divisions? And is this a problem for school 

divisions that are seeing an on-reserve school being built in 

their area as far as the stability of that existing school division? 

What kinds of things are occurring? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I can say to the member that 

certainly this is a concern for many rural school divisions that 

have historically had first nations children attending provincial 

schools on the basis of tuition fee agreements between the band 

and the school. The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

and ourselves have entered into a protocol where we’re in the 

process of ensuring that our provincial curriculum is 

appropriate for Indian or first nations students. 

 

The second point I can make is that the government last year 

introduced an increase of $1 million in the Indian and Metis 

education development program in order to assist those rural 

school boards in providing culturally sensitive programs that 

school boards felt they were unable to provide, given the nature 

of tuition fee agreements. And consequently we’ve seen a 

significant increase in the number of programs that are offered 

in rural schools to first nation students, and we think that this is 

beginning to address some of the concerns from first nations 

people when it comes to ensuring that their students have access 

to language programs, for instance elder programs, or other 

culturally sensitive programs. 

 

The third point I could make is that we’re just in the process of 

discussing with the Flying Dust Band and the Meadow Lake 

School Division, the possibility of a school that could be jointly 

funded by the Flying Dust Band and the province, and 

consequently, perhaps co-managed by the band and the school 

division in order to accommodate first nations children that are 

presently leaving the Flying Dust Reserve and going into 

Meadow Lake. And the Flying Dust Reserve and Meadow Lake 

are side by side. 

 

And here’s an example of where we may have a joint-use 

facility that can meet the needs of the school division in 

Meadow Lake, the Government of Saskatchewan, and also the 

first nations people from the Flying Dust Reserve. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And when you 

talk about joint-use facilities and that movement with native 

groups, that is something, I think, that is necessary in many 

parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

That takes me to different joint use, an announcement that you 

just did not too long ago, Madam Minister, which is the new 

project in Yorkton. And I guess if we look at media reaction in 

terms of different parts of the province, we see the Yorkton 

people, the Yorkton Catholic Board of Education, the Public 

Board of Education, I think responding quite positively to this 

new venture. Yet we see the response by the Catholic school 

section as not necessarily as warm, I guess, as the other. How 

do you see this new project in Yorkton influencing what might 

occur provincially? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think that this is a wonderful 

initiative for the city of Yorkton, in that as I understand it, not  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

only have the Catholic and public boards come together to 

develop a school for a particular neighbourhood, but now the 

city of Yorkton has also involved itself in that project in order 

to provide facilities for Yorkton and the community within this 

school is going to be built. 

 

In terms of what impact does this have on the rest of the 

province, I mean we’re not talking about a very large school in 

the Yorkton context. I believe we’re talking about 500 children 

between the two facilities. Obviously joint use will go forward 

where it makes sense for the community, and where we have 

agreement. 

 

Right now in terms of capital planning in the province, joint-use 

facilities move quickly up the list because the province is 

encouraging the notion of joint use, particularly between adult 

learning institutions in rural Saskatchewan in particular, and 

school divisions, along with health boards and municipalities 

and library boards and so forth. 

 

I think we have a wonderful example of joint use in the town of 

Tisdale where the community college, the health board, the 

school division, and the town have come together and what they 

have developed in a collaborative, cooperative way is a facility 

that I think that will receive international attention and national 

attention. And I suspect it will win international and national 

awards because of the forward thinking of the community of 

Tisdale and area. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Multiple use of 

structures that cost us millions of dollars is necessary and I 

think that the public is demanding of that to occur. And I’m 

very happy to see the Yorkton people proceed with such a 

project. 

 

One question, do you see that school being administered by one 

set of administration, or are we looking at shared facility but 

still two separate entities in terms of teachers and principal, 

administration and the like? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  At the Yorkton facility the gymnasium 

and the resource centre will be shared by the two school boards, 

or the two schools. Each school will have its own 

administration. They will jointly share the resource centre or the 

library and the gymnasium for physical activity and community 

activity. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As a result of a 

capital construction in the city of Yorkton, do you see any . . . 

has there been any discussion with other communities in terms 

of discussing their concerns with you because they live further 

out of Yorkton and indeed now they may see the potential that 

school closures or great discontinuance will occur because of 

the construction of a new school in Yorkton? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised by my officials that 

Yorkdale, which is the school division that surrounds the city of 

Yorkton, was involved in the planning for this facility. And this 

facility is part of a long-range plan for Yorkton and the 

Yorkdale area. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay. Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, I’d like to take you back to April — whatever 

it was — 17, I guess. I asked a couple of questions about Media 

House and I need some clarification. That day you indicated 

that your department had renewed its . . . had not renewed its 

five-year contract with Media House. And you responded that 

the audio and visual duplication services were tendered out and 

another company won the bid. Now I’ve heard and we’ve been 

informed that audio and video not necessarily occurred. Can 

you tell us whether the audio portion of that contract was 

included, or was it not included? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I can tell you is audio is going to 

be done internally, video is going to this company that won the 

tender, and the 16 millimetre films are being discontinued. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The response that I had from you in Hansard 

was indeed that the contract was awarded for all of those things, 

so I’m glad that you’ve clarified that for me. 

 

When we took a look at audio, and I think that the statistics 

were that about 25,000 audio tapes were released by Media 

House throughout all of last year to the public. Are you saying 

now that your department is going to look after 25,000 audio 

tapes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t have the official here that has 

the answer to your question. So what I’ll have to do is contact 

Dr. Margaret Lipp. She’s got the information and we’ll share 

that information with you as soon as I can. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, when your department decided to tender, I guess, the 

new contract whatever it called for, had you conducted a survey 

of the schools, the educational users of audio and video tapes to 

see whether or not there was a need to change the system? Is 

this as a result — that is, the change to a different type of 

arrangement — is that as a result of complaints of the old 

system? What changes or what things precipitated your need to 

ask for a new tender? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Media Group, as I understand it, had a 

five-year contract. The decision was made to tender this. This is 

not unusual, for government to tender various services that are 

provided by independent business groups. We tendered it, and 

the other company won the tender. 

 

The other thing that the department advises me is the use of 16 

millimetre film was going down significantly because people 

are now using videotape machines. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In response to that comment, Minister, I have 

three letters from three teachers who have described to me, I 

think a total of nine titles here that were available in 16 

millimetre film and now have been told that they will not be 

able to be supplied. And there’s no replacement for them by 

new technology. 

 

  



1440  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

How will teachers who have been using particular media, the 16 

millimetre, and if they are not being duplicated by some other 

source . . . what process is in place to inform these teachers that 

alternatives to that media is available? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised once again by the 

department that the 16 millimetre films are going to be given to 

Media House in Regina. Media House will then have to seek 

the rights to those films, and then they’ll be in a position where 

they can offer these films for rental. 

 

As well, the film titles that are of extreme usage, I suppose by 

school divisions, we’re attempting to replace those 16 

millimetre film with videos because there are groups that make 

the transition from film to video. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Could you indicate to the House the kind of 

contract that is in place with the new supplier, and who is the 

new supplier? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The new group is . . . the successful 

component was Media Group Inc. from Saskatoon. Media 

Group Inc. is owned by a company called C Prompt Computer 

Systems Inc., and the agreement has been negotiated with 

Media Group. The contract has not yet been signed . . . Oh, the 

contract has now been signed and it is for a five-year period 

beginning July 1, 1997. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ll leave that 

issue for the moment. 

 

If I could ask you now to take some specific look at the section 

on page no. 42, which is the teacher pensions and benefits and a 

couple of questions around the teachers’ pension. 

 

I note that in the cost of teachers’ pension, there has been a 

decrease, and there’s been a decrease over the last three years. 

What do we attribute that to and what are long-term 

projections? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It’s attributed to the increase in the 

number of retiring teachers. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Do you expect that number to continue to 

decrease? And as a result will there be additional funds 

available, or will that now be taken up by the new pension plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We expect it to increase but fluctuate 

from year to year until the year 2005. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In the section entitled, educational grants and 

programs, section no. 4, I note that Official Minority Language 

Office, when I look at the estimates for ‘96-97 and ‘97-98, we 

see almost a . . . in fact it’s a little more than a $3 million 

reduction in terms of the expenditures. Could you explain how 

this happened, and what kind of changes will be made? Because 

obviously a $3 million change must mean that there must be 

significant changes. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you may know, there was an  

agreement with the federal government for capital funds for the 

renovation and construction of francophone schools in the 

province. My understanding is that all the francophone schools 

have undergone their renovations or construction, and therefore 

there is a reduction in OMLO (Official Minority Language 

Office) because we’re no longer . . . all of the schools have got 

their renovations and their capital construction done. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, in the area of capital 

funding, you’ve indicated that approximately 16.8 million is 

available for capital funding this year, an increase over last 

year. And I note that about 3 million new dollars has actually 

gone into the area of capital because we have a decrease in 

interest rates . . . or interest payments, I should say. Is there a 

projection available for interest payments by the department for 

the next three years? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’ll have to get that information for 

you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Yes, I would 

like an explanation as to the interest payments. And I see, like, 

the ‘95-96 year at 12,000 and then 10 for this current estimated 

year, and where are we moving in terms of the future. Because 

that will clear up some, I think, capital projects that are before 

us. 

 

How many projects is the facility department now handling in 

terms of the first request by the boards of education? And what 

do you see occurring with 16.8 million in terms of the number 

of capital projects that will now be able to be approved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The amount of money for block 

projects is $8.3 million, and we expect that there will be about 

110 projects. 

 

As well there is approval in principle for the North Battleford 

joint youth project, the Estevan joint youth, the Yorkton joint 

youth, and there are funds allocated to this fiscal year. As well 

there is money allocated to Moose Jaw King George, Wadena 

Comp phase 2, Central Butte phase 2, and work being done on 

the new school in Biggar. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Sorry, Madam Minister, what was the first 

number that you indicated in terms of number of projects? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  $8.327 million and 110 projects under 

block funding. Those tend to be occupational health and safety 

projects, new roofs. They’re small projects; they’re not large 

projects. They come out of block and the rest of the money, 

another 8 million, goes into capital construction of new schools 

or the completion of phases or the beginning of phases. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much for that clarification. 

Madam Minister, a lot has been said in terms of the payment of 

grants to school divisions during the spring, the delay that 

occurred on budget day because of some reassessment figures 

being unavailable from certain cities. And I think the 

constraints that boards found themselves in caused some 

difficulty for many of the boards. 

 

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

Let’s begin by asking this question, Madam Minister. You’ve 

indicated in the budget, or the Minister of Finance has 

indicated, that there was an additional $8 million provided for 

grant purposes. In terms of the department’s analysis of the 

entire costs of education, when you say the recognized 

expenditures, what change took place to — and again I recall 

last time that I asked for those figures to be provided to me and 

I do not have them yet — what kind of changes occurred to the 

left side of that column whereby we note that recognized 

expenditures increased? What total amount did the expenditures 

increase for all boards in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The total recognized expenditures 

increased from 863.8 million to 882.8 million. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. If my math is 

correct, that’s about a $19 million change. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Correct. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay. Madam Minister, if we look at a 

recognized expenditure of 19 million approximately and the 

province’s commitment of 8 million new dollars, we see a 

continuation of the slide. And we’ve talked about 60/40 

funding. We realize that all stakeholders, whether we’re talking 

about the municipal governments of SARM and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and whether 

we’re talking about the school boards, everybody is lobbying 

you, I’m sure, and the minister that the 60/40 split is not 

acceptable. 

 

With a $19 million change in recognized expenditures and an 

$8 million commitment, that’s about 40 per cent again. So we 

haven’t made any significant move in that respect. What kind of 

plan do you see being put in place not just . . . I mean we don’t 

see a plan occurring for this year, but what does the future hold 

in terms of moving from 40/60 to 60/40? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as the member knows, total 

recognized expenditure doesn’t mean that that’s what school 

boards spent. In fact school boards can spend much less, much 

less. 

 

So what I will say to the member is that the Premier, in his 

address to the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association 

as well as SARM, as well as his discussions with the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), has indicated very 

clearly that it is the intentions of this government this year to 

consult with our various stakeholder groups that have an 

interest in educational taxes on property to determine how we 

might — in a realistic and sustainable, fiscally sustainable way 

— move back to the 1978 period when 58 per cent of the cost 

of education was borne by provincial property taxpayers . . . or 

provincial taxpayers and about 42 per cent of the expense for K 

to 12 education was borne by local property taxpayers. 

 

(2145) 

 

So I expect that we will at some stage come forward with a plan 

to gradually get ourselves back to those heady days of the late 

‘70s, but I could say to the member that 60/40 is not going to  

happen overnight; but it is our intention to come forward with a 

plan that is financially sustainable to move us in that direction. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Two questions 

then related to that. I know you don’t have this year’s budgets 

because boards are working on them right at the moment. And 

probably you don’t even have 1996 audited financial statements 

yet. If you do, could you tell me then what the total amount for 

K to 12 expenditure is. Because you’ve indicated a number of 

882 million as far as recognized expenditures and I was under 

the understanding that we’re almost at $1 billion in terms of the 

total cost of K to 12 education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t yet have the audited financial 

statements but what I can say to the Leader of the Third Party is 

that if we weren’t spending some $760 million in interest 

payments, we could go to 60/40 immediately. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I wasn’t sure 

whether someone else had joined our conversation. I didn’t 

realize that you were referring to someone else. 

 

Madam Minister, when you talk about $20 million increase in 

terms of recognized expenditures and an $8 million additional 

funding allotment from the Minister of Finance, how then did 

boards manage to balance their budgets with that kind of 

recognition? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I guess what I can say to the member 

is, had we lowered the recognized expenditures, boards would 

have spent the same amount of money. So regardless of whether 

it goes up or it goes down, boards still have to deliver a K to 12 

education in this province and they will still spend the same 

amount of money. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The recognition that you require from boards 

in terms of the financial commitment is determined by the 

equalization factor. I understand that that changed, but because 

of the change in assessments; could you indicate what amount it 

changed as far as the old assessment system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It basically changed by 2 old mills. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Then if that’s true, Madam Minister, 2 mills 

is the equivalent of about $12 million, so therefore what you’re 

saying is that boards of education were expected to contribute 

an additional $12 million towards the recognized expenditures. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As the member probably knows, this is 

a distributional effect. This is about equalization. Had we 

lowered the computational mill rate, boards would still have 

spent the same amount of money. So I disagree with what 

you’re representing. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I didn’t say anything about lowering the rate. 

My question is, Madam Minister, is if you have changed the 

equalization factor by 2 mills from 68.4 to 70.4 — if that’s the 

new number — and the assessment remains the same as it did in 

1996, you are now asking the boards of education to contribute 

an additional $12 million recognized in comparison to last year. 

Is that not true? 

  



1442  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What the member needs to know is that 

regardless of whether we lowered it raised it or kept it the same, 

boards are spending the same amount of money, the 

government is still distributing $363 million worth of grant. 

This is about distribution, this is about equalization, and we 

don’t share your notion that boards have to raise an extra $12 

million. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I guess, Madam Minister, we’ll see the results 

of that when we look at the budgets of boards, and indeed if we 

find out that the total amount of money that boards will be 

spending this year has increased by $20 million, then we will 

know that 8 million came from the Department of Education 

and 12 additional million came from the taxpayers. That will be 

seen when we see the finalized budgets. 

 

One question, Madam Minister, about shared services — and 

there has been some change in there — and I note from 

individual printouts for various school divisions that significant 

changes occurred to the amount of money for shared services, 

and I understand that’s for the provision of some additional 

people. Could you explain what benefits will occur for students 

in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of the change to the 

shared services program. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well it’s quite simple. We know that 

there are certain parts of Saskatchewan where a core curriculum 

was not being fully implemented. We knew that school boards, 

for whatever reason, did not have the resources to ensure that 

teachers were implementing the curriculum in all parts of the 

province. 

 

What we have done is, we’ve moved to put in a resource-based 

learning position into each of the shared service districts — 

there are 17 of them. And the idea here is to have a 

resource-based learning personnel in place to assist school 

boards and teachers in implementing core curriculum, which we 

have spent literally tens of millions of dollars to design, pilot, 

implement. Now what we have to do is ensure that it’s being 

implemented across the province, and it’s being implemented in 

the way that core was originally designed to be implemented. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that response, Madam 

Minister. One final question, Madam Minister . . . or series of 

questions about a different area, and that’s the small schools 

factor. Could you explain the department’s reasoning around 

the minimum to maximum as far as the mileages . . . or I 

shouldn’t say mileage, but the distances that occur between 

schools and why you have different factors for different 

schools, that is the different grade levels of different schools? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well the maximum and minimum 

distances are: K to elementary education, 30 kilometres is the 

max., 10 kilometres is the minimum; middle years, 40 

kilometres is the max., 15 kilometres is the minimum; and 

secondary or high school, 50 kilometres is the max., 20 

kilometres is the minimum. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I’m sorry. You didn’t 

understand my question. I knew those numbers but I don’t 

understand why you’ve put in place varying degrees of  

numbers for the different grade levels. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Quite simple. What we want to do is 

ensure that small children are not on a school bus for hours 

trying to get to school. I mean I’ve heard many times in this 

legislature, and when I was certainly in opposition, the concern 

that we need to keep small children — elementary school aged 

children — as close to home as possible. We don’t want them 

on these long bus rides. Some middle years students and 

certainly high school students are in a better position to take the 

long bus rides but young kids aren’t. 

 

And so it’s a matter of social policy. We want to ensure that 

younger kids are educated as close to home as possible. And for 

those small, isolated schools we are supporting those school 

divisions by making sure that funds are available to support 

students in various age categories and grades. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Have you had any reactions from 

boards of education regarding the change to the small schools 

factor — either positive or negative? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well what we did was we put $8.3 

million into small, rural, isolated schools. You know I heard the 

members opposite talk about this government’s commitment to 

rural Saskatchewan. This is a commitment to those small, rural, 

isolated schools. And we put an extra $8.3 million into those 

rural school divisions with those small schools. 

 

In fact we increased the rates from $440 per kindergarten 

student to $1,000 and for all other students from $800 to 

$1,000. And this is to support rural communities with small 

schools that have to go great distances in order to get to the next 

closest school. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess here’s 

where we start to develop some confusion. And I know what 

you’re saying in terms of supporting the small schools, and I 

know many small schools and communities are very 

appreciative of the fact that there’s been significant recognition 

for the fact that it is more costly to provide a program in that 

kind of a school, that that’s true. 

 

The problem though, Madam Minister, is you’ve just indicated 

that you’ve put $8.3 million into that area. Now that’s 

recognized expenditures. We know that there are salary-teacher 

costs of about $8 million. And the question that I asked you a 

few minutes ago was that the department has an additional $8 

million worth of grant. Now if you’ve now indicated that 8 

million additional dollars went into small schools, and 8 million 

went to teachers, and now you’ve indicated shared services 

received millions more, we end up in a situation where you’re 

talking about expenditures that far exceed the grant 

commitment that you have given and to the boards of education, 

which was an $8 million increase. How do you make the 

balance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You’ve just reinforced my point — 

you’ve just reinforced my point. This is about distribution. This 

is about how we distribute the $363 million. A public policy 

priority is to support small, isolated schools in rural  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

Saskatchewan. That is a public policy position of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government. 

 

Second point I want to make is that we have heard from you 

and some of your colleagues on numerous occasions about rural 

school closures. We wanted to ensure that rural school divisions 

had a recognized cost for small, rural, isolated schools. I would 

assume that as a member from rural Saskatchewan that you 

would be supportive of that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, either you weren’t listening 

to my response on the last question . . . I said that small schools 

were very appreciative and communities were very appreciative 

of what you did. And I for one indicated that. So don’t confuse 

the issue here and say that I was somehow condemning the fact 

that you have recognized small schools. 

 

My question was: you have indicated an expenditure of 8 

million here and 8 million there and 8 million there, and I’m 

wondering who’s paying for it? That was my question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well there’s $363 million that’s 

coming from the province, and the rest of the money is coming 

from school divisions across the province. 

 

Now just so you understand this, this is $8.3 million that’s not 

going to Saskatoon. It’s not going to Regina. It’s not going to 

Moose Jaw. It’s not going to North Battleford. It’s not going to 

Weyburn. It’s not going to Prince Albert. It’s not going to 

Estevan. It’s not going to Lloydminster. 

 

It is going to those school divisions with small, isolated, rural 

schools, those school divisions that have seen their property 

assessment go up. And had we not done this, they would have 

lost a lot more money from the province because of property 

reassessment. This was a mechanism for the province — the 

NDP government — to support those rural school divisions 

with small, isolated, rural schools. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Good evening, Madam Minister, and 

welcome to your officials this evening. First question that I 

have is, have you received the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

caucus global questions to your office and to your department, 

and when can we expect an answer to those questions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m sorry, member; we have not yet 

received the official package. But when we do, we’ll provide 

you with the answers to the questions that you ask. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. We’ll try and ensure that they get 

there fairly quickly. Question on your activities as minister and 

the question is, what sorts of trips have you taken over the past 

year and the staff that accompanies, like department officials, 

and what cost to the taxpayer that would have been? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay, I was to Edmonton to attend the 

second national consultation on education. It was the Council of 

Education Ministers from across the country, had a national 

consultation with various people. The people that attended were  

myself, Ken Horsman, Brij Mathur, Rene Archambault, Stan 

Frey, and Gillian McCreary — all people from the department. 

 

I then attended the council of ministers meeting in St. John’s, 

Newfoundland. My expenses were paid for by the council of 

ministers. Craig Dotson attended, as did Bev Cardinal, who was 

my chief of staff at the time. Then I was to Victoria and 

Vancouver and what I was doing was meeting with the B.C. 

(British Columbia) minister and the deputy minister, as well as 

school trustees, school council people, teachers, regarding their 

educational restructuring initiative that had occurred in British 

Columbia. And the person who accompanied me was Craig 

Dotson, the deputy minister. Those are my only out-of-province 

travel. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s a little 

amazing when we hear other members of the cabinet saying that 

education is one of those two or three key things that your 

government is spending money on and that the rest of them 

travel so much and you’re kept close to home. So maybe 

education isn’t quite as high up as some of the other ones. 

 

Madam Minister, Saskatoon (East) School Division is among 

the hardest hit in the province by the new education grant 

structure that you outlined on April 11. And as a result of that 

particular statement, the school division will see a million 

dollars cut from approximately 4 million they had received last 

year. Because of reassessment the division would have lost an 

additional, I believe, 1.4 million if you hadn’t placed that 25 per 

cent cap on the total amount which could be cut in any division. 

According to the division’s director of education, and I’ll quote 

here, “A higher portion of the division’s budget will have to be 

borne by property taxpayers.” And that’s from Star-Phoenix, 

April 12. 

 

Madam Minister, your government promised there would be no 

tax increases, yet those particular cuts to the K to 12 over the 

past five years on top of reassessment will mean big hikes in 

property taxes for many communities. How can you continue to 

say there are no tax increases when I think as we’re getting our 

tax notices, we’re seeing just the opposite happening. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well let me just say this to the member. 

As you know, this is the year for reassessment, and as you 

know, based on market value, some of us are seeing our taxes 

increase. I can say on my home in Saskatoon I will see my taxes 

increase fairly significantly because of reassessment. It’s not 

because the city of Saskatoon is going to raise more taxes from 

its collective ratepayers. It’s not because the Saskatoon Catholic 

School Board or Public School Board is going to raise more 

taxes from its collective ratepayers. It’s because of 

reassessment. 

 

In the case of the Saskatoon (East) School Division, their 

assessment increased 7.15 times. That was much above the 

provincial average. What that means is that property owners in 

the Saskatoon (East) School Division have seen their property 

increase in value on average some 7 times in comparison to the 

provincial average of some 4.9 times or 4.8 times. 

 

Our educational foundation operating grant is based on the  

  



1444  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

principle of equalization of distribution. The higher your 

assessment the lower the amount of money you get from the 

province. The lower your assessment the higher amount of 

money you get from the province. So in the case of Saskatoon 

(East), they would have seen their grant drop by some $2.14 

million had the province not moved to put a cap on it, an 

assessment-related cap that stays flat for three years. 

 

I can report to you that I received a very kind letter from the 

Chair of the board, along with the director of education, that 

expressed their appreciation for the work that the Government 

of Saskatchewan did along with our departmental officials for 

listening to our concerns about the loss of grants caused by 

reassessment. 

 

So I would say that . . . they also say that the way that you and 

your officials listened and responded in such a considerate and 

timely manner was much appreciated. So while you can raise 

this in the House, I think that they understood that this is 

reassessment related, it is not because of anything the 

Department of Education did. It is because 1997 is the year of 

reassessment. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  On that same thing, you just mentioned the 

cap, that basically I believe you said is going to be there for 

three years. What do you see happening when those three years 

are over and this cap comes off? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well it will be the year 2000, and you 

know, once again we will see municipalities across the province 

engaged in reassessment. I suspect that what we will see is an 

increase in the assessed value of property in Saskatoon and 

Regina, that it will go up, because we’ve had some significant 

economic activity between 1994 and 1997. And I suspect that 

it’s possible that we may get back to some of the balance that 

we had prior to this assessment year, 1997. 

 

Now I don’t know that, I’m just speculating. But I can say that 

we were quite surprised that Saskatoon and Regina came in 

below the provincial average of 4.8. They came in at 4.2, 4.1, 

and we got that information shortly before the budget. And that 

really had some significant impacts upon some of these 

divisions who were way above the provincial average and the 

grant. That’s why we moved to cap it for three years until 2000, 

and I think maybe the system will have settled out. And I don’t 

know if farm land is going to increase significantly in value 

between 1994 and 1997. But certainly if you look at property 

assessment in the cities, I think you’ll see some pretty 

phenomenal growth in value of properties. When assessment 

comes in the year 2000, then we’re looking at 1997 values. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  The assessment increase, I think you said it’s 

a little over seven times in Saskatoon (East), I would believe 

Sask Valley probably had something fairly close to that. And I 

would suspect that those areas close to Saskatoon would 

increase at the same rate because the housing booms and the 

acreage trend seems to have been reawakened again. 

 

And so I would suggest that the next time reassessment comes 

around, those particular divisions may be hit as hard, if not 

harder, again. So in case that happens I would hope that we’re  

looking at something, a plan for that contingency, because it 

will likely happen and we’d hate to get caught scrambling 

again. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I understand the member’s point. I 

guess one of the things that struck me when we sat down and 

took a look at the grants based on assessment, or reassessment, 

those school divisions that ring cities like Sask Valley, 

Saskatoon (East), Saskatoon (West), Buffalo Plains around 

Regina, Thunder Creek, P.A. Rural, the Battlefords, Battle 

River, I mean these are areas that are growing. 

 

But if you look at a place like Arcola, its assessment was below 

the provincial average and so consequently they see a 

significant increase in the grant. 

 

So the grant sort of worked both ways. The west side of the 

province saw some fairly significant increases in their grant 

because their assessment was below the provincial average. 

And then there were places that surrounded some of the larger 

centres that saw a significant increase in their assessment. And 

they are obviously becoming quote: “wealthier” communities 

based on assessment. And they saw a decrease in the grant. 

 

But you raise a good point, and it’s something that we’re aware 

of. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  You mentioned becoming wealthier, and I 

guess in terms of reassessment they are. It’s just highly 

unfortunate because your assessment goes up, doesn’t really put 

any extra dollars in your pocket to pay the extra taxes. 

 

Twenty school divisions have seen their operating grants cut by 

approximately 25 per cent this year. And I think we just talked 

about Buffalo Plains, I believe, which was cut by approximately 

1.4 million compared to ’96. School divisions are either going 

to have to basically close some schools . . . And I think that’s a 

thing that’s being looked at. And having met with some of the 

school divisions, I know that’s a concern that’s out there and 

some of the activities that they’ll be involved in. 

 

Again, Madam Minister, how can you be promising no tax 

increases when taxpayers, I guess, are going to just be having to 

pay a whole lot more than they’ve been in the past? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think the point here is that . . . and I’ll 

just use this example. I’ll use the example of a house in my 

constituency that’s assessed at $100,000. And then I use the 

example of a house that’s assessed at $100,000 in Martensville. 

It seems to me that we should a pay similar amount in education 

tax. I think in the past that was not the case. That if you were in 

a particular community, you did not necessarily pay the same 

amount. 

 

The principles behind reassessment is that regardless of where I 

live in the province, if my property is worth a similar amount of 

money, I should be paying a similar amount in the area of 

education tax and municipal tax. And I think what reassessment 

has done for those people living in various parts of the province 

that maybe weren’t paying as much as other people in other  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

areas of the province, they now will be doing so. 

 

And it’s not unlike myself in my own home. I was paying taxes 

that were much lower than other people that had property that 

wasn’t worth as much as mine. It just happened to be because of 

where I lived. And the area has rejuvenated and increased in 

value significantly in the last 20 years, and now I’m going to 

pay more. Reassessment is something that all of the various 

interest groups agreed to, and it’s something that we’re dealing 

with in 1997. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. At least I guess 

the one little bit of silver lining with all that cloud is the fact 

that there’s nothing self-serving about this thing in your case. 

 

A couple of specific questions dealing with grants and those 

sorts of things. What are the total operating grants for the K to 

12 system in the years ’91, ’92, ’93, ’94, ’95; like how have 

they changed, specific numbers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  If I was up at my computer, I could tell 

you that, but we don’t have that information in the House. But 

we’ll get it for you. I can tell you that they were more than they 

are now. The grants in 1991-92 are more than they are now, and 

I think the grant now, we’re starting to move back up. We cut 

grants in ‘92-93, ‘93-94, ‘94-95; there were no increases, I 

think, in ‘95-96. Last year there was an increase of $2 million, 

and now we’re hopefully on our way back to some levels that 

we saw in the early 1990s. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  The increased pay and benefits to teachers 

has added some cost to the boards as well, as I believe you are 

aware. What has been the increase in salary or benefits since 

’91, and can I have that figure in dollars? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’ll get you that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Another question on tax and tax shifts. What 

sorts of tax shifts, if any, have there been between Regina . . . 

for example, Regina Catholic and Regina Public? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I just want to remind the member that 

reassessment is revenue neutral. I mean there are people that 

will see their taxes decrease significantly and others that will 

see their taxes increase significantly. And some municipalities 

have moved to have the decreases and the increases phased in 

over a three-year period. So I just want to make the point, 

reassessment is revenue neutral. 

 

In terms of Regina Catholic, Regina Public, they set the 

identical mill rate. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay — just shifting gears here substantially 

— approximately a year ago we had some good discussions on 

what was happening in Scenic Valley. And I’d like a comment 

from you on where you see what’s happened in Scenic Valley, 

where we’re at with the success or failure or whatever with that 

program. 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I can share with the minister is 

that on March 27, 1997 I approved a further one year in terms 

of the four-day school week. When I made the approval the 

interim report that was being prepared by the external evaluator 

had not yet been completed. Scenic Valley asked for a one-year 

extension and we accommodated their request. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, you mentioned an external evaluator. 

Is this Scenic Valley’s evaluator or someone that you’ve set up? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Scenic Valley set up the external 

evaluator and we have someone sitting on the committee. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I would imagine that the report will probably 

come in fairly positive and I’m basing that on the sorts of 

information that I’ve been getting out of Scenic Valley. 

 

And I’m wondering, if that does come in the way it likely will 

come, is this an option that will then become . . . some of the 

other schools in the division in Saskatchewan can operate on, 

just as in the city systems, when we’re talking about the new 

semester ideas — that sort of an option that will become 

available in general? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well just in terms of the balanced 

school year, it’s also available. It will be available in the 

Buffalo Plains School Division, which is a rural school division. 

In terms of Scenic Valley four-day school week, it’s too early to 

tell. We have not yet got a final evaluation; so I’m not in a 

position to indicate to you one way or the other whether or not 

we will, at the end of the day, approve a four-day school week 

for school divisions across the province. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Still missed 

part of a question that we had about two or three questions ago 

and that was, obviously you’ve been watching Scenic Valley 

fairly closely on a personal basis rather than just waiting for a 

report. And I’m wondering where you see Scenic Valley going 

and how you feel about what’s happening there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think it’s fair to say that there 

are 119 school divisions in the province, and I’ve been at this 

job for practically four years. Someone wrote me a memo the 

other day that I’m the third longest serving Minister of 

Education in the province, and will soon be the second longest 

serving if I can get to February 1998 or something. So I can just 

say that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, perhaps. 

 

All I can say is that after awhile you become familiar with 

various school boards across the province. You know who the 

individuals are that are involved. And when you say I’m 

familiar, I’m no less familiar with Scenic Valley than I am with 

Sask Valley or Battleford or North Battleford or Buffalo Plain 

or Canora or Kamsack or Davidson or whatever. 

 

I think it’s too early to tell, and I’m not in a position to indicate 

to you one way or the other. I want to wait for the evaluation. 

And obviously based on the evaluation, we’ll make a decision. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I like that part of the answer 

where it says that you’ll use the evaluation in making a  

  



1446  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1997 

decision, which means if the evaluation is good I’m assuming 

that that will be an option that will be able to be used by other 

schools if they wish to do that. 

 

I’d like for you to comment on what’s happening, or what 

advantages you see, now that we’ve been into amalgamation for 

a number of years in a number of different school areas. As this 

is moving along, what advantages are there now that you see? 

Obviously that may be different from what you had hoped to 

see. What do you see as being the advantages at present? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well we only have one real 

restructuring in the province, and that’s Blaine Lake, Sask 

Valley, Hafford, and Battleford. I think it’s fair to say, having 

had some discussions with the people that live in Blaine Lake 

— not having had discussions with Hafford — I can say that 

people in the Blaine Lake area feel as though their teachers now 

have access to more services because Sask Valley is a larger 

school division with a number of services that support students 

and support teachers. As well, the students in Blaine Lake now 

have access to computer technology and their teachers have 

access to personnel at Sask Valley who is familiar with 

instructing in the area of computers and technology. 

 

So I would say that for the restructuring that I’ve seen, certainly 

the Blaine Lake, Sask Valley School Division, I would say that 

the students now have access to more services as a result of that 

restructuring. And the teachers have access to more support 

because of the educational infrastructure that is available in 

Sask Valley. In terms of the other initiatives, we’ve not yet seen 

true restructuring, so I’m not in a position to respond to the 

other part of your question because I think it’s too early to tell. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, interesting answer, part of that, 

because I haven’t been a very great supporter of that particular 

amalgamation situation that you discussed for the following 

reason. 

 

You mention that there was some advantage to these particular 

students, and I believe the number of students there is probably 

a few hundred. That particular amalgamated school division, if 

I’m right, did not increase its support staff to teachers by one 

individual, which means that the other 4,000 students are now 

suffering because they have to thin out the amount of support 

they get out of those individuals. 

 

So what you’ve really done is you’ve sacrificed 4,000 students 

to some extent for the benefit of 3, 400. And I think that’s a 

rather unfortunate choice when those sorts of things happen. 

And I’d like to hear your comments on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I guess what I could say is that we 

no longer have a director of education in Blaine Lake. We no 

longer have a secretary-treasurer, and we no longer have a 

support staff. That means that the money that is saved can go 

into other support services for students. 

 

So I guess I would say, from the people that I’ve spoken to both 

in Sask Valley and Blaine Lake, that they see this as a win-win 

situation; that Sask Valley obviously has the infrastructure to 

support those — I think — 200 students. And the benefits  

certainly from the involvement of the teachers in Blaine Lake 

. . . I believe there’s one other school as well; it’s not just Blaine 

Lake, there’s one other — Lestock? Leask, I’m sorry. And from 

Sask Valley’s point of view, there are some funds available 

from the savings that can then be used for their services and 

their students. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Your answer seems a whole lot more rosy 

than I think what’s actually happening out there. A teacher from 

Blaine Lake, Marie Dandet-Predushewski stated a couple weeks 

ago, and I’ll quote from that: 

 

Amalgamation of school divisions can pay dividends for 

students if it’s done right, but the provincial government 

may not find any savings in it (she said). The Blaine Lake 

School Division amalgamated with their southern 

neighbour Sask Valley last year, with better services for 

students, but the stress of a larger bureaucracy and 

additional committee work has been wearing on teachers. 

 

And she ends with saying she didn’t think this process is going 

to save any money in the long run. And I think that was one of 

the underlying rationale behind amalgamations, was to save 

some money on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can assure the member that we have 

never said that restructuring was going to save the province 

money. What restructuring might do is redirect existing 

resources into services to students. And I think that for the 

purposes of Sask Valley and Blaine Lake and Leask, I would 

say that what this has meant is that we can redirect funds that 

were being spent on the Blaine Lake Division office and all the 

support staff and directors of education and so on. We can 

redirect those resources into services for students, and I can’t 

see how anybody would be opposed to that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  If it worked out that way, probably correct, 

but I don’t think it is. 

 

Madam Minister, there seems to be some discrepancy about 

school bussing grants for Regina. Regina School Division is 

counting on about, I think it’s $326,000 in additional funds to 

come from the province. And that, I think, played a part in some 

of the recent school closures. You stated recently that because 

grant calculations were complicated and assessment 

information was still being collected, you couldn’t guarantee 

that the Regina School Division would get that total amount. 

And they might get a very small amount, and they might get 

nothing. 

 

Madam Minister, have you turned down the request of the 

Regina school board, and where does the bussing grant stand as 

of today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised by my officials that this 

does not affect this school year because the grants are based on 

the 1996 numbers as of the end of September, and we won’t be 

in a position to answer your question in a detailed way until 

next year. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  One other question on the Regina situation  

  



May 6, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

and those school closures. I had a number of parents call me up 

from one of the schools that we would say is in a socially 

critical area. And they’re quite concerned that their students 

now are going to have to be in a bussing situation. And some 

other concerns that come along with that because that 

community has really sort of grouped around their school for 

some programs within the school and for the kids. 

 

And I’m a little concerned that what’s happening here is that 

we’re going to get . . . these schools are going to be . . . and the 

kids are definitely going to be hurt by that. And it might be a 

good idea for a re-evaluation of that and for you to come onside 

and request Regina to take a look at that, because I think there’s 

situations where a community area is suffering. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I just want to share with the 

member, if you’re talking about the Regent Park School — is 

that the school you’re talking about? Yes, I thought you were. 

I’m familiar with that situation in that two of our members on 

the government side of the House have also met with those 

parents. And my understanding is the Regent Park parents are 

meeting with the school division tonight. 

 

What I can say to the member is that this is a really difficult 

issue. And it’s difficult in this sense. The Minister of Education, 

when you look at The Education Act, doesn’t have any legal 

authority or even moral authority to involve themselves or 

herself or himself in the discussion at the division level. We, 

under various administrations, have given that authority to the 

local school division to make those decisions. 

 

Our grants, for the most part, are given to school divisions in an 

unconditional way. School divisions are in essence a local level 

of government. They have the power to tax. They have 

authority under The Education Act. And so when I’m asked 

these kinds of questions in the legislature . . . And I have to 

share with you; I used to ask the same questions when I was an 

opposition critic. But I’ve now come to understand that it is 

impossible, legally impossible, for a Minister of Education to 

involve themselves in those kinds of discussions that 

legislatively are left to local school boards to decide. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, and I’ll end this evening’s 

questioning probably with a comment rather than a question. 

 

It’s too bad that the money that was going to Regina didn’t 

come ahead of time so that the boards would have known how 

much they had. I doubt in that case they would have made this 

decision because it’s not socially good for that community, and 

it is a painful situation. 

 

With that I’d like to thank the minister and her officials for the 

answers they provided this evening. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

(2230) 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Education 

Vote 5 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 5 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the minister, 

thank you for sharing your answers with us tonight. I look 

forward to receiving the information that I’ve requested. Thank 

you to all your officials for assisting in providing Saskatchewan 

residents with that information. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I want to thank the Leader of the 

Opposition, the Education critic, as well as the Education critic 

for the third party, for their thoughtful questions and the 

respectful way in which I think we handled the Education 

estimates. As well I want to thank the various officials that are 

here tonight to assist me in our spending estimates. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1423 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1423 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1424 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1425 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense 

 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense 

 Legislation  Vote 21 

 Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Legislation  Vote 21 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training  Vote 37 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments 

 Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training ....................................................................................................................... 1437 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Education  Vote 5 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1443 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense 

 Education  Vote 5 ................................................................................................................................................................... 1447 

 


