



















































Hansard: May 01, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1275 

 May 1, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of citizens from the great communities of Neudorf, Saskatoon, 

Melville, and Yorkton, and Springside, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

Duff. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime 

throughout Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave 

of property crime charges, including car thefts, as well as 

crimes of violence, including the charge of attempted 

murder of a police officer; such task force to be comprised 

of representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to support the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning for the construction of a new 

hospital in La Loche. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce in your gallery, the 

east gallery, my daughter, Jeanette, and my grandson, Terrell, 

who are leaving our fair province for Manitoba. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to introduce two constituents of mine who are in your 

gallery — George and Esther Labelle. 

 

I trust they’re probably here actually to make sure that their 

daughter Claire was able to make it to work today now that she  

is considerably older than she was yesterday. So if you would 

join with me in welcoming the Labelles and, obviously, 

congratulating Claire on another birthday. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I see seated in your gallery 

a gentleman who will be well known to some members of the 

Legislative Assembly, at least those who were here seven, eight 

years ago. And I would direct your attention to Mr. Joe Melia, 

who was until seven years ago . . . and I believe this is his 

seventh anniversary upon retirement as director of Hansard. 

 

And please join me in making him feel very welcome on his 

visit here today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, it’s a pleasure as well for me to introduce Mr. 

Joseph Melia, because I’ve known him in the past as a principal 

of my former high school in Moose Jaw — Vanier Collegiate. 

 

I certainly enjoyed my education there, and Mr. Melia was 

certainly an influence on all of the students who went through 

the school at that time. So I’d just like to welcome him as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Letter from Bombardier 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently informed 

members that I wrote Bombardier regarding critical remarks 

made against them in this House by the former deputy premier, 

the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I received a response from 

Bombardier. The official from Bombardier states, and I quote: 

 

We are always conscious of the danger posed by remarks 

such as those made by Mr. Tchorzewski in the absence of a 

full understanding of the project and what it will mean to 

the local area. 

 

The letter goes on to say that Bombardier would gladly: 

 

. . . give Mr. Tchorzewski a briefing on the NATO Flying 

Training in Canada project to make him fully aware of the 

breadth and depth of this project and the impact that it will 

have on Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will send a copy of this letter to the member 

from Regina Dewdney and to the Premier. 

 

If the member prefers to criticize Bombardier rather than 

support them in their efforts to bring more jobs to Moose Jaw, I 

strongly urge the Premier to get the member to take time off  

  



1276  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

from federal campaigning, to not only do his MLA job, but to 

accept this briefing so everyone in this province supports 

Bombardier in its efforts. The Premier may also urge the 

member to simply apologize for his recent remarks. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Low Income Housing Project 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, I want to take the moment 

today to comment on Saskatoon’s community group and its 

leaders, a group mentioned Tuesday by the Minister of 

Municipal Government in her announcement of a Saskatoon 

low income housing project. Like all members, I was happy to 

see the announcement of this project. It is also seen as an 

innovation, pilot attempt to deal with persistent social programs 

and adequate housing, a program that can be repeated and 

expanded as success is measured. 

 

It needs to be emphasized that there are three partners in this 

project: the province, the city, and a community organization. 

This is not a top-down imposed program, but a program that 

grows from need and out of lobbying by local community, the 

community that’s mostly keenly aware of its circumstances. 

Quint Development Corporation, with Gary Wilson, is an 

integral part of this project. 

 

Quint, named for five inner-city neighbourhoods it represents in 

Saskatoon, has been active in seeking partnerships with the 

public and private sector to improve the economy and living 

conditions of its neighbourhoods. It’s a logical partner for this 

housing project and I want to congratulate Gary Wilson and 

Quint Development Corporation for its role in bringing it into 

being. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Winning Students from Englefeld School 

 

Ms. Draude:  Two weeks ago the Humboldt Rural School 

Division announced that Englefeld School would close. For the 

past year the parents of this community have maintained that 

this school offers quality education for their students. 

 

I have also stood in this House and brought to your attention the 

concerns of businesses such as Schultes and Koenders, who fear 

that the closure of this school will hurt their business and their 

town. Today I would like to bring to the attention of the 

Assembly the quality of the students and the education offered 

in Englefeld. 

 

Seven students participated in the Canadian Mathematics 

Competition recently. Scott Eggerman, Nancy Kirzinger, and 

Richard Pomedlie were three of the students who participated in 

the grade 9 Pascal exam. Scott achieved top marks in the school 

and in Zone 5, which includes Nipawin, Humboldt, Watson, 

Porcupine Plain, Kelvington, Invermay, Weekes, and Carrot 

River. Provincially he finished fourth out of 1,095 students and 

nationally he placed 990 out of 32,323. Nancy placed third in 

 the zone and 37th in the province while Richard placed fourth 

in the zone and 65th in the province. 

 

The combined scores for Scott, Nancy, and Richard earned 

them the distinction of zone champions, and overall in the 

province they tied for 6th out of 50. Sherrie Zimmerman 

competed in the grade 10 contest, finishing first in her school, 

12th out of 61 in the zone and 158th out of 262 provincially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to offer congratulations 

to these students for their achievements and to the teachers of 

Englefeld who provide a very high quality of education for our 

children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Donations to Manitoba Flood Victims 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, there have been many times 

that Saskatchewan people have rallied together in times of need, 

demonstrating the true spirit of the prairie people — the 

cooperative spirit. The Saskatchewan way is a caring way. No 

one likes to see people fleeing their homes in the wake of 

nature’s fury. Time and again the very worst of situations has 

brought out the very best in humanity. 

 

We’re witnessing this today for the thousands of flood victims 

in Manitoba. Yesterday the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool donated 

$20,000 to the Red Cross in an attempt to help ease the 

suffering of flood victims. In addition, Pool elevators across the 

province will be collecting donations that will be directed to 

Manitoba. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, Peter Gzowski, who originally started in 

Moose Jaw, will be dedicating his entire Morningside program 

tomorrow, 9 to 1 o’clock, to raising money for Manitoba flood 

victims. Appropriately, Mr. Gzowski is calling the show “The 

Red River Valley.” If anyone would like to make a donation to 

the rally, there’s a toll-free number that they can call. 

 

These two examples of Saskatchewan spirit epitomize the 

thousands of people who take it upon themselves to help in any 

way they can. There’s nothing more important than coming to 

the aid of a friend or a neighbour who is in need. Not even the 

federal election is more important. 

 

The welfare of the people must always be the top priority for 

society and for governments. And I want to commend the 

Wheat Pool and Mr. Gzowski for the leading rolls they are 

taking, and all the Saskatchewan people who are assisting the 

Manitoba flood victims. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ready for Work Program 

 

Ms. Bradley: — Mr. Speaker, today I want to commend a 

program which is a fine example of cooperation between the 

Department of Labour, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 

and the education system. 

 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

The Ready for Work program is directed to grade 11 and 12 

students who are preparing to enter the workforce, either for 

summer jobs or permanently. It begins by posing the question, 

are you ready for work? And then proceeds to show the students 

their rights and their responsibilities once they enter the 

workplace. 

 

This program is a necessary one because, as we were so sadly 

reminded on Monday, the workplace can be dangerous and 

even fatal. Beginning workers need to know that by law they 

have the right to know the hazards of their work and the right to 

participate in measures to make that work safe. They need to 

know both their and their employers’ responsibilities to ensure a 

secure workplace. 

 

The program is effective because it has been developed and is 

presented by qualified workers recruited by the SFL 

(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour). The slide presentation is 

based on stories of young workers who have been killed or 

injured on the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was made aware of this program when President 

Barb Byers came to Weyburn to make a presentation to 

students. It is a good project, and I encourage schools across the 

province to make it available to their students. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

International Working Persons Day of Recognition 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a special day 

for working people the world over. In many countries this is 

International Working Persons Day of Recognition, indeed a 

holiday in a great many countries. Certainly in Britain today, 

labour has a somewhat dual purpose meaning, today being 

election day in Britain. 

 

But the fact of Labour Day is that there are many groups in 

Saskatchewan who do recognize the significance of this day. In 

Estevan, where many of the original coalminers immigrated 

from Europe, this day is still observed. 

 

Many of us recognize the struggle that workers have endured 

over the years in such struggles to gain an eight-hour working 

day, to gain certain basic, rudimentary health and safety 

benefits, that sort of thing. 

 

I’m very, very grateful for all of those workers past, for all of 

their diligence in their struggles to make Saskatchewan, 

Canada, the world, a great place to live in. Where the 

recognition of human value in labour and the dignity of labour 

is appreciated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agricultural Sciences Month 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For years 

Saskatchewan has been a leader in agricultural research and  

development. Our new innovations, new technologies, and new 

ideas are influencing agriculture around the globe. 

 

We are a world leader in this area and we have the worldwide 

reputation as being a leader. Research and development in 

agricultural science are the foundation of Saskatchewan’s 

continued success in agriculture. That is why it pleases me and 

other members as well, that the Minister of Agriculture and 

Food has proclaimed this month as Agricultural Sciences 

Month in Saskatchewan. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, the designation is in conjunction with 

the 36th annual Canada-wide Science Fair, sponsored by the 

Youth Science Foundation of Canada, to be held at the 

University of Regina from May 11 to 18. 

 

Agricultural sciences increases the opportunity for further 

economic development and growth for our province, but they 

also have the ability to provide opportunities for our young 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of the Assembly and all 

Saskatchewan citizens to consider the importance of the 

agricultural sciences to this province and to take the opportunity 

to promote agricultural research and development to ensure a 

brighter future for all farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Herbert Sims 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to acknowledge the passing of a very prominent resident 

of Tisdale. Herbert Charles Sims was laid to rest on April 29 at 

the age of 86. 

 

Mr. Sims is best known as the administrator of the rural 

municipality of Connaught, a position he held for 42 years. He 

was also a life member of the Lions International and the 

Saskatchewan anti-tuberculosis association, and a Jacobs 

awardee of the Saskatchewan rural municipality 

secretary-treasurers’ association. He was chairman of the board 

of Ste. Therese Hospital in Tisdale and a member of the 

University of Saskatchewan Senate. 

 

Mr. Sims was the secretary-treasurer of the Tisdale Riverside 

Golf Club and a member of the Tisdale Ramblers Hockey Club 

executive. He expanded his interests with music, singing in 

choirs, and by playing the saxophone and the mandolin. 

 

Please join me in recognizing the many contributions Mr. Sims 

made to the Tisdale community over the years and to share with 

his family the loss of such an outstanding man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Local Telephone Service Competition 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the  

  



1278  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission) is rendering a decision at this hour which will 

determine whether local telephone service will be opened up to 

competition. All indicators point to the fact that the CRTC will 

rule in favour of allowing local competition. 

 

We also understand that today’s decision will also require the 

long-distance carriers to make financial contributions to the 

local telephone service providers so that they can serve the rural 

areas as well as the urban areas. 

 

Will the minister explain what preparations her government has 

made for a decision requiring SaskTel to share its local 

telephone market with competitors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we are aware that May 1 

was the date for the CRTC to release some wide-ranging 

recommendations on a number of competitive issues in the 

telecommunications industry. We haven’t seen the details as 

yet; they’re probably being or have just been announced, and 

we haven’t had an opportunity to study them or see them in 

writing. 

 

But we will certainly turn our attention to them. And we will act 

and organize ourselves in — within the context of those 

regulations — in the very best way to represent the interests of 

our shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would hope in this 

case we’re not caught off guard like we seemed to be when 

long-distance competition was brought in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government fought tooth and nail to keep 

long-distance competition out of Saskatchewan. Yet when 

competition did arrive, SaskTel lowered its long-distance rates, 

and usage by customers went up, and therefore revenues 

increased. SaskTel officials expressed amazement, but yet the 

consumer has been served well by competition. 

 

If today’s decision goes as expected, will the minister make a 

commitment that Saskatchewan consumers will enjoy the full 

benefit of local telephone service competition, and that you will 

not block competition by seeking an exemption of the CRTC 

beyond October of ’98? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as usual, the member 

opposite has got the chronology entirely wrong. First of all, 

SaskTel began to lower long-distance rates long before the 

CRTC’s ruling. They started to drop the rates in 1991 and 2, 

and there was a steady reduction ever since; although the 

CRTC’s ruling, from which SaskTel was exempt, didn’t take 

place until 1994. 

 

Then we invited competition to come in. We invited resellers 

and rebillers in in February of 1996. And we invited and 

negotiated interconnecting agreements with AT&T and the 

other interconnectors in October, two years ahead of when we 

would have been compelled to by regulation from the CRTC. 

We’re exempt from that. That exemption has served us very  

well; it’s given us time to adjust. 

 

But we have invited the competition to come in — far from 

resisting competition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, it is sadly ironic that this 

government is shying away from local telephone competition at 

the same time the CRTC confirms a federal order in council 

was issued April 22, which opens the door for SaskTel to apply 

for a broadcast licence to operate a cable television network. 

This order in council was the result of a persistent lobbying by 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if SaskTel goes into the cable business, it will 

have the ability to use revenue from its telephone operations to 

subsidize its cable operations. This would put Saskatchewan’s 

local cable operators at a disadvantage. The cable companies 

welcome competition as long as it’s fair. 

 

But it’s not fair, because as long as your telephone operations 

are not regulated by the CRTC, there is no watchdog to prevent 

you from cross-subsidization from the telephone end to the 

cable end. 

 

Madam Minister, it appears that this government opposes true 

competition in which all competitors are on the same, equal 

footing. But you seem to like competition when you have a 

distinct advantage over . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 

has been very lengthy in his preamble and I ask him to put his 

question immediately now. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Why are you so 

scared to compete on an equal footing with the local cable 

companies? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, how would he have it? 

How would he have it? Would he have us have a strong, 

competitive, profitable telephone company in the public sector? 

Or would he privatize it where you’d have nothing to say at all 

and no basis for any complaints because the private operator 

would do it their way. 

 

First of all he says he wants us to be regulated and then he 

complains when the regulator gives us a licence. Are we in the 

business or out of the business? Is it public enterprise? Private 

enterprise? Is it profitable or is it subsidized? Make up your 

mind. Which side of the fence are you on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, you want an extension so 

SaskTel is not regulated, but you want to compete with cable 

companies that are regulated. That isn’t fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it becomes abundantly clear that this government 

wants to compete but only if the playing-field is tilted in their 

favour. 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

Saskatchewan presently has about 230 local cable operators 

which employ hundreds of individuals with total payrolls that 

exceed 8 million per year. Our research also indicates that these 

cable companies pay close to $5 million in provincial sales 

taxes on an annual basis, to say nothing of the provincial 

income taxes paid by the companies and their employees. 

 

What is it about competition — and here I mean real 

competition — that scares you so much you will not promise to 

give up the idea of extending the moratorium beyond October 

’98? You already have had five years to prepare for 

competition. What is it about the present management of 

SaskTel that scares you from taking on local, private companies 

head to head? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we are not afraid of 

anything. We are completely in the competitive arena. We are 

making every effort to harmonize with CRTC. And we are not 

permitted under the terms of the cable licence to subsidize that 

service. We don’t subsidize our Mobility service. 

 

The only subsidy we have is a cross-subsidization to the rural 

and remote subscribers of this province, which under a private 

mode would very likely, following the pattern in the States, pay 

through the nose for service that’s non-existent and declining. 

That’s not the kind of service that Saskatchewan people want, 

that’s not the mode that we’re in, and we’re not afraid to 

provide good service at good prices to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’re not afraid to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Income Tax Surcharges 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

1992 the people of this province were convinced that they 

needed to accept a further surcharge to their already horrendous 

taxes in order to reduce the deficit and the debt that the previous 

administration of this government had accumulated. Mr. 

Speaker, that deficit reduction was later changed to a debt 

reduction surcharge with the specific intention that that amount 

of money was going to be directly applied to the accumulated 

debt of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that this amount of 

money being collected from the debt reduction surcharge 

specifically in the 1997-98 fiscal year is estimated to be in 

excess of $57 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, I thank him for the question; and I provided an answer 

to him on this question yesterday. 

 

If you look at ‘96-97 and you look at the debt reduction that has 

occurred there, it is well in excess of a hundred million dollars. 

If you look at ‘97-98, it will be in excess of 24 — 124 over two 

years, which will more than cover the amount in the debt  

reduction surtax. 

 

But what I want to say to the member opposite is, the Liberals 

are missing the main point here. In the province of 

Saskatchewan, the debt is coming down dramatically. Taxes are 

coming down dramatically. And we are enhancing key services 

to the people of the province. A balanced approach, an approach 

that takes into account the priorities of the people of this 

province — quality of services, lower debt, lower taxes — 

that’s our approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, on page 14 of the Estimates 

the amount forecast from last year’s amount of money that went 

to the debt reduction account was $18 million, not a hundred 

million dollars. The amount this year is forecast to be $24 

million, which are the amounts that were specified as having to 

be put as surpluses that had to be applied to the debt. The only 

other amount that has gone into this account, Mr. Speaker, has 

been the proceeds from the sale of the Cameco shares. Will the 

minister please ’fess up and say what’s happened to the $60 

million a year she’s been collecting for this specific purpose? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. What the member has to recall is, on top off all that is 

in excess of $100 million in crop insurance debt that has been 

paid off . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, which goes into the 

books as money into Agriculture. 

 

But what I would say to the members opposite is, on this side of 

the House we’re clear — we are for reducing debt and reducing 

taxes. 

 

What is not clear is where those members are at. One of them is 

for the sales tax cut. Another would not do the sales tax cut but 

put the money into education. The leader would harmonize the 

sales tax, which means spreading the base. Perhaps the aspiring 

leader, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, would narrow 

the sales tax base. 

 

What I say to the member opposite is, we have a balanced 

approach. Enhancing programs, lowering taxes, lowering debt 

— that’s what we’re standing on, on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the figures are absolutely clear 

and the figures are not misleading. You have not met your 

target of putting $60 million a year against the debt because 

that’s what the people of this province were told and believe 

that you’re doing. 

 

What you have to do is come clean and put the $60 million in 

the debt reduction account, which would mean, Madam 

Minister, that your budget isn’t balanced, as opposed to what 

you’re saying and claiming all along, because you’re skimming 

off the money into your General Revenue Fund. 

 

  



1280  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

Will you account for it in a transparent way so the people of this 

province can be assured that the money that they’re paying on 

this surcharge is going directly to the debt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. He knows how the system works. The money all 

comes into the government coffers and it is used for three 

things. It is used to enhance programs; it is used to reduce taxes; 

and it is used to reduce debt, and to balance my budget, to 

balance the budget of the people of this province — the balance 

is not my balance, it’s their balance. But as I say to the member 

opposite, we have reduced debt and we have reduced it in 

excess of our targets. 

 

What I ask the member opposite is, to explain headlines like 

this: “Liberal leader sceptical about PST cut.” We are clear. We 

favour lowering the sales tax from 9 to 7; we favour reducing 

the debt; and we favour enhancing key programs. Where do 

they stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Closures 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister in charge of Education. Madam Minister, last 

month I asked you to provide school boards with their financial 

information prior to your budget so they could make informed 

decisions. At that time, the Regina School Board was deciding 

on the closure of nine elementary schools to save a total of 1.2 

million. It’s unfortunate that since your budget the school board 

finds it has an increase of 3.5 million this year, after they have 

announced the closure of six schools. 

 

Madam Minister, the Provincial Auditor says your government 

is forcing groups like school boards to make decisions in a 

vacuum because you don’t give them enough information. This 

is a case in point. Had the Regina School Board known it would 

be receiving millions of extra money, I doubt these schools 

would be closed. 

 

Madam Minister, the Regina School Board is meeting today to 

set its 1997 mill rate. Considering the fact that it’s your fault 

that the school boards were forced to make premature decisions, 

will you ask the Regina School Board to reconsider those 

closures? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, as 

the member will recall, two days prior to the budget we did not 

yet have all of the information from all of our municipalities 

across the province in terms of reassessment. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we did not get the information from the city of 

Saskatoon until the day prior to the provincial budget. We did 

know that the Regina School Board was in a position where 

they had to make some decisions, and they were aware on 

budget day that there was going to be an increase in our overall 

operating grant of some $8 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now have been able to give to the boards their  

grant information based on reassessment in the province, and 

school boards are setting their mill rates accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, didn’t you think this 

through? Didn’t you think through the tough position the school 

boards would be in? Didn’t you and the minister responsible for 

reassessment ever speak to each other? Maybe the vacuum is 

between cabinet ministers. Your reassessment is just being 

finalized. So school boards are scrambling to estimate their 

grants and their budgets and where to set their tax rates and 

whether to close schools or not. 

 

Madam Minister, you are forcing school boards to make 

decisions without proper information and without enough time 

to deliberate. Decisions on school closure had to be made six 

months in advance before the school year, before school boards 

had any indication of their levels of government funding. Why 

did these figures come out so late? Madam Minister, what are 

you doing to fix the problem you have caused school boards 

across this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear on 

whose assessment system this is. I recall being a member of this 

legislature in the ‘80s when the Progressive Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan, when they were government members, 

brought in this organization called SAMA, Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency. As I recall the facts and the 

history of this agency, this was a creation of the Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 1995, municipalities and school 

boards across this province met to determine a new system — 

85 per cent of municipalities and school boards in this province 

voted for the market value reassessment system that is coming 

into existence in 1997. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a year of reassessment, a system 

created by the Conservative Party, and municipalities agreed to 

it. School boards now have their grant information and school 

boards are setting their mill rate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Theft Claims 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is for the minister responsible for SGI. Mr. 

Minister, some months ago SGI said that an increase in car 

thefts was a major reason SGI was looking at increasing vehicle 

insurance rates. And on March 12 in this House, you said no, 

that wasn’t the reason. The increase in car thefts wasn’t 

significant. 

 

This morning in Crown Corporations Committee, we learned 

that car theft claims have almost doubled in two years, from 

2,491 in 1994 to 4,483 in 1996, an increase of 80 per cent in 

just two years. Mr. Minister, how can you say this is an 

insignificant increase? Will you admit that your government’s 

failure to control car theft has led to pressure on SGI to increase  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

its rates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think, as the minister has explained 

before, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll reiterate, there’s a whole range of 

factors that are taken into consideration when looking at auto 

insurance rates, deductibles, and coverage changes. As you 

know, that process is taking place right now. When it’s 

announced, there’ll be a 45-day review period. 

 

But I’ll just mention that it doesn’t matter which scenario we 

look at or what the study eventually tells us. What we know is 

that we’ll still have amongst the lowest rates in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Metis Hunting Rights 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Environment minister. Mr. Minister, Wendy’s hamburgers used 

to have a slogan, Where’s the Beef? The people around Hudson 

Bay are asking, where’s the moose? The male moose 

population in the area has dropped dramatically. Environment 

officials attribute the decrease to three things — more roads, 

more ATVs (all-terrain vehicles), and Metis hunting rights. 

 

Mr. Minister, the number of roads and ATVs in northern 

Saskatchewan has been steadily increasing for years. But the 

big change, and the only big change in the past year, has been 

the extension of Metis hunting rights. Mr. Minister, how much 

has the extension of Metis hunting rights contributed to the 

decline of the moose population in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

hon. member for the question. 

 

The hon. member neglected to mention a number of other 

factors which are impacting the moose population, such as ticks 

and also predation by predators, and cycles as well. 

 

I can assure the hon. member that we are monitoring the moose 

population, and we will be adjusting seasons this year to reduce 

the impact of hunting on moose population, and we will 

continue to manage this resource in a responsible manner in 

order to ensure that there’ll be moose left for future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to 

hear that you’re monitoring the situation. Unfortunately those 

who have to buy licences are now being restricted to one week. 

 

But what are you doing to monitor this situation, Mr. Minister? 

Do you know how many people have applied for their Metis 

status since the date of hunting rights were extended to Metis 

hunters? Do you know how many animals were taken by Metis 

hunters in the past year? What is the process for applying for 

Metis status? And what process do people have to go through to 

verify the fact that they are Metis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 

knows, the issue of Metis hunting rights in Saskatchewan is 

now before the courts. I will not be commenting on that issue. 

 

But other aspects which we are doing to assist the moose and is 

. . . one main one is the road closure program, which we are 

working cooperatively with the forest industry. As an area is 

harvested, the roads can be closed to reduce the access. And as 

the member rightly points out, ATVs and other equipment that 

hunters have today make access much easier for people to get 

back in off the roads to where the moose may be residing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are to the Minister of Education. 

 

It would be a shame if the federal NDP based their education 

platform on the Saskatchewan education model. 

Saskatchewan’s education system is showing severe cracks 

after years of chronic underfunding. Taxpayers are sinking 

under the growing burden of education costs. Providing quality 

education to all Saskatchewan students must be a priority, yet 

under this NDP government, property owners are now footing 

at least 60 per cent of the education costs. And the 

government’s share is only 40 per cent. 

 

Can the minister explain why Saskatchewan taxpayers are 

picking up the majority of education costs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to 

the member that on March 20, 1997, in this House we brought 

in a provincial budget that took a balanced approach to 

governing in this province. We brought in a provincial budget, 

Mr. Speaker, that lowered the overall debt, lowered taxes, and 

increased spending in social program areas such as health, 

education, and social policy. Mr. Speaker, in this budget we 

brought in an additional $8 million in spending for K to 12 

education in the province. 

 

And I would just like to add, Mr. Speaker, I have a headline 

here from the Melville Advance that said: “The best ideas in 

Thursday’s provincial budget were the ones stolen from the 

Liberal Party, says Melville MLA.” So all I can say, Mr. 

Speaker, is I don’t know why the acting leader is complaining, 

because the former leader supports our budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

facts are that Saskatchewan’s education system is being 

underfunded. Since it was first elected in 1991, this NDP 

government has chopped over $328 million from 

Saskatchewan’s K to 12 system — $328 million, that’s fact. 

 

Who pays the price? Saskatchewan students and Saskatchewan 

property owners pay the price, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the minister tell us when her government plans to accept its  

  



1282  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

responsibility to properly fund K to 12 education, and as a 

result give Saskatchewan property owners the tax relief that 

they deserve? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, the member obviously 

wasn’t here on March 20. We increased spending for K to 12 

education by some $8 million. Mr. Speaker, that is a significant 

turnaround in spending in this province. 

 

Now what does the member want? Does he want us to increase 

the provincial debt, not decrease taxes, but increase spending in 

social programs? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we took a balanced approach on 

budget day. We increased spending in our social program area, 

we cut taxes, we cut the debt. This province is turning the 

corner; we’re well on the way to economic recovery, and all we 

can hear from that member is snivel snivel, whine whine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker. The figures don’t lie, Madam 

Minister. Since 1991 this government has cut $328 million. The 

opposition didn’t cut it, you did, Madam Minister and your 

Finance minister. 

 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), all agree that 

education is underfunded, and that the property taxpayer is 

picking up too much of the cost. That is fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is the minister saying that these groups and thousands of people 

across Saskatchewan are wrong and that you’re right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well you know, Mr. Speaker, as I said 

before, we have begun to turn the corner. We’ve cut taxes for 

people in this province and that’s been well received by the 

public. We’re cutting the provincial debt — that’s well received 

by the provincial taxpayers because we can take the savings 

from interest on the public debt and put it into increased 

spending when it comes to health, social services, and 

education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t really know where the Libs are at 

these days. I really don’t know. The member from Melville 

says, “NDP ‘stole’ budget, ideas, from Liberals,” and he says 

the budget’s okay. Then we have the . . . not the acting leader or 

the former leader, but the present leader, the research person. 

He’s up at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) “Commerce 

students mock budget,” and what does he agree to? He says we 

need to reduce the number of school divisions in the province 

from 119 to 60. He says that he applauds fiscal conservatism. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is that the NDP government 

takes a balanced approach — we cut taxes, we cut the debt, and  

we’re increasing spending. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

JobStart/Future Skills Expansion 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

stand in the House today and announce that JobStart/Future 

Skills will be expanded this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Not only is this very successful 

provincial training program continuing, but it’s also changing 

with the changing times. We are making the changes because 

we listened to what workers, employers, and industry 

associations told us they needed. We added two new features to 

our already successful program. 

 

These two new features, Mr. Speaker, are retraining in the 

workplace for currently employed workers, and a new sectoral 

partnerships program. 

 

As a key component of the Saskatchewan training strategy, 

JobStart/Future Skills is now an $11.9 million program. This is 

$3.4 million more than last year, Mr. Speaker. JobStart/Future 

Skills will provide about 2,700 training opportunities annually, 

and that is training, Mr. Speaker, that leads to real jobs. Since 

the program began in 1995, we have approved over 4,300 

training positions and now we are building even more on that 

success. 

 

The first new feature, Mr. Speaker, is to open the program to 

the retraining and up-skilling of persons who are already 

employed. This has been requested by both workers and 

employers. This is a $1.1 million program and will now help 

retrain current employees in businesses faced with 

technological change and workplace change, or critical skills 

shortage. This will help businesses maintain their competitive 

edge while helping workers adjust through retraining or 

up-skilling. This program will assist approximately 400 

employers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re also adding $500,000 for a new sector partnerships 

program to help industry sectors work with communities and 

with training organizations to identify and address their specific 

training and employment needs for the 21st century. We’ve 

already seen how successful sector partnerships can be with the 

multi-party training plan in the North. Northern people are 

being trained for good, well-paying jobs in the mining sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other two components, work-based training for 

the unemployed, and institutional quick response training, will 

continue as before. They too have proven to be tremendously 

successful, linking to real jobs where and as they are created. 

Some notable examples are the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa in 

Moose Jaw, Michel’s Industries in St. Gregor, and the Quadra 

group in Outlook. 

 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

Two JobStart/Future Skills program features will continue. Our 

$3 million work-based training program for the unemployed 

will assist in training approximately 700 to 800 unemployed 

workers in new jobs. A $6.3 million institutional quick response 

training helps our training institutions respond quickly to 

address emerging skill shortages. This has worked very well in 

areas such as custom harvesting, home care, and web page 

design. 

 

The JobStart/Future Skills is a made-in-Saskatchewan success 

and I know there are going to be many more as we begin 

working with our partners to define the Saskatchewan training 

strategy over the next three years. Together we are all investing 

in Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to first begin 

by thanking the minister for the advance copy of the statement 

and indeed for sharing with the people of Saskatchewan your 

ideas and your government’s commitment to post-secondary 

education. 

 

I’m very pleased to see that indeed you’re recognizing that not 

only do we have a problem with people who are unemployed 

and who require training and/or retraining to indeed find 

employment for them, but that through the lobby of employers 

and the concerns of people in the Labour Force Board and 

indeed some of the discussions that we’ve had with the 

minister, that there is indeed now a plan in place to actually 

provide training for people who are employed currently, who 

may be looking at the potential that their job — due to 

technology, due to the fact that businesses will change — that 

their job may disappear. And indeed they can now join into the 

training program and indeed receive a training for an additional 

career. We’re very pleased to see that. 

 

Right now of course in Saskatchewan our force, our labour 

force, is very mobile and there are changes that occur from one 

corner of the province to the next. And I think that this training 

strategy — that involves employers, it involves businesses, it 

involves additional funding from the government — will be 

able to meet the needs of people. 

 

I want to ensure and I guess as an opposition I will be very 

closely monitoring to see that indeed the people that should be 

receiving this assistance and can access this new training 

strategy plan, that indeed they do so. 

 

I know that the training strategy plan, as the minister announced 

a couple of weeks ago, has a time line of about three years. And 

my concern is that we don’t indeed delay it and three becomes 

four or five. I’d sooner see the training strategy move forward 

and indeed we can implement some of the things. But very 

clearly Saskatchewan will grow if we have jobs and the 

retraining, and retraining is necessary to provide those jobs. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Somewheres I  

missed getting a copy of that report, but that’s fine. I still have 

comment on it and I understand where you’re going with that. 

 

I think the retraining program is a good idea, I think, to the 

effect that it goes ahead and takes people that are in jobs that, 

because of technology, may be outdated and those people are 

retrained. It keeps them from getting onto the unemployment 

lines and ending up with the despondency that may often be 

there. 

 

I think it also bodes well for those particular industries that are 

having those jobs that look like they might be phased out due to 

change in technology, and as a result that will keep 

Saskatchewan very much in a competitive edge. And I think 

that’s good. 

 

To the extent that we’re saying this is going to be a great 

provider of jobs, I think probably not. It may be a larger part in 

keeping people from becoming unemployed. But as far as 

saying it’s going to go ahead and take other individuals and put 

them to work necessarily, I think it may be not quite as strong 

as it appears to be at first glimpse on that one. 

 

But I think the program is good. The more effort we put into 

people that are underemployed or whose jobs are of a marginal 

situation, we support that. And to the extent that this one goes 

ahead and makes companies more competitive is good as well. 

But I think we need not get too excited about the fact that it will 

necessarily employ that many people. It will just make sure 

people don’t get unemployed. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the Government Deputy House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to make a 

motion about the position of Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  It’s requested . . . the hon. members request to 

be advised of the nature of the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The nature of the motion is that Mr. 

Speaker be granted absence to attend the legislative 

Commonwealth parliamentary session in Ghana. 

 

Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence for The Speaker to attend 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Seminar 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move, seconded by the member for Melfort-Tisdale: 

 

That leave of absence be granted for Mr. Speaker from 

May 12 to 21, 1997 to represent the Legislative Assembly 

at the ninth Commonwealth parliamentary seminar in 

Ghana and to assist with Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association post-election seminar for newly elected 

members of the Ghanaian parliament; and further, that  

  



1284  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

adoption of this motion shall constitute notification of the 

absence of the Speaker as provided for under section 15(1) 

of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker:  The motion is not in order because it must be 

seconded by a member who is present in the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would move, seconded by the member 

for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has reduced the provincial sales 

tax from 9 to 7 per cent. This Bill essentially ensures that the 

overall cost of tobacco products does not drop as a result. 

Smoking and tobacco products continue to pose a real threat to 

thousands of Saskatchewan families and young people. 

Lowering the costs of these products would send the wrong 

message about the health risks associated with tobacco use. 

 

To offset the sales tax decrease, this Bill increases the tax on a 

package of 25 cigarettes from $2 to $2.10, effective March 21, 

1997. The tax on 1 gram of fine cut or pipe tobacco goes from 

5.3 cents to 5.5 cents. And the tax on cigars changes to 95 per 

cent of the retail selling price to a maximum of $2.50 per cigar. 

 

The tax structure on cigars, Mr. Speaker, is being changed to 

make it more consistent with other provinces. Nine provinces 

now apply the tobacco tax to cigars as a percentage of the 

selling price, rather than as a fixed tax rate per cigar for various 

price categories. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the maximum tax of 

$2.50 per cigar is the same as the maximum tax in Alberta and 

British Columbia. 

 

The changes contained within this Bill are effectively revenue 

neutral. The tobacco tax revenue is expected to yield an 

additional $5.1 million in 1997-98 while there will be a 

corresponding reduction in the education and health tax revenue 

collected from tobacco products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

comments on this Bill. As we received a copy of the Bill and 

the explanatory notes, I found it very interesting that at the 

bottom of the explanation it talked about the reasons for the 

tobacco tax rates being increased, and that’s to offset the  

revenue, and I quote: “to offset the revenue loss from a 

reduction in the E&H tax” that the government reduced . . . will 

be coming up next in a Bill reducing from 9 to 7. 

 

I just want the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to understand the 

ramifications of Bills such as this, and of course of the one 

that’s coming up next in the reduction of the PST (provincial 

sales tax) by 2 points; in that a government that’s very, very 

quick and can very easily bring in back-door taxes of all 

descriptions, whether it’s utilities, Mr. Speaker, or tax like this. 

I do want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that I am not a smoker 

and I do not condone smoking. And I think that we as elected 

people don’t do enough to convince people of the hazards of 

smoking, and I want that to be on the record. 

 

However, it’s typical of this government, however, Mr. 

Speaker, in light of what they’ve done with health reform and 

downloading onto the sick and elderly of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, once again, once again, Mr. Speaker, here’s another 

back-door tax onto some less fortunate people in the province 

as our ourselves — ones with smoking habits that are very 

addicting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the government members should be aware, as should the 

taxpayers, that we’re going to be watching to see where this 

government brings in another back-door tax to recoup the rest 

of the reduction of the PST from 9 to 7, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 

have more to say on that in the Bill coming up next. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, this Bill, as I understand 

it, proposes to increase taxes on cigarettes so as that to ensure 

that there is no reduction on the price of cigarettes which is 

occasioned by a drop in the sales tax. That’s as I understand it. 

 

Now there’s a very clear course of action which is indicated for 

members of the Legislative Assembly. Members of the 

Legislative Assembly can vote against a Bill and in this way 

propose to reduce the price of cigarettes, or they can vote for 

the Bill so as to maintain the price of cigarettes. 

 

Now it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that there has been 

considerable public debate over these last number of years 

about the impact of lowering the price of cigarettes. It seems to 

me that there has been a considerable body of knowledge which 

has been developed, especially in Ontario and other parts of 

Canada, which suggest that if you lower the price of cigarettes, 

you make cigarettes more easily available for people, especially 

young people, who seem to be very susceptible to the come-on 

by tobacco companies and to get into smoking in the first place. 

 

So there’s a very clear option here for members of the 

Legislative Assembly. They can vote for the Bill to maintain the 

price we have on cigarettes and in this way, not encourage more 

of our young people to start smoking. They can do that. 

 

On the other hand, they can vote against a Bill, and in this way 

take the approach they want, which is to encourage young 

people to start smoking. Let’s see your votes. Let’s see where 

you stand on this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today to move second reading of The 

Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997. This Bill 

continues our promise to bring sustainable tax reductions to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

They have worked hard to restore the finances of our province 

and we said that we would deliver back the benefits of sound 

financial management in a balanced way: debt reduction, 

enhanced social programs, tax reductions. Not just one alone, 

Mr. Speaker, but all three together with fairness and with 

balance. 

 

We have reduced taxes in every year since 1992 to stimulate 

jobs and growth. We strengthened small business and created 

jobs by reducing their income taxes by 20 per cent. We attracted 

call centres to Saskatchewan by removing the sales tax on 1 800 

and 1 888 numbers. And we also introduced a number of tax 

incentives for manufacturing and processing. This growing 

sector continues to create thousands of new jobs. 

 

But we’ve also worked to lower taxes for families. In 1995, we 

reduced personal income taxes by up to $300 a family. Mr. 

Speaker, this tax cut was both compassionate and fair. It 

removed some 6,000 low income earners from the income tax 

rolls. Fairness is already a major feature of the Saskatchewan 

tax system. 

 

For example, many provinces tax family essentials like 

children’s clothing, home heating fuel, and electricity. This now 

includes the Atlantic provinces, which have chosen to become 

part of the federal government’s harmonized tax scheme. We do 

not tax these family essentials and, Mr. Speaker, that is the right 

approach to take. 

 

This Bill further expands the list of family expenses not taxed 

by adding many medical devices. Items such as blood glucose 

monitors and meters, blood pressure monitors, cholesterol 

testers and monitors, medical alert bracelets, and monitoring 

systems have now been added to the list of exemptions. 

 

We promised we would reduce taxes further when it was 

affordable and sustainable. Saskatchewan people were clear on 

which tax they would like to see reduced — the provincial sales 

tax. 

 

Business people told us it would do more to create jobs than 

any other measure. Border communities told us it was important 

for the competitiveness and well-being of their communities. 

 

And families told us a sales tax cut would benefit everyone; that 

it would make family purchases more affordable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill reduces the education and health tax rate  

from 9 per cent to 7 per cent, effective March 21, 1997. As a 

result, the people of Saskatchewan will pay less sales tax than 

the people of any other province with such a tax. 

 

It will provide about $180 million of annual tax savings to 

Saskatchewan families and businesses. That’s $180 million that 

will be put back into Saskatchewan pocketbooks and cash 

registers each and every year. And it is the largest single cut to 

the sales tax in this province’s history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill delivers back the benefits of sound 

financial management to communities, to business, and to 

families. And it confirms why people everywhere are feeling a 

growing confidence and optimism in their future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move that An Act to amend The Education 

and Health Tax Act (No. 2) be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

while we certainly support the fact that the sales tax should go 

from 9 per cent to 7 per cent, I’m really not sure how the 

government can take so much credit for it because they 

certainly, in 1992, didn’t accept the responsibility for the fact 

that the 2 per cent that we now are reversing is the 2 per cent 

that this government put on. 

 

So only in Saskatchewan, where you go back to where you 

were in 1992, does anyone think that that’s progress. And, Mr. 

Speaker, while it’s a step in the right direction, it can hardly be 

considered progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, aside from the fact and even including the fact that 

this tax has gone down, there still is $791 million more in taxes 

coming out of the people of Saskatchewan’s pockets now than 

what happened . . . than was happening in 1992 when this 

government assumed a responsibility for the tax system in this 

province. And certainly even after the 2 per cent, which is 

welcome, is off, we’re still paying almost a billion dollars more 

a year on the backs of taxpayers in Saskatchewan; and on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we at least understand what that 

means to the real people of this province who are fed up with 

the level of taxes that we’re paying in this province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make a few comments as well regarding this piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 54. I think, Mr. Speaker, you may be 

aware, when we had a vote, there were a number of members in 

this Assembly who were seen as not really working on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people when they decided to stand in opposition 

to the Minister of Finance’s financial piece of legislation that 

she had brought in, or her budget speech. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think if you could talk to each and every 

one of the members, this is the only piece of that budget that 

really had any meaning to the Saskatchewan people, that really 

met them right where they’re at. And the reduction in the sales 

tax is certainly something that everyone appreciated. 

 

And I was pleased to be able to pass that on to my constituents. 

And I know in my area, talking about a reduction in the sales  

  



1286  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

tax is something that people were really looking forward to. In 

fact it was one thing that everyone deals with on a daily basis. 

 

When I look at the piece of . . . or this legislation that we have 

before us today though, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly gratifying to 

see that the government was willing to recognize that a platform 

policy that we had campaigned on in 1995 was certainly an 

appropriate piece of information that should be looked into 

seriously — because obviously the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

really liked that part of our policy — and adopted it. 

 

But I would think that maybe Bill No. 54 . . . if the minister 

would have been more than willing to accept the private 

members’ Bill, Bill No. 204, The Education and Health Tax 

Amendment Act, basically said the same thing. 

 

So I’m pleased to see that the Minister of Finance has 

recognized that it’s appropriate to address this concern, has 

brought forward this piece of legislation, and that the 

legislation, as the ’95 debate regarding taxation was addressed 

in the budget, this piece of legislation is just addressing 

something that was brought forward in a private members’ Bill, 

and that all members of the House can have some impact on 

some of the decision making. 

 

And so we certainly thank the minister for recognizing this. It 

would have been nice if she could have allowed our Bill to 

proceed, but we’ll accept the fact that her Bill does the same 

thing. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate for 

just a brief moment or two to draw to the attention of the House 

a couple of matters which need to be spoken to respecting the 

member from Melfort’s comments on the tax and the position 

of the government, and particularly the position of his party. 

 

First of all, the member alleges in his remarks to this Assembly 

that because revenues are up, somehow this is a reflection of the 

fact that taxes are up, generally speaking. He either fails to 

acknowledge or is unwilling to acknowledge that in fact 

revenues of the province at this particular time are up because 

the economic activity in the province of Saskatchewan is up. 

When more businesses are prospering and more people are 

working, more people are paying taxes and the revenues are up. 

It has nothing to do in this instance with the obvious fact that 

there is a tax reduction. 

 

There’s a tax reduction not only of the amount from 9 to 7 per 

cent that this Bill advocates, but parenthetically on the — and I 

say parenthetically — tax reductions in manufacturing and 

processing, previous tax reductions with respect to the lowest 

income level earners in the province of Saskatchewan on 

income tax, and other changes as well. Now that is the first 

point that I want to make. 

 

It is false logic, it is highly political, and in my judgement it 

leads to the next comment that I make about where the Liberal 

Party really stands on the tax situation. It is also a very political 

comment because it attempts to obfuscate exactly where the 

Liberals are on this important issue. 

So the first point I want to make is tax revenue is up; taxes in 

the province of Saskatchewan are going down. 

 

The second point I want to make is the fact that the provincial 

Liberal Party is against this tax decrease and is for maintaining 

9 per cent on the sales tax. Lest there be no doubt about it, I 

quote from the Langenburg Four-Town Journal of April 16, 

1997, where under a headline “Liberal leader sceptical about 

PST cut”, the following quotation marks are said around these 

words directed by the Leader of the Liberal Party, Dr. 

Melenchuk, as context as follows, quote: 

 

Why didn’t they use that $150 million (referring to the tax 

cut) to support the infrastructure of rural Saskatchewan to 

allow that transition to occur? 

 

That’s an interesting quotation because he’s acknowledging a 

transition, which here they either refuse to acknowledge a 

transition or in fact outright accuse the government of trying to 

do harm to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s an interesting quote, but that’s not the main point of it. 

What he is obviously saying at Langenburg is he does not want 

that tax cut. He’s saying he does not want the 9 to 7 tax cut. 

And that’s what the Leader of the Official Opposition in this 

House says — does not want this tax cut. On budget day, every 

one of those Liberals voted against this budget because they do 

not want this tax cut. They want the tax to remain at 9 per cent. 

 

And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only that, Mr. Speaker, but 

there is another aspect of the Liberal Party position. The Liberal 

Party position also is due to the fact that they want to 

harmonize. Now this, Mr. Speaker, is very clear. The new 

Leader of the Liberal Party, Dr. Melenchuk, very shortly after 

election, gave an interview. In the interview he said — I don’t 

have the clipping handy but I can locate it very quickly to give 

you the authority of this — widely reported, he says, what the 

Liberal Party in Saskatchewan will do if elected is not only 

expand now the PST, from 7 to 9 per cent, but they’re going to 

harmonize it with the GST (goods and services tax). That is 

their position. 

 

Members opposite challenge me on that last statement about 

harmonization. I thank the hon. member for giving me a copy of 

an article in the Regina Leader-Post dated November 26, 1996 

— my memory is correct, right after the Liberal leadership 

selection process in Saskatoon — and the headline says this: 

“Grit wants tax harmonization.” Those are the words. There it 

is, there it is: “Grit wants tax harmonization.” 

 

Saskatchewan should follow the Atlantic provinces and 

harmonize its sales tax with the federal GST, says Liberal 

leader Jim Melenchuk. 

 

That is the position. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  To ask for leave to introduce guests. 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, through 

you and to you, I’d like to introduce a couple of very special 

guests that travelled a great deal of distance today to be with us, 

and they’ll be here for the day and tomorrow. I’d like to ask all 

of you to welcome Mr. Felix Merasty and Mr. James Corrigal, 

who are from Ile-a-la Crosse. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 

welcome the two guests from northern Saskatchewan to the 

legislative gallery. 

 

I was making the point, the third point — my first point being 

revenues as a result of the economy going up, the revenues go 

up for the province of Saskatchewan; my second point being 

that the provincial Liberal Party wants to increase the sales tax 

back up to 9 per cent — my third point that I was making at the 

time of the quite appropriate intervention by the member from 

Cumberland was this proposition that the Liberal leader says, 

quote again: 

 

Saskatchewan should follow the Atlantic provinces and 

harmonize its sales tax with the federal GST, says Liberal 

leader Jim Melenchuk. 

 

Now I want to take just a moment, a moment, Mr. Speaker, to 

explain to the members of the Liberal Party opposite, what that 

position of theirs means. Harmonization means this, Mr. 

Speaker, that a provincial government, in applying its 

provincial sales tax in a harmonized way with the federal GST, 

must do so in such a way that the PST — if you can imagine it 

in my right hand here — is exactly in conformity of the GST, 

including the items specially under the GST which are taxable 

by the GST. 

 

Now right now, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, 

the provincial sales tax, we do not tax a whole wide range of 

articles and commodities. We do not tax, for example, services. 

We do not tax school books. We do not tax children’s clothing. 

The list goes on. In fact not only was that list of exemptions 

very extensive prior to this budget and this particular Bill, we 

even went further by even narrowing the tax base of the PST 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. So by my imagination, if 

you can imagine this, if this is the GST, we’re approximately 

two-thirds or half of the GST, maybe even below half. 

 

Harmonization would force us, by law, Mr. Speaker, to expand 

the provincial sales tax to exactly overlap the four corners of the 

GST and would expand the tax rate, as it has in Atlantic 

Canada, to the point where, the Minister of Finance has pointed 

out, where it would be double what it is in Saskatchewan even  

now without the lowering of the sales tax from 9 to 7 per cent. 

 

That is what the Liberal leader, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, wants to 

do. He wants to harmonize. And the current official Leader of 

the Opposition in the House here is agreeing with his leader, as 

obviously he must do. 

 

So make no mistake about it. Nobody in Saskatchewan should 

be confused about this. The provincial Liberal Party and the 

federal Liberal Party are at one mind. They want to increase the 

provincial sales tax and they want to harmonize it, and by 

harmonizing it, they want to expand the areas of taxation, 

doubling the individual taxes on people. 

 

Nobody should be mistaken about the provincial Liberal 

position in that regard. That is clear. I’ve not heard a retraction, 

I’ve not heard an explanation, I’ve not heard a denial. Nothing. 

In fact I hear a repetition of it, even as I speak, by the members 

opposite from their seats. 

 

An Hon. Member:  But we don’t even hear you say you 

might even look at something that would improve our situation, 

position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, now the former official 

leader of the opposition says, they don’t even hear us talking 

about something that would improve the situation. I’m not sure 

what he’s talking about in terms of improving. 

 

But I tell you we have examined harmonization from every 

aspect that is possible to be examined. And you know what 

happens? Apart from changing the taxes, from taxing those who 

can basically pay it onto the consumers generally, that 

philosophic shift, apart from that — I’ll leave that aside for the 

moment — what it does, it would leave the province of 

Saskatchewan’s coffers approximately $200 million short in 

revenue each and every year. 

 

Why? Because in addition to the overlap that I’ve described 

about harmonization, there is another mechanism about 

harmonization which requires rebates to be paid back to 

businesses — certain businesses. And in the win/lose 

mathematics of it, the province of Saskatchewan loses $200 

million a year. And more people pay more taxes. That’s why no 

provincial government has accepted harmonization except the 

Liberal Atlantic provinces. 

 

And even then they accepted it because they basically were 

bought off. How were they bought off? They were bought off 

because they have the shortfall in the different numbers, but in 

the same proportion as we do. And what the federal government 

said to them was, buy into harmonization and we will — we the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan through the Ottawa coffers — what 

we’ll do is we will make up that shortfall for the first year so 

the people won’t see it. 

 

But for the second year we’re going to back down to 50 per 

cent, and all of a sudden they got $100 million shortfall. And 

the third year the federal government says, we’re out of 

subsidizing you and you’re back into the shortfall. That is 

exactly the deal and that is what the Liberal Party wants us to  

  



1288  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

do. That is exactly what the Liberal Party wants us to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a party, this Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, 

in league with its federal Liberal cousins, which is a party of 

tax, tax, tax, and spend, spend, spend — and I mean foolishly, 

spend on everything going. This budget is well accepted by the 

people of Saskatchewan because it’s a balanced budget and this 

particular Bill reflects this. 

 

If we wanted to save all of the surplus into tax reduction we 

could’ve done that. Or we could’ve have said all of it should 

have gone to debt reduction; we could have said that. Or all of it 

should have gone to . . . by the way, when you say no money 

for infrastructure — $2.5 billion over 15 years for highways; 

how about that for infrastructure? 

 

How about $57 million a year added on to the base for health 

care; how about that for infrastructure? Not good enough for the 

official leader of the opposition. Eight million dollars for the K 

to 12 system and $13 million approximately for the universities; 

not good enough for him. 

 

We took the balanced approach of reducing the taxes, putting 

more money in for people services, and reducing the debt by 

over $2 billion on the way to a reduction that totals $4 billion 

by the year 2000. And this is not good enough for the Liberal 

Party. 

 

You know why it’s not good enough? Because they will 

increase the provincial PST, if elected; and they will harmonize 

it with the federal government, thereby doubling the PST. And 

in the consequence, will leave the provincial purse $200 million 

short each and every year right after that. 

 

That is the position of the party. And the member from Canora 

is disputing me. I read to the member from Canora again, lest 

he did not hear. Leader-Post, November 26, 1996, quote: 

 

Saskatchewan should follow the Atlantic provinces and 

harmonize its sales tax with the federal GST, says Liberal 

leader Jim Melenchuk. 

 

There’s the headline. Did he say it or did he not say it? 

 

An Hon. Member:  He must have said it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  He must have said it. A least I got the 

member from Canora . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, let 

you challenge the Leader-Post. Have you challenged the 

Leader-Post? Have you said anything about this since 

November 26? Not a word. And you can’t say anything about it 

now. It’s too late now. 

 

You not only want to increase the PST; you want to have, Mr. 

Speaker . . . just one comment on taxation. You want to have 

the oil companies — and the people in the south-west should 

know this — you want the oil companies to pay on 

developmental leases up front, in cash, for 15 years. That’s 

what you want to do. Now that’s a great idea. 

 

You know how great it is, Mr. Leader of the Official  

Opposition? If it’s so great, we should start right now by you 

paying your taxes up front for the next 15 years in cash. How’d 

you like to do that? If it’s a fair point for the oil companies and 

for some businesses, why isn’t it a good point for you? 

 

Maybe we should extend that principle to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, too. Have them pay their taxes for 15 years in 

cash, up front, thanks to the Liberal leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a Bill which represents, together with 

the other additional funds for health and for education and for 

roads and the child poverty initiatives of the action plan of 

Saskatchewan, that whole plethora of exciting attempts to 

alleviate those in need, this Bill represents a turnaround for the 

province of Saskatchewan. It represents a dawning of a new 

day. It represents, as somebody says, springtime in 

Saskatchewan in 1997. 

 

After six years of fighting a massive deficit, after six years of 

fighting a massive debt, we’re now able to say, no more deficit. 

The first government, provincial or federal, anywhere in this 

jurisdiction to balance its budget. We did that. 

 

And we’re able to say to the people of Saskatchewan, you can 

share with us because it was you who did this for the people of 

Saskatchewan. You got us out of the deficit position. You got 

us to the point where we’re paying down on debt. We’re giving 

you a reward. We’re sharing with you on a 2 per cent reduction 

of the sales tax. We’re sharing with you and protecting our vital 

health care, education, road system, and concern and 

compassion for kids in poverty and in need. What’s wrong with 

that? 

 

What is possibly a source of complaint by the Liberal Party in 

that regard? Except that what the Liberal Party stands for in the 

province of Saskatchewan and, I might say in a closing word, 

what it stands for federally . . . remember that “red book,” the 

famous “red book” of the last federal election, 1993, the one 

that was waved around? And remember what they said? What 

did they say about the GST? They said they would what? Do 

away with it. It’s gone. That was the promise made in 1993. 

 

What do we have in 1997? We not only have the GST, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’re going to have it for ever. And not only that, 

if we ever elect any Liberals to government in Saskatchewan — 

I don’t think I’ll see it — but if we ever should, we’re not only 

going to have the GST, we’re going to have a harmonized 

GST-PST, doubling the taxes on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I say to everybody in Saskatchewan: a Liberal is a Liberal is a 

Liberal. They stand for high taxes. Don’t give them your 

confidence or your trust. This is the Bill which represents the 

hope and the optimism and the opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell the Bill No. 11 — The 

Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

had numerous opportunities already to talk about Bill No. 11 in 

terms of its implication for the province of Saskatchewan and 

the various constituencies. 

 

A couple of final points, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to make 

about Bill No. 11. I believe that there are two components here 

that need to be addressed and need to be looked at and see 

whether or not they are of an advantage to the province of 

Saskatchewan or a disadvantage. 

 

The first point I think, is around the area of when shall there be 

a review that takes place. And there’s been discussion between 

the government and the opposition parties in terms of looking at 

whether or not we should be doing this on a cycle that includes 

every 5 years or whether the cycle should be expanded to be 10 

years. 

 

And I think in previous debates on Bill No. 11 we’ve made the 

point that of course we see it as an advantage to move to a 

10-year cycle. I think it will be an advantage to the voters that 

will be in the constituencies will have more . . . a greater 

understanding of what constituency they actually represent. 

And this process, I think can take place. So we have no problem 

in terms of supporting the amendment that changes the period 

of time from 5 years to 10 years. 

 

The second point that we have looked at in this Bill, in terms of 

amendments, is the amendment that changes a particular section 

from the wording, voter population, to total population. 

 

While we agree with the fact that this looks like an error indeed 

in terms of the 1993 legislation, because when you take a look 

at sections . . . I believe sections 11, sections 12, 13, 14, all of 

the sections or the clauses that relate to population have referred 

to total population. And indeed the one section is the one that 

relates to voter population. And that must have been an error 

indeed in 1993 and had slipped by the people at that time and 

has to be corrected in terms of housekeeping. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now that’s the point: that if it is a housekeeping change, as an 

opposition we have no problem. 

 

However, when we take a look at that concept of choosing 

constituencies, areas of constituencies, by total population, as 

I’ve indicated before in speaking on Bill No. 11, we find this 

not to be a practice that is acceptable, especially in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

And I think I’ve indicated before that as we move to a more 

elderly population outside of city areas, and the fact that within 

the city we have populations that have a greater density of 

younger people, who are non-voters, we indeed produce a result 

that has areas of rural constituencies becoming much, much 

larger. 

 

When you look at the concept of one voter, one vote, that 

should be the principle I think, that determines the size of a 

constituency. If we are elected as MLAs by voters on the basis 

of one voter, one vote, I think that practice can be followed in 

terms of determining the constituency size as well. 

 

We have an enumeration process in place that identifies all the 

people in Canada, it identifies all the people in Saskatchewan. 

We’re going to be setting up a database I believe, that will make 

the manual type of enumeration unnecessary. 

 

And I think it’s incumbent upon this government to take a 

serious look at whether or not we can change the sections — 

and I’ve indicated sections 11, 12, 13, and 14 inclusive — those 

four sections where it refers to total population. Can we indeed 

explore the possibility of saying no, that could be amended to 

say voter population. And therefore you bring a very consistent 

basis across the entire province of deciding what size a 

constituency is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I would suggest is that the Bill . . . We 

need a little time to look at the four sections that I’ve identified, 

to see whether or not it is possible to make some changes 

through amendments to the Bill. And we would like to have the 

possibility of proposing those amendments during the 

Committee of the Whole and have the government take a look 

at those amendments and see whether or not indeed that would 

be a much more fairer system to develop an electoral system for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have no problem, as I’ve indicated, with the fact that we’re 

moving to a 10-year plan. That’s acceptable. We know, of 

course, that this was a housekeeping error, and indeed that has 

to be changed as well, if indeed we were staying with that 

system. 

 

But what I’m suggesting is that we take a look at the second 

half of this Bill to say, instead of developing constituencies on a 

basis of total population, let’s take a look at that now when we 

have the Bill before us. The year 2001 is a long ways away. 

Let’s take a look at the possibility of making those amendments 

now when we have the Bill before us and changing it to what 

we believe is a much fairer and more equitable system in the 

province. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

make a few comments as well regarding this piece of legislation 

that we have before us. 

 

Certainly we appreciate the fact that the minister responsible  

  



1290  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

has consulted with us and brought to our attention some of the 

changes that were coming in. And we thank him for that. 

 

We certainly concur with the fact that we’re moving . . . this 

Bill is moving from a 5-year revision to 10 years. I certainly 

think, as the member from Canora-Pelly has indicated, that is 

certainly a positive move. 

 

To be continually changing constituency boundaries not only 

makes it difficult for the electorate, it makes it difficult for 

elected members, to know that you’ve just been elected but by 

the time the next election rolls around, you may have to be 

looking at a different set of boundaries and a different area to 

cover. So you’re left with the problem of how do you represent 

your constituents and yet plan for the future. 

 

And so this change is certainly something that is positive. And I 

think it as well shows some responsibility in regards to 

legislation and responsible government. It reflects responsible 

government, responsible representations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the area we do have a problem with though as 

well goes back to the fact that the current Bill before us just 

goes back to what we had on the last Bill regarding voter 

population. And we have mentioned this to the member and to 

the government members, that in our discussions leading up to 

this piece of legislation coming to the Assembly . . . and in 

subsection 14(1) . . . or section 14 as amended by reading in 

subsection 14(1): 

 

. . . by striking out “the voter population of each proposed 

constituency” and substituting “the population of each 

proposed constituency”. 

 

The reason we have a problem with this, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 

And going back to the debate that took place prior to the last 

revision, and even before that, back in the late ’80s, there was a 

revision when two more seats were added in the province of 

Saskatchewan — one to Regina, one to Saskatoon. 

 

One of the big debates at that time was the different differential, 

or the variances in constituencies of some 15 to 25 per cent. 

And I remember government members, when they were on this 

side of the Assembly, said that that was too large. It didn’t 

really reflect the proper voter population of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And 25 per cent was just too large and it should 

be reduced. And I believe at that time the suggestion was even a 

5 per cent variance, taking into consideration large urban 

sectors and then the rural setting where you do have the 

population base certainly farther dispersed. 

 

Therefore if you get to trying to draw up boundaries where you 

have totally equal population, in a large urban sector you’re 

covering a very small area, land area, and you can cover your 

constituency quite easily; whereas in a rural area, as you get a 

smaller variance and number of seats . . . fewer seats, you end 

up with larger areas that you have to cover which makes it more 

difficult for rural members. 

 

While we do not have a problem with the variance, we do have 

a problem with the fact that . . . when you bring it down to  

population. Because as we’ve seen in the last revision where the 

complaint before was that urban ridings had such a large . . . in 

some cases more voters per constituency than some of the rural 

ridings, the changes, Mr. Speaker, in the last piece of legislation 

actually did one thing: it put, in many cases, the number of rural 

ridings with many more voters, actual voters, than urban 

ridings. 

 

And I note the constituency that I represent. In 1995, there were 

11,407 voters; Cannington had 11,491; Cypress Hills, 11,014. 

But on the other hand we see some of the large urban ridings 

. . . I shouldn’t say large urban ridings. As far as land base, 

fairly small. But for example, Regina Dewdney, 10,158. That’s 

almost 1,400 voters . . . or 1,300 voters less than I had to try and 

converse with in a larger area. 

 

Regina Elphinstone, 10,764. I can see why the member from 

Regina Elphinstone decided to get out of Shaunavon — be a lot 

easier to cover his constituency. Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, 

10,417. But of real interest, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

Saskatoon Fairview only has 9,376 electoral voters in the 1995 

election. And Saskatoon Riversdale, 9,820. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, when you start talking about variances, adds 

up to a variance of about 17 per cent. And it’s basically gone 

opposite to what the variance of . . . the discussion, the debate 

in and prior to 1990 was about a 5 per cent variance. 

 

I would think, Mr. Speaker, that this isn’t a coincidence. And it 

certainly is not a coincidence when you look at where the 

strengths of political parties tend to lie in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The large urban sectors get more seats. Guess 

who has the strength, especially in the cities of Saskatoon and 

Regina at this current time? Although I think Saskatoon and 

Regina certainly have some areas that other parties are finding 

that there are strengths starting to come back. 

 

But over the years, Mr. Speaker, the two large urban centres 

tend to have a stronger NDP base. And based on the way we’re 

going and the change in constituency boundaries, I can see 

where this government could move in the next year or maybe 

even the next time there’s a change, a variance change, this 

government could move to the point where they are forcing 

people to really look on the rural side and say, well we don’t 

stand a chance any more. The two large urban centres have all 

the votes, they have all the seats, and it makes it very difficult 

for people to vote against the NDP as it currently . . . certainly 

as the current riding structure sits. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very deep concern to us. It’s a concern 

to rural residents. The Premier just a moment ago was talking 

about how they have made significant changes in taxation. 

While there are a number of areas I certainly could stand up 

here and debate the Premier on, I think the Bill that’s before us, 

while it has some good components and we agree with them 

and we certainly appreciated the debate we’ve had with regards 

to the government members on this issue, it’s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, that government members were not willing to take a 

look at this other piece of legislation and recognize the 

difference between population and voter population. 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

The fact that in areas where you tend to have younger families 

moving into, you’re going to have a larger population but you 

may have a very small voter population. And that can have a 

significant impact. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that that could be addressed 

very simply, very easily. And I think, Mr. Speaker, if we got 

back to voter population, which in our technological times that 

we now live in could be addressed very easily, if we got back to 

voter population, it would certainly take away from the 

discrepancies and the disparities that now arise and are now 

created as a result of the current legislation and the current 

make-up of constituencies within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we possibly haven’t heard the minister 

indicate that he’s willing to address this concern, I can’t really 

say that the minister isn’t because I haven’t heard the minister 

respond to some of the concerns we’ve raised here. And I know 

we will be giving the minister, we will be giving the minister 

the opportunity in a moment, we will be giving the minister the 

opportunity in a moment to respond to some of these concerns. 

 

But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that when we get into 

Committee of the Whole if we don’t hear anything positive, we 

will certainly continue to raise this issue. And we will look 

forward to as well bringing forward some amendments that 

would address this concern. 

 

But we trust, Mr. Speaker, that the minister himself is 

recognizing, based on the open, honest, and effective 

government they talk about, the open, democratic process, that 

the minister will give some serious concerns in his government 

to some of the issues that we have raised. 

 

And so I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for having me had the 

opportunity to raise some of these concerns. We look forward to 

the response from the minister and further debate in committee. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker:  Does the minister wish to exercise his right to 

close debate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  It is my obligation then to advise all hon. 

members that the minister wishes to exercise his right to close 

debate. And once he’s recognized, all other members will be 

prohibited from entering into debate. If any other member 

wishes to speak, then he or she must do so now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 

interested in the debate that took place today with the 

representatives of the two opposition parties stating their views 

with respect to a very important question. I also had read . . . 

heard and read previous debates about this matter in connection 

with this Bill, and indeed in connection with the 1993 Bill. 

 

At issue here, as members have noticed, is the question of 

whether we in this House represent voters or whether we in this 

House represent the population of this province. That was the  

debate that took place in 1993, and that indeed is the debate that 

has taken place in a lot of other Assemblies a number of times 

in this country. It’s a fundamental question for democracy and 

not one that is easily answered. 

 

We wrestled our way through this in 1993 on this side of the 

House and came to the conclusion that we represent, having 

been elected by our constituents, we then represent all of the 

people who reside in our constituencies, whether they’re of 

voting age or eligible to vote or not. 

 

And so it is that we would represent people who are under the 

age of 18; we would represent newly arrived Canadians who 

live in our constituency and who have not yet become entitled 

to vote because they are not yet Canadian citizens — to mention 

two classes of citizens who are not voters but yet who we have 

an obligation to represent as elected members of this Assembly. 

 

I confess though, Mr. Speaker, that there is a force to the 

opposite argument. Obviously there is for the debate to have 

continued over so many years in so many different jurisdictions. 

 

Until now it has simply not been practical to draw constituency 

boundaries on the basis of eligible voters. The reason for that is 

that we have never been certain we know how many eligible 

voters there are in the province, or in each of our constituencies. 

We’ve had an enumeration process in this province that has 

begun on the day on which . . . or the day after the election is 

called. And enumerators then go around enumerating the 

population during the next couple of weeks or so and then we 

candidates get the voter’s list about two weeks into the 

campaign. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I don’t know if I can speak for all members on this, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly in my constituency the voter’s list has not 

accurately reflected the eligible voters in our constituency. So 

we hustle around and try to revise it, try to ensure that all the 

people are on it, but come election day, sure enough, there are 

all sorts of people who present themselves at the voting station 

whose names are not on the voter’s list. So we have not had an 

accurate way of determining in this province who are the 

eligible voters. 

 

Now the constituency boundaries of course can’t be drawn 

during the election campaign. They have to be drawn before the 

election campaign. The commission that draws the boundaries 

— and I think everyone agrees we should have a commission 

like the one we have — they have no basis on which to do that 

except the voter’s list from the last provincial election. 

 

Now we’re making some progress there, Mr. Speaker, as 

members have noted. We’re moving in this country towards a 

permanent voter’s list. And we have indicated, for our part, in 

the province of Saskatchewan that we will cooperate with the 

establishment of that permanent voter’s list and with its upkeep. 

We’re prepared to cooperate. 

 

  



1292  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

Now that process is off the ground with respect to the federal 

election that is here now. We will have to watch that very 

carefully, and if the result of that is a voter’s list in which we all 

have confidence, then I think we can raise this question of what 

is the appropriate way to draw constituency boundaries. I think 

it will be a workable plan. I think the voter’s list that emerges 

will be an accurate list. And then we could, I think, properly 

consider the alternative. 

 

But for now, for now, we have not changed the position we 

arrived at in 1993. And we’re sort of from Missouri on this 

question. If the permanent voter’s list works, fine. But we want 

to see that it works, we want to test it, and know that it works 

before we change our mind. 

 

And on that basis, Mr. Speaker, I have to reply to the members 

of the opposition that while the idea certainly has merit and the 

arguments certainly have force, for the reasons that I’ve 

indicated, the government wishes to maintain the same 

approach that was taken in the ’93 Bill. 

 

And I’ll close on this note, Mr. Speaker, by observing that if 

you’re reading the 1993 legislation, as the member from 

Canora-Pelly indicated, it is clear that the intention was that the 

division be made on the basis of population and that the section 

that we’re referring to was, in that context, inaccurately 

expressed and it was a mistake that ought to be cleaned up. In 

that sense, it’s a housekeeping measure. 

 

But as I take my place let me note once again, the issue is a 

good issue, it’s a live issue, and no doubt will be raised again in 

this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 9 — The 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 10 — The 

Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 

1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed  

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 32 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 

1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 33 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications corrélatives à 

certaines lois be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 50 — The Private 

Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to add a few more comments to some of the debate I entered 

into yesterday regarding this specific piece of legislation, Bill 

No. 60, The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 

1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, our caucus is certainly 

opposed to this Bill. Off the top, when we first saw the Bill and 

understood that the government was bringing this Bill forward 

— and what we understood about this Bill, it was going to 

address a number of concerns — we felt there weren’t . . . that it 

was the type of Bill that really didn’t have a lot of issues that 

related to it, or areas that . . . We would certainly take a stand 

against it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we found that after meeting with representatives 

from the Canadian Society for Industrial Security, it has 

become clear to us that the government did not do adequate 

consultation with the industry before drafting this Bill. And 

we’ve had the privilege of sitting down with representatives 

about two weeks ago, just after the presentation — or just 

before the presentation of the Bill — and they raised a number 

of concerns with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of our caucus like all members 

appreciate the public concern about issues that this Bill is trying 

to address, certainly when you unfortunately hear of the 

circumstances leading to the death of one Mr. Nikolichuk in 

Saskatoon. And that is a concern. 

 

And as we heard from the representatives of the Canadian 

Society for Industrial Security, this is a concern to them as well 

because it affects the industry that they are involved in. And 

they are certainly, as they indicated and as I suggested, were 

more than pleased to have been asked by the government to 

work towards drafting some type of legislation or bringing  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

forward some ideas that would be able to be put into legislation 

that would make that industry operate much better; and that it 

would certainly bring better protection to its members and to 

the individuals who they hire and who are out there working as 

security guards on many different projects throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan from time to time. 

 

Even the commissionaires, I believe, who tend to go up and 

down the streets and see whether we’re parked illegally or not 

are involved. So there are a lot of people who are concerned and 

they want to make sure they’re well represented and well 

protected. 

 

The representative of the private investigators and security 

guards appreciate this concern as well, and they feel that it is in 

the best interests of themselves, as a profession, to be held to 

very high public standards of competence and safety. 

 

Their criticisms of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, arise from . . . on the 

whole are not at reducing the Bill, but rather they want to see 

the Bill, or this piece of legislation strengthened. They feel that 

the legislation as it currently sits before us really does not 

address a number of the concerns that were raised as a result of 

this tragic incident. 

 

They would like to see the Bill take a stronger approach to 

licensing that would hold their profession to the highest public 

standards possible. And I understand from our discussions with 

them that they are in discussion with other provinces across 

Canada regarding similar legislation so that there is a 

uniformity across Canada when it comes to legislation such as 

this, dealing with an industry of this type. 

 

However by the same token, they expect the government to 

extend to their profession some degree of respect. It is their 

feeling that this Bill does little to prevent the kind of situation 

that led to the Nikolichuk case. What it does do is subject their 

profession to constant suspicion and arbitrary interference from 

government and the feeling that it would make it difficult for 

them to continue to operate very efficiently based on how they 

understand this piece of legislation coming forward. 

 

They are concerned about clauses such as no. 14 which gives 

the registrar the ability to withdraw an investigator or a security 

guard’s licence if they deem that he or she is not a fit or proper 

person to hold a licence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a major concern because what it does is if a 

person loses a licence . . . A contractor has bid on a job place to 

provide security, and all of a sudden they find that the 

individuals that they have hired have lost their licence. They 

really don’t have a lot of time to react. And in may cases, they 

feel that they are then going to lose that job as some other 

security operation is going to then be called in because they do 

have the personnel that have been licensed and, certainly, 

recognized. 

 

So they have some concerns in that area. Obviously this 

definition is far too vague and opens the door to bureaucratic 

confusion and abuse. They have many further concerns which 

the House should take time to consider, both in second reading  

and in committee. 

 

In general, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the government 

keep this Bill off the order paper in this session so that they can 

go back and listen to the very worthwhile suggestions that this 

profession has to offer. In particular, the CSIS (Canadian 

Security Intelligence Service) would like the government to 

consider a much more thorough Bill that was recently passed in 

Nova Scotia. Mr. Speaker, it would seem that it would be 

appropriate to do that. And as the representative certainly 

indicated to us, their feeling is, rather than just jumping in and 

addressing an issue that relates to a tragic incident and bringing 

forward legislation that really may not meet the needs of this 

particular sector of our society, it might be appropriate for the 

government to take some more time. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that our caucus has 

raised, and other members of this House have raised, it would 

certainly be appropriate for the government and for the minister 

to give some serious consideration to maybe just leaving this 

legislation sit and not bother worrying or even worry about 

passing it through this current session, to review the legislation 

much more carefully, and to come in with a legislation that will 

address the concerns and that will have some real benefit to this 

sector. 

 

Certainly the professionals that we’ve talked to feel that it’s 

appropriate that this legislation that protects their industry . . . 

but they want to make sure that legislation doesn’t impede their 

ability to provide a service, but it certainly addresses the 

concerns as far as safety and proper availability of the proper 

equipment to perform a duty in the workplace. 

 

And then the other concern that was raised and needs to be 

addressed — and I don’t believe the government is even close 

to having any form of the . . . or any outline of the regulations 

that will be brought forward to address how this Bill is 

implemented. And that is of a major concern. 

 

(1530) 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, once the Bill is passed, once the 

legislation is passed, and then this Assembly gets the 

opportunity to address and to speak to legislation . . . but when 

the legislation is passed and regulations are then worked on or 

put in motion and brought into place, they may not generally 

reflect what the industry feels and in some cases may not even 

reflect their version of how they interpreted the Bill. 

 

And their feeling is that it would be appropriate for the 

government to give them an idea of the regulations that would 

be coming down to implement the intent of this Bill. And I 

think that certainly is a valid point and it’s something that we 

should give serious consideration to. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, I basically raised the points of major 

concerns. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I adjourned debate the 

other day and I don’t have that privilege today. So therefore I’m 

going to have to allow other members of the Assembly to get 

into this debate because I think this is certainly one of the Bills 

that we need to take some time to address a little more closely  

  



1294  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

to make sure that it addresses the concerns and that it certainly 

meets the intended need and intent of the Bill. And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my place and allow any other member in 

the Assembly the opportunity to speak to this Bill. Thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as my colleague has pointed out, that the representatives of the 

security industry do have some concerns with Bill No. 50 in 

that it doesn’t fulfil the needs as they see it as to what the 

solutions were to the problems that have come forward in the 

past within the security industry. They believe that while the 

minister has brought forward a Bill that is supposed to address 

those concerns, it has failed to do so. 

 

And we have seen this type of legislation before, Mr. Minister, 

where a problem has been identified, the government reacts to 

that problem, brings forward some legislation, but misses the 

point of what the whole piece of legislation was for. Mr. 

Speaker, they have done exactly that in this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

My colleague has suggested that perhaps what the minister 

should do is pull the legislation, go back, start over, redraft it, 

get the points that need to be dealt with, work with the industry 

to ensure that their needs are met, that the security staff people 

who work with them are met, and those that are interested in the 

industry, any needs that they might have are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to go one step even further than that. 

If the minister wants to go back, redraft this Bill, and bring it 

forward to the House still in this session, having done it 

properly, we’re prepared to move quickly on that particular 

piece of legislation because the security people, both the 

companies and the staff, need a new piece of legislation there to 

define and to protect and to serve their needs, which is not 

being done at the present time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Perhaps for the security staff, what needs to be done is 

something along the line of certification, as happens with 

school teachers within a division, that they can prepare the 

exams for their students without supervision from the 

department. For the security staff within a corporation, perhaps 

they could be certified to provide the services without constant 

supervision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we support a move to make this Bill 

responsive to the security industry, for the security staff, but 

clearly this Bill has not done so. We would ask that the minister 

withdraw the Bill, go and do it right, and bring it back into this 

legislature. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 

adjourn debate on this Bill at the present time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Eastview on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to hon. members for giving me leave to introduce some 

special guests from Saskatoon. 

 

I’d like to introduce the grade 4 and 5 class from Hugh Cairns 

School, and welcome you here to Regina. Also with the class of 

57 students, the teachers, Ms. Miller; principal, Mr. Abraham; 

Ms. Braitenbade and Ms. Stephenson; and chaperons, Mrs. 

Krysa, Mrs. Reekie, and Mr. Udchic. 

 

They’re down in Regina for the day. We’re going to be meeting 

for a few minutes after to take a picture and have a chat. I think 

I’m coming into the classroom next week and some more tough 

questions will be there. 

 

I know that the students have probably had a great day in 

Regina and I look forward to meeting you in a few minutes and 

would ask all hon. members to join me in giving you a warm 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Now why is the hon. member for Saskatoon 

Northwest on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests 

also. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 

welcome the students from Hugh Cairns here today. I’ve had 

the opportunity to be at their school on two occasions for a 

citizenship court, where the students have played a very 

important role in that activity. And I have enjoyed both 

occasions that I’ve been at their school and I certainly welcome 

them here today to Regina. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 27  The Municipal Tax Sharing 

(Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  Order. The committee will come to order. I 

would ask the minister to introduce her officials first, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right is John Edwards, the director of the policy and legislative 

branch of the Saskatchewan Municipal Government 

department. Behind John is Doug Morcom, vice-chairman of 

the Municipal Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board. And 

behind me is Perry Erhardt, legislative officer for Saskatchewan 

Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you. First of all, Madam Minister,  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

welcome to you and to your officials this afternoon. I 

understand that the basic purpose of this Act is to prevent major 

tax shifts to potash mines as a result of reassessment. And I 

wonder if you could confirm that that is in fact what the Bill is 

attempting to address here? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes, I can clarify that 

and confirm what the member says. This Bill is a consequence 

of reassessment, where the legislation refers to factors on the 

mill rate. The mill rate will obviously be changed or altered 

considerably when the assessment rises. And so this will be 

activated only every third year when there is a reassessment 

because the reference is to the assessment of the year before the 

current year’s mill rate, and that won’t work in a year of 

reassessment. So it’s designed to be applicable every third year. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Can the minister tell me, Mr. Chair, if this will 

prevent all tax shifts regarding potash mines as a result of 

reassessment or if it will merely cap an attempt to limit 

potential tax shifts from reassessment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it will not have 

that effect because the property taxes levied on an individual 

potash mine in a tax-sharing area may increase or decrease 

depending on the change in a mine’s assessment relative to the 

change in assessment of other mines. So it won’t necessarily 

mean the status quo for all mines but it will mean that the 

changes will be relative to the assessment of each mine. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, what I’m trying to understand 

here and I think there’ll be many property owners who are 

trying to grasp, what are the special issues and challenges 

regarding potash mines in the sense that of course reassessment 

is resulting in significant shifts all over the province? We’re 

having shifts in some cases . . . the education costs going from 

villages to farm land. We’re having shifts in our cities from 

downtown businesses to peripheral businesses. We’re having 

shifts from the commercial to the residential. We’re obviously 

having shifts from older to newer. Shifts are going on all over 

the province, and indeed the whole purpose of reassessment 

was so we would have shifts. 

 

And so what I’m trying to understand now is what are the 

particular challenges that mean that we have to legislate some 

breaks on shifts regarding the potash industry when I say you 

could argue the whole purpose of reassessment to begin with is 

to have shifts. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, with respect, I think 

that the member is not interpreting the purpose of this Act 

entirely accurately. This is an Act, this is The Municipal Tax 

Sharing (Potash) Act that we’re amending. And the basis for 

this legislation or what it’s intended to achieve is the sharing of 

potash tax revenues that occurs between and among 

municipalities. 

 

And there’s a formula in place in this legislation that affects that 

sharing so that the revenue enjoyed by the presence of a potash 

mine and its assets is not confined to the municipality in which 

it’s located, but that benefit is shared throughout a defined area 

by a defined formula. And the formula uses, say in  

this year, it would use 1997 mill rates on 1996 assessment. 

 

Now in a year of reassessment, that doesn’t work because 

you’re having a mill rate that reflects this year’s assessment; so 

that using the formula would skew . . . and tend to increase the 

burden on potash mines, which is not intended. 

 

So it’s simply that the reference to assessment is . . . this 

amendment will alter that relationship for the years of 

reassessment only. In other words, next year the relationship 

that’s spelled out in the formula between 1998 mill rates and 

1997 assessment will produce the same relationship that it 

always has. But again, in the year 2000 the relationship will 

again be skewed. So this amendment is meant to make that 

alteration in the calculations every third year. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I realize then, Mr. Chairman, that there’s a 

sharing, tax-sharing agreements here for the payment of potash 

mine taxes, but you’re saying that the tax shifts resulting from 

reassessment will still take place and this may involve 

individual tax increases? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, first I should correct 

something that I said — I knew better but I mis-spoke myself 

— and it’s . . . it would be the 1996 mill rate against the 1997 

assessment. You know, not the other way around, which I said. 

 

But yes, the reassessment will still capture different values for 

mines relative to their individual situations. But what this Bill is 

intended to do is not to reduce tax shifts, but to maintain the 

intent of the tax-sharing formula. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The effects of property 

reassessment are having fairly acute effects on members of 

businesses, property owners, and I think we’re finding out fairly 

recently, especially farmers, As well the changes in tax 

structure has a big effect on school divisions. And I’m 

wondering in general, why are special exceptions being made 

for potash mines? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as a result of 

reassessment, there are a number of consequential changes that 

are administratively needed as references to mill rates are made. 

And this is not an attempt to alter the effect of reassessment; it’s 

simply administrative. 

 

Another example for this is — that has arisen recently — is the 

reference to mill rates in the regulations affecting the provincial 

disaster assistance program, where there was a, say a 3 mill 

deductible. Well any place where as a consequence of 

reassessment, the costs or charges would be changed, then our 

intent is to make administrative changes with respect to the mill 

rate reference. So that no . . . the financial effect will not be 

changed. So in other words, we’ll change the reference in those 

regulations so that the equivalent deductible would be effective. 

 

And it’s the same thing here, is that we’re just changing the 

references so that this scheme, the municipal tax sharing, potash 

sharing arrangement, will not . . . the principles of it will  

  



1296  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

not be altered as a consequence of reassessment. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  In the second reading that we had, you stated 

that some mines would see their taxes increased four or five 

times under reassessment. How will these amendments modify 

those changes? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, this is what we outlined as being 

a result if we did not make these changes. And that kind of 

increases was certainly not an intent, and that’s what the 

amendments to this Bill are intended to correct — so that that 

does not occur. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay. So then the question that I had is still 

there. How will these amendments modify those changes? Will 

they put them down to zero or just be twice the increase instead 

of four or five times? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as I said before, what 

this Bill currently does or what the scheme currently does is, it 

uses as . . . this year, for example, it would use the 1996 mill 

rate applied to the 1997 assessment. So if the assessment in 

terms of real dollars goes up, applying last year’s mill rate 

would really skew the result. 

 

So it’s meant to mitigate or reduce the mill rate factor that’s 

used, so that it would produce the same amount of tax revenue 

as previously. And when I say the same amount, I mean, just 

say there was a potash mine whose assessment was not altered 

one bit; I mean the value was the very same. Then the amount 

of money that would be raised would be exactly the same. But 

if there was an increase, I mean there was an expansion to the 

mine or some other increase, that would be captured, as it 

would in the normal course. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Were the municipalities that were involved in 

. . . or that had potash mines in the area, or municipalities in 

general, were they consulted on this Bill? And if they were, was 

any sort of agreement reached between your department and the 

municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the municipalities are 

represented on the board that makes the distributions or 

approves the distributions. And indeed, SARM and the rural 

municipalities, at a meeting specific . . . or consultation session 

specific to this issue, were consulted and they do concur. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Those are 

basically the questions that I had, and I’d like to thank you and 

your officials for giving us the opportunity to ask those 

questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  I see the minister has one new official. I would  

ask her to introduce her, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Marilyn 

Turanich from the Saskatchewan Municipal Board has joined 

us. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I note that the quorum is being 

reduced to one board member. Is that because of the pressure of 

appeals that you’re expecting as a result of reassessment this 

year? What is the thinking behind reducing the quorum, and in 

what circumstances would you go with a board of only one 

member? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, of course we are 

anticipating more appeals and have appointed additional board 

members and so forth. But we brought forward amendments 

last year which made some of these changes and which reduced 

the quorum to one for the purpose of hearing appeals. 

 

This amendment simply amends the committee structure to a 

quorum of one. It seems reasonable if the whole board can 

operate with a quorum of one, that a committee should be able 

to operate with a quorum of one. And the quorum of one would 

never be used in a complex appeal. It’s just meant to be more 

efficient and more responsive in terms of the availability to 

appeal, members to local decisions. And if in a rural or remote 

location, for instance, where one member acting as a quorum 

would be sufficient, then it’s a matter of cost-saving and 

flexibility. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Could the minister discuss for me what 

mechanism will be used to decide what appeals are simple 

enough to warrant only one member and when a larger board 

would be required. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board would make those 

determinations in the course of his administration of the 

process. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I would like to hear, Mr. Chairman, from the 

minister the average number of appeals we have been 

experiencing in the last two years, and if she can give us any 

indication as to what pressure she is anticipating this year. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, if I understood the 

member’s question clearly, he’s asking what is the average 

appeal workload now, and what do we anticipate it to be? That 

was the question? Sorry, I didn’t quite understand it. 

 

At the current time the average runs between 7 and 900 appeals 

per year. And we’re anticipating, it can only be I guess, an 

educated guess, but from 3 to 5,000 appeals in the year of 

reassessment. But at the moment, I mean we’re in a very good 

situation without a backlog. So we’re, you know, well 

positioned to deal with the workload as it comes this year. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So you’re anticipating that there may well be 

as much as a 500 to 750 per cent increase in the number of  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

appeals you’re hearing this year. That’s what you’re saying? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as I said, it can only be 

an educated guess, and of course we’ve held workshops 

throughout the province. I’m sure that municipalities will be 

holding open houses and doing the best that they can to provide 

an educational process for ratepayers to avoid any unnecessary 

appeals. But as an educated guess, we are anticipating between 

3 and 5,000. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Can the minister tell me then, in view of the 

fact that the system has only handled, I believe you said 

something in the order of 700 appeals up until now — you say 

you have appointed new members, you’ve reduced the quorum 

— is the minister satisfied that we have the mechanisms in 

place to deal with this dramatic increase in the number of 

anticipated appeals? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we did have in 

anticipation a budget increase. We did appoint eight additional 

part-time members to the board, who will be available to hear 

appeals, and we did add two additional clerical staff. And the 

assessment appeal database has also been updated. So we’re 

expecting that in spite of the increase in numbers, that appeals 

will be heard expeditiously and decisions rendered in a timely 

fashion. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I note that there is a 30-day time period within 

which to file an appeal. And, Madam Minister, that strikes me 

as rather short, particularly if a property owner wishes to seek 

some professional advice, as say from a property assessor, 

somebody working in the field, or possibly legal advice. 

 

Because it seems to me that in most cases a property owner 

really wouldn’t . . . All he or she knows is that taxes have gone 

up a lot. They don’t really know if they might have proper 

grounds for an appeal. And 30 days strikes me as a rather short 

time to allow a property owner to seek professional advice and 

get in their notice of appeal. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite is referring to the 30-day period that’s allowed for the 

court of revision at the local level. That’s not applicable to 

hearings or appeals to the Municipal Board. But this time is 

increased from 20 days to 30 days; so we have actually 

increased the time frame for appeals. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But would the minister though comment on the 

difficulty though, of say trying to obtain the services of a 

commercial property appraiser and seek the services of a 

commercial appraiser to see whether or not your appeal might 

have some validity. I understand that in most cases you 

wouldn’t be able to seek this sort of professional advice within 

that 30-day time frame. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only say 

that the time period has been increased by 10 days from what it 

was before. And from my experience in local government and 

as a ratepayer and occasionally an appellant, I’ve never found  

that that time frame was not adequate. But in anticipation and to 

make it as fair and open as possible, we have increased it by . . . 

the time from 10 days more than what it’s been for many years. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I understand 

that the existing section of the Act concerning the assessment 

material, the decision on which the initial assessment was made, 

was to be made available to the ratepayer or his representative, 

and that that section, although it’s in the Act, has never been 

proclaimed. And that’s my information, that it was not 

proclaimed, and I would like to ask, Madam Minister, if that is 

correct and what is the status of that at present? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure, and my 

officials here are not familiar with the reference that the 

member is making. As far as we are aware, there is no section 

of the amendments from 1996, I assume the member is referring 

to, that has not been proclaimed. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I believe Madam Minister is aware of the 

situation that the assessment roll in toto is open for a brief 

period in municipalities in the spring, and otherwise it is closed 

except for specific inquiries that may come through as a result 

of land transfers and specific transactions. 

 

I wonder if Madam Minister could comment on that, as to what 

is the thinking behind the roll only being available for public 

inspection for a brief period of the year. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, none of this procedure 

is changed by these amendments except that . . . Well in the 

previous legislation we have changed the time, but none of the 

provisions of these amendments address the issues that the 

member is raising. 

 

There are some differences in interpretation in municipalities. 

Usually a person, a ratepayer, can get information on their own 

assessment at any time. It’s just that the time period when the 

roll is open and a ratepayer can make comparisons with other 

assessments, that’s the limitation. But it’s always been that way. 

And it seems reasonable, because each appeal is only relative to 

that year. So in order to have appeals heard in a timely fashion, 

there are statutory times for the notices to be mailed, for the roll 

to be open, the deadline for appeals, the deadline for appeals to 

the court of revision, decisions to be appealed to the Municipal 

Board, so that the system can work within the year that’s 

applicable. And so the time lines are necessary in order to deal 

with that year. If it’s longer, then it spills over into the next 

year. And you can’t be dealing with concurrent appeals; it’s just 

not the way the system works. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I wish to ask Madam Minister if she has any 

statistics or percentages as to the history and experience of 

appeals to this point in time. That is, how many appeals have 

traditionally — or at least in percentage terms — how many 

appeals have traditionally been allowed by the Municipal Board 

from local municipalities? 

 

And again, when they take the next step into the courts, how 

many of those appeals have been allowed? Is it a significant 

percentage, or have most appeals been dismissed? Is our history  

  



1298  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

that the bulk of appeals have been dismissed? And again, is 

Madam Minister anticipating any change as a result of going 

into the reassessment here? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: Mr. Chairman, we don’t really have 

the figures that the member is asking for. We’ve got . . . if you 

look in the . . . I’d refer you to the annual report of the 

Municipal Board, which outlines in table form the disposition 

of appeals that come to that level. 

 

But we obviously wouldn’t have any information on how 

appeals are disposed of in the local courts of revision. Because 

most of them, the majority of appeals, would be dealt with at 

that level. The only other information I might be able to offer is 

I’m told that less than 1 per cent of appeals that go to the 

Municipal Board actually made reference to the courts. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, what I was asking though, does the 

Municipal Board, the appeals it hears, how many appeals does 

it allow as opposed to how many appeals does it deny? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that about 25 

per cent of the appeals that come before the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board are allowed. As I mentioned, about 

approximately 1 per cent might make a reference to the courts 

and the balance would be denied or dismissed or withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and thank you to 

your officials for attendance today. I’m satisfied with the 

information you’ve been able to supply. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Good afternoon, Madam Minister, and to 

your officials and the news ones that have shown up as well. 

Dealing with the SMB, (Saskatchewan Municipal Board) to 

what committees of that particular board would this particular 

Bill apply? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this would apply. . . 

this provision would apply to the Assessment Appeals 

Committee. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Having a reduced quorum should obviously 

lead to reduced costs for the boards in terms of board member 

expenses. Given current workloads, how would expenses 

compare for a one-member quorum versus a two-member 

quorum? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve budgeted 

this year $1.193 million compared with a total of $772,000 in 

1995-96. There were also some changes in the year just past. 

And because we had a backlog — there was a backlog of 

appeals to deal with that we wanted to have obviously out of the 

way before the year of reassessment. And I don’t have the 

figures for an individual appeal. It would depend on how far it 

had to travel, how long it had to stay and so on. 

 

But I think that gives you an idea that based on an increase of 

three or four times the current load that this is actually a modest 

increase. So I think it reflects the reduction in the quorum and 

the more efficient approach to deal with appeals. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  A minute or two ago there was a bit of 

discussion on members’ appeals that were passed and the ones 

that were not accepted. Have there been examples in the past 

year where split decisions have been made? Where on a 

particular issue where board members have been split on 

things? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is no record of 

split decisions by members of the Municipal Board Appeals 

Committee. There are no minority reports on file. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I would imagine, though, that in numerous 

cases there would have been quite a discussion on the 

committees between the members as to what the decision 

should be. And that, I think, raises a concern with a one-person 

committee. And my question is: isn’t there a chance of a certain 

amount of arbitrariness on committees if only one member is 

considering the appeal and there isn’t the opportunity for 

discussion, interaction, and a differing point of view? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as we said earlier, that 

the committee would only sit at the discretion of the chairman 

of the Municipal Board if it is seen that the appeal is not 

contentious, that the issue under appeal is straight-forward, and 

that the location of the hearing is remote. So in all other cases 

there would be more than one committee member so that that 

kind of exchange that the member opposite refers to could take 

place. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and to your 

officials. That is the list of questions that I had and I thank you 

for your time. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I thank my officials for 

their assistance and thank the members opposite for their 

questions and their diligence, and I move to report Bill No. 4 of 

1997, An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act be reported 

without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1615) 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and 

Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chair, with me today is Michael 

Jackson, chief protocol officer for Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And just a few 

brief comments this afternoon. We might as well say right at the 

outset that we’re supportive of the government’s attempts here 

to add some clarity to the definitions of honours of the Crown 

and making them consistent with national and international 

usage, and also in being able to facilitate the  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

establishment of medals provincially. 

 

I spoke in second readings rather extensively on the value of 

potash to the province. And certainly we’re supportive of 

recognition of potash as our official emblem mineral in the 

province. 

 

Also just before taking my place, just a brief comment 

concerning the volunteer medal. We’re very appreciative that 

the government is attempting to enhance the status of this 

particular medal by adding the post-nominal letters of the 

designation of SVM (Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal) and 

allowing the usage of that by the volunteer recipients. 

 

We certainly acknowledge the value of volunteerism in the 

province and wholeheartedly recognize those individuals who 

give of their time and efforts. So having said that, I’ll just take 

my place and allow this Bill to proceed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing 

(Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and 

Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of  

committees. I would like to welcome the minister and his 

officials here today, and we might as well carry on where we 

left off yesterday on pay equity. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said you had a committee in place or a group 

that was reviewing pay equity to determine job values. I wonder 

if you could tell us who is on that committee or group, how they 

were chosen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just to share this with the 

member that we have . . . what’s happening, as I was saying 

yesterday, is that we’re developing an entirely new 

classification plan in government across the public service, an 

entirely new job classification plan where we’re going to be 

addressing many of the equities issues that we’ve talked about. 

 

This process is happily being spearheaded by a joint union and 

management committee. So there will be representatives from 

the management side, the Public Service Commission side, and 

representatives from the union side, for the most part, SGEU 

(Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union). That 

committee is working through all of the job classifications. 

 

Now we also have of course some . . . a unit within the Public 

Service Commission, some staff people, who are tasked with 

some of the equity issues and so on. We talked a little bit about 

that yesterday. 

 

But in terms of your question today, how is this being steered 

through? Who’s doing the planning, who’s doing the deciding? 

It is a joint union management committee. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, thank you. Who do you 

have on there from the management side on that particular 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Madam Chair, we don’t have with us the 

names of all the management reps on the committee — it’s 

quite a large committee — but for instance, Mr. Will Loewen, 

who’s with us here today from the PSC (Public Service 

Commission) is on that committee; Mr. Jim Graham from the 

Department of Finance; Mr. Dick Hutchinson from SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). 

 

What we can do for the member’s interest is we can get the 

entire list of the management reps on that committee and send it 

over to the member. It won’t take but a day. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  If you would, please, Mr. Minister. And 

could you please outline why those particular people were 

chosen to be on the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  These will represent, Madam Chair, 

senior management people in the various departments of 

government involved. And they will be chosen for two reasons: 

one, their expertise, which will have come from many years of 

service in the public service; one, their expertise; and two, their 

interest in achieving the same goals that we all share. 

 

(1630) 

 

  



1300  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, once this committee has 

made its deliberations and has come to a decision, will they be 

making a recommendation to someone else on how to 

implement it? Or will their decision be the final arbiter on pay 

equity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to explain to the House this 

afternoon, Madam Chair, the process, the committee of . . . the 

joint management-union committee will be looking at all of the 

job descriptions and describing the new class plan. They would 

then bring that to the Public Sector Bargaining Committee of 

cabinet, who would then recommend it to cabinet for a final 

decision. That would be the process of deciding the job class 

plan. 

 

And then when we begin to look at the financial implications 

and the mandates to meet some of the equity issues within that 

new plan, that same process would follow through again — 

recommendations to the Public Sector Bargaining Committee, 

then to cabinet for ultimate decision, and then ultimately into 

this legislature for debate and to be accountable. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Human 

Rights Commission has brought forward a series of 

controversial recommendations calling for your government to 

pass legislation requiring all companies with more than a 

hundred employees to adopt hiring quotas for women, 

aboriginals, visible minorities, and people with disabilities. 

Have you studied this type of affirmative action in other 

jurisdictions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Madam Chair, we had some discussion 

yesterday between the member from Thunder Creek and myself 

around the issue of setting targets within government for equity 

representation of the broad, general Saskatchewan public in the 

workforce it serves and through their government. 

 

We have worked with the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission and the commission has set out for us some goals, 

some benchmarks that we would try to achieve. Just for the 

member’s information, I can repeat those benchmarks as they 

have been established for us by the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Commission. 

 

So our goal in terms of employment in the public service in 

Saskatchewan: persons of aboriginal ancestry, 12.2 per cent — 

that’s our benchmark goal there; persons with disabilities, 9.7 

per cent; members of visible minority groups, 5.1 per cent; 

women in management, 45 per cent; and women in 

non-traditional occupations, 45 per cent. 

 

And so this is the approach that we’ve adopted as a government 

with goals set for and with us by the Human Rights 

Commission. And through the various processes of hiring, 

career planning, and so on, we’re endeavouring to meet those 

goals. And over the last number of years, we’ve shown 

progress. We’ve not reached the goals yet. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. These goals 

— will they apply just to government structure or will they 

apply to government-funded organizations also? Just to whom  

will this apply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair . . . or Madam Chair, in terms 

of these numbers that I’ve just identified, these are numbers 

established for us by the Human Rights Commission for the 

government, for government proper. 

 

Now many other employers in the province, in our community, 

will also have set some — in reference to the Human Rights 

Commission, their own goals. 

 

So it’s not just happening in government; it’s happening beyond 

government. But the numbers that I’ve given you are those 

goals set for government, the goals we’re trying to achieve, and 

they will be more or less representative of the demographics in 

the province. So that if our goal, for instance, in equity of 

people of aboriginal ancestry is 12.2 per cent, that more or less 

represents the population of aboriginal ancestry in the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well what I was asking though, Mr. 

Minister, was whether or not other government-funded 

organizations would be asked to meet these quotas, such as 

education and health, where the vast majority of their monies 

comes from government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Madam Chair, maybe the issue 

that the member would like to address is the question of, are we 

imposing these on funded agencies and so on, and the answer is 

no. We do not impose those kind of same benchmarks on 

funded agencies of government, or third parties and so on. 

 

But many of these agencies . . . Because these figures do reflect 

the demographics of our province, we know that many of these 

agencies are working with these same kind of benchmark 

targets as we are in government proper. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the reason I ask, Mr. Minister, 

because in discussions last year, I believe it was, and perhaps 

the year before, with the Minister of Education, she was moving 

in this direction within the high school system of trying to bring 

more women into the classroom. And I’m not sure that she had 

a quota in mind, but just to raise those levels. And I’m just 

wondering if this is part of this type of a recommendation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. And I think what we see happening 

in our province these days is that many employers — in fact 

what I would say is I think most responsible employers, 

whether they’re publicly funded or private sector — have set for 

themselves, maybe not as clearly stated as this, but some goals 

to improve the equity representation in their workplace. That’s 

the appropriate thing to do in terms of the delivery of public 

services, and I think I would argue that’s the appropriate and 

right thing to do in the private sector. So we’ve seen that kind 

of thing at school boards. School divisions are looking at these 

issues to be sure that their teaching staff, for instance, is 

representative of their student body. 

 

So we’re seeing it happen. But again, to repeat, it’s not 

something that government has or is contemplating imposing on 

our third-party, our funded agencies. 

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So, Mr. Minister, you believe then that 

government agencies and the government-funded agencies, 

either voluntarily or through mandate within government, 

should move towards gender equity based on population levels? 

The same with aboriginal content; same with disabilities? 

Across the board, that there should be equity based basically on 

your percentages within society and population? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. Essentially, yes. Essentially my 

answer to the member’s question would be yes. I as an 

individual citizen of the province would encourage that within 

our province without a doubt. 

 

The member will know that the motto of the province of 

Saskatchewan is “From Many Peoples Strength.” That’s always 

been the strength of our province — recognizing, I think, the 

diversity of our people. And as that diversity is reflected in our 

public institutions and our private businesses in our 

communities, that’s to our strength. 

 

And in some ways . . . I believe it fair to say that in some ways 

the private sector, or some elements of the private sector, have 

moved ahead of the public sector in achieving some of these . . . 

achieving that kind of diversity in their workplace. I’m not one 

who often stands up and gives kudos to the chartered banks, but 

I think this is one area where the chartered banks have shown 

some real leadership, not only in our province but in our 

country. 

 

So to go back to the member’s question, absolutely yes. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I’m 

surprised that you agree with the Human Rights Commission’s 

report because no place in there does it state anything about the 

male quotas. No place does it say that you should have 

approximately 45 per cent — which is the government’s 

number — of men in a position. 

 

And I’ll give you an example. Within the elementary school 

system in this province, there is a very high percentage of 

women and a very low percentage of men in those positions. 

Now are you suggesting that within the elementary school 

system in this province, that we should be having more men to 

bring them up to a 45 per cent quota? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Madam Chair, I think the member knows 

before asking the question that the reason that we have these 

kind of programs, the equity programs, is to attend to the 

imbalance which has existed. And the imbalance in our public 

employment sector, in the private sector, the imbalance has 

been overall that women, people with disabilities, people of 

aboriginal ancestry, have been under-represented in those 

sectors overall. 

 

When the member takes out a portion of the K to 12 system and 

recognizes that there in fact may be the imbalance on the other 

side, where there have been traditionally more women involved 

in elementary education, I know my own school district is 

sensitive to that and there is good reason to have some balance 

in the classroom at the elementary level. But this is not what 

we’re here discussing when we talk about equity generally in  

the public service or in the private sector. 

 

Equity intends to deal with that recognized imbalance that 

everyone in the world recognizes: the imbalance that has left 

women out of management positions; that has left aboriginal 

peoples out of employment and out of management positions; 

that has left people with disabilities out of employment and 

management positions — that’s what these equity programs are 

trying to deal with. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I mentioned 

previously discussing this with the Minister of Education. At 

that particular point in time, she suggested there was an 

imbalance in the high school system, that there were too many 

males and not enough females, and that there needed to be some 

affirmative action to change that. 

 

If that applies to the high school system, then surely it should 

also apply to the elementary school system where the imbalance 

is the other way around. If one is out of balance, then the other 

is out of balance also, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Madam Chair, this is the . . . This I 

thought was the estimates for the Public Service Commission. If 

the member has a particular concern about the balance or 

imbalance of male and female teachers either in his own home 

school or in his own home school district, or he has that 

observation generally in education, I think that’s a fair 

discussion he might want to have with, either with the Minister 

of Education or with the education officials in his own 

community. 

 

We’re not here — when we’re talking about equity — we’re not 

here talking about that kind of specific issue. We’re talking 

about generally in the public service of Saskatchewan, we have 

known and observed that women have been under-represented, 

particularly in management; that people of aboriginal ancestry 

have been under-represented in our workforce and in its 

management; and that people with disabilities have been 

under-represented. And this is indeed what we’re attending to 

through this equity initiative. 

 

If the member’s got some complaint about what’s happening in 

his school district or in the schools of Saskatchewan, well he 

can raise the complaint, fair enough. But it’s an interesting 

place to do it when we’re debating the estimates for the Public 

Service Commission. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, your department is 

the one that’s trying to push pay equity, that’s trying to push 

quotas on the government in general, and recommending to the 

other government structures that they move in that direction. 

And yet you seem to be extremely defensive when I point out 

an area where it’s in reverse to what you are promoting. You 

seem to want to deny that it even exists, Mr. Minister. You say, 

well maybe it’s just in my school. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you know very well that it goes across the 

whole province that the elementary school system has a high 

preponderance of female teachers, just as the high school 

system has a high preponderance of male teachers. I don’t deny  

  



1302  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

either one of them 

 

And yet if you’re going to base quotas on each of those areas, if 

you’re going to base quotas on every government structure, 

then you have to be prepared to look at all of them and not just 

a few picked . . . selected few that prove your point. Because, 

Mr. Minister, there are others that prove the other argument — 

that if you’re going to have equality based on gender in 

government, you have to do it equally across the board. 

 

Another area is nursing where there is a high preponderance of 

females in nursing with a few males. Are you prepared to put 

quotas in that one, Mr. Minister, to say that you have to have 45 

per cent men in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well let’s be clear, Madam Chair. I want 

to repeat again that we have not established quotas —we’ve not 

established quotas. Now it’s an interesting thing that I . . . that 

the member today comes into the House and I get the feeling he 

is pushing us to establish just such quotas and impose them. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It came from me. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I see it. It came from the member who 

seated behind him this afternoon. 

 

Now I detect he is pushing. Now I happen to, I think, share 

some of his view here that yes, I believe it is appropriate that 

we should encourage more male teachers in our elementary 

school system, just as we should be encouraging more female 

administrators in government. Fair enough. 

 

It would be, I think, great if more men studied the nursing 

profession and offered their skills and their talents in the 

nursing profession. I think that would be great. 

 

We’ve taken the point of the view in the Public Service 

Commission that within government we would again, working 

with the Human Rights Commission, establish some 

benchmarks that we believe are appropriate for government. 

 

Now if the member . . . I just need to ask him this. Is he today 

suggesting, as I think he is, that we should now establish, in his 

word, quotas, and impose them on the school districts and the 

schools of Saskatchewan and impose them on the hospitals and 

health districts of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Chair, I’d like to know. Is the member now suggesting that 

this is what we should ought to do? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, that’s what you 

yourself were suggesting yesterday; that you had a 45 per cent 

quota for women in these areas. When I wanted to talk about 

equal pay for work of equal value, you kept saying, well we 

know that we need 45 per cent women in management. It was 

you, Mr. Minister, who kept shifting . . . trying to shift the 

arguments at that particular point in time away from work of 

equal value to the quota system. And today you’re trying to 

shift it some place else again. 

So, Mr. Minister, you’re the one who doesn’t want to answer 

the questions because you want to pick certain areas that suit 

your political purpose, rather than being fair and equal to 

everyone across the board. Recommendations, Mr. Minister, are 

a big difference from quotas and you were the one yesterday 

talking about quotas — a 45 per cent quota. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think you need to go back to the drawing 

board on this particular issue and take a very serious look at 

where you’re going, and that it be fair and equal for everyone 

not just a select few. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to move to a different area of the PSC. I 

believe it’s the PSC’s responsibility to hire people to work 

within the government structure and to do so, again, in a fair 

and equitable manner; that they be hired based on qualifications 

to suit the particular job that you have advertised for. Is that the 

case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I’m not going to abandon our earlier 

discussion just for a moment. I would invite the member to 

either get the Hansard from yesterday that I believe is in his 

book, or turn on his Internet, and he will understand that neither 

yesterday nor today nor ever have we in these discussions 

talked about quotas. That’s the idea of the member that’s doing 

the questioning here. That’s the idea of the third party here that 

we should ought to have quotas. We never talked about quotas. 

We’ve talked about setting goals. 

 

And the member unfortunately seems to want to mix up the 

discussion between employment equity and pay equity, or equal 

pay for work of equal value. Now if he wants to have another 

long discussion about that, we can do that. But he should not 

mix them in this such a fashion and then suggest that we’re 

talking about quotas when it’s he who is talking about quotas. 

 

Now in answer to the next question. He is, in fact, correct that it 

is the role of the Public Service Commission to assist 

departments in hiring. The departments themselves will actually 

do the hiring for the vast majority of positions. 

 

It is the role of the Public Service Commission to ensure that 

standards are met in the hiring procedures, to do the kind of 

career ads that we see and advertising those positions and so on. 

But the departments themselves will actually do the hiring — 

the Public Service Commission serves as the vehicle to assist. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I clearly 

remember when I was asking you the questions yesterday about 

equal work of equal value. You kept shifting over to the number 

of women that you wanted in management positions. It was 

you, Mr. Minister, who kept trying to shift the discussion. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, yesterday you informed the member from 

Thunder Creek that you had income of approximately 

$357,000, I believe, that came from advertisements you had 

done for other departments, and they paid for those ads — is 

that correct? Okay, the minister nods yes. Mr. Minister, who did 

you do those advertisements with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I’m wondering, Mr. Chair, if I could ask  

  



May 1, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

the member to clarify the question. Is he interested to know 

where the ads are placed, in which media vehicles? Or in the 

process by which . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Process by 

which it’s done, which would be our advertising agency. 

 

The agency who does this on behalf of the Public Service 

Commission is Turner-Warwick. Those ads will be placed in 

the Leader-Post; you’ll see them in the Star-Phoenix, 

Times-Herald, some of the dailies, a few of the weeklies and so 

on. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Was this advertising tendered out? How 

did they become your agency of record? I’m not sure that’s the 

proper word for them, but how did you acquire 

Turner-Warwick as your advertising agency? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, it’s always tendered. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. I’d like to 

ask about a particular position that was filled and that is the 

local government elections office. Was that particular position 

advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we think the position that the 

member’s talking about is not a position that’s in the regular 

classified service and therefore is not the responsibility of the 

PSC. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. That 

position does report to Executive Council so perhaps it’s not a 

PSC position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  If, Mr. Chair, if the position is in the 

unclassified service, then it is not the responsibility of the 

Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. Do you 

deal with ministerial assistants with the Public Service 

Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The answer is no, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well if you keep giving me answers like 

that, we’ll be through this quickly. 

 

How about positions such as STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) presidents or deputy ministers — are 

those positions through PSC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 33 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  The next item of business before the committee 

is Intergovernmental Affairs. Before we move to that, I 

recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. I apologize. I wanted to take just an 

opportunity to both thank the members of the opposition and 

third party, whose questions I think informed the debate — I 

appreciate their questions — and to say a special word of thanks 

to the officials from the Public Service Commission who’ve 

joined us in these estimates, but not only for the time they’ve 

spent in the estimates but indeed in the days and weeks and 

months that they serve us all year-round. And the people of 

Saskatchewan, in my view, are very well served by our Public 

Service Commission. So thanks to them and thanks to the 

opposition members. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 

also like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in 

today and yesterday and answering our questions. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  And also thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And 

a thanks to the minister and to his officials for having been so 

diligent in answering our questions yesterday and today. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental Affairs 

Vote 30 

 

The Chair:  I’ll invite the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, if I could, Mr. Chairman. With 

us today we have the deputy minister, Mr. Paul Osborne, who’s 

seated to my right; and directly behind me Bob Hersche, the 

senior policy adviser, telecommunications and broadcasting; 

and seated to my right and behind me is Melinda Gorrill, the 

director of administration. 

 

What I might add too, Mr. Chair, if the committee would allow, 

I have a short message from the minister in charge of 

Intergovernmental Affairs, who you know has had some 

surgery recently in eastern Canada. And I just report, having 

just talked to him a short time ago, that he has started his 

physiotherapy, doing well, and he passes on, as you might 

know, his best wishes to all members of the committee and 

public who may be watching. So I just wanted to relay that 

message from him. 

 

The Chair:  I thank the minister for that message, and it’s 

inappropriate for the Chair to comment, but I do appreciate his 

best wishes. And certainly our prayers are with the minister as 

he recovers. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And we do also 

send out our best wishes to the Minister of Intergovernmental  

  



1304  Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 1997 

Affairs and certainly hope for a speedy recovery. 

 

I would like to just welcome the Deputy Premier here this 

afternoon with the officials from Intergovernmental Affairs. I 

just believe we don’t have too much time here this afternoon 

that we can really get into too much. 

 

But when I’m looking over the summary here of expenses, I see 

a number of increases here, I think something in the total of 

$350,000 overall. And the branches, or the subvotes of the 

department here that are getting increases are accommodation 

and central services, protocol office, the federal-provincial 

relations, constitutional relations, trade and policy, 

telecommunications and broadcasting policy. 

 

I certainly, on another occasion I want to get into the matter of 

the constitutional relations. I see a substantial increase there; 

well something in the order of 60 or maybe 70 per cent, to 

$327,000 for ’97-98. 

 

(1700) 

 

But before I get into that, I’d like to just ask, with respect to 

accommodation and central services, I see that there is, as I say, 

an increase in spending there. And I’d just like to know if the 

department has acquired some additional office space or what 

new initiatives have you undertaken that would justify some 

increase in spending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the member is correct. I think 

overall the department budget has increased by 353,000 or 

about 8.4 per cent overall which, in comparison to other 

departments, is a bit higher. 

 

But on the other hand, I think if you look at the areas were 

we’ve increased . . . The Office of the Lieutenant Governor, for 

example, had an increase of 10 per cent. But when you look 

back, it hasn’t had an increase since 1992. So you’re really 

talking about 2 or less than a 2 per cent increase per annum over 

that period of time. And of course the Lieutenant Governor, 

who you know is a very busy individual and a very proactive 

Lieutenant Governor, I think it’s important that we maintain his 

travel and sustenance and those things that go with the office. 

 

The other area that there is a considerable increase is in the 

constitutional branch, as you’ve identified. And I might say that 

in large part that’s as a result of the filling of two vacant 

positions that have been vacant for some time. As we approach 

the next Quebec election — we think probably less than a year 

from now or about a year from now — we think that whole 

issue of constitutional . . . the constitutional issue will rise on 

the agenda. And we want to be sure we have staffed up for the 

likely debate and responses that we will have to give on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And that alone, filling those two 

positions, increases the spending in the constitutional branch 

quite considerably. 

 

The other area, of course, is in the trade policy branch where 

there was a transfer to this department. And because of the 

importance of trade and trade policy, we’re putting some extra  

money into there. 

 

There’s other areas as well. But I say to the member these are 

very, very important areas as it relates to the whole debate of 

how provincial governments relate to their federal counterpart, 

and so some areas needed to be beefed up. With the extra 

money that we’re getting as a result of some of the oil and gas 

and resource revenue that we’ll be able to generate and some of 

the turnaround in the economy that have given us a bit . . . extra 

revenue, this is one of the areas that we thought it important to 

place some emphasis. Because we . . . well we went through the 

squeeze when we were balancing the budget in the province. 

This is one of the areas we had held back. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, if we could just turn to the 

protocol office for a moment. I noted there was some increase 

there and I was wondering if you could give us an overview . . . 

or perhaps preferably a list of perhaps foreign dignitaries, 

representative of the royal family who might be visiting our 

province within this next fiscal year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The way it works — and I’m 

learning this as I go as well, so you have to be patient with me 

— but the fact of the matter is that we don’t go out and seek 

individuals, or those kind of dignitaries, to come. Once they 

indicate that they’re interested in coming here, then we work 

very closely with them. But at this point in time we don’t have 

any such list. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:09 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1275 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1275 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1275 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1275 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1275 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1275 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1287 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1294 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Letter from Bombardier 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1275 

 Saskatoon Low Income Housing Project 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1276 

 Winning Students from Englefeld School 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1276 

 Donations to Manitoba Flood Victims 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1276 

 Ready for Work Program 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1276 

 International Working Persons Day of Recognition 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1277 

 Agricultural Sciences Month 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1277 

 Passing of Herbert Sims 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1277 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Local Telephone Service Competition 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1277 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1278 

 Income Tax Surcharges 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1279 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1279 

 School Closures 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

 Auto Theft Claims 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

 Metis Hunting Rights 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

 Education Funding 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 JobStart/Future Skills Expansion 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1282 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1283 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1283 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence for The Speaker to attend Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Seminar 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1283 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 53 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1284 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1284 



 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1284 

 Bill No. 54 — The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (No. 2) 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1285 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1285 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 

  Romanow ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1286, 1287 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1291 

 Bill No. 9 — The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 ........................................................................................................ 1292 

 Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 1997............................................................. 1292 

 Bill No. 32 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 1997 .............................................................. 1292 

 Bill No. 33 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à certaines lois ........................................................................................................................................................ 1292 

 Bill No. 50 — The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 .............................................................................. 1292 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1292 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 27  The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1294 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1295 

 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1296 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1298 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 27 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

 Bill No. 19 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Public Service Commission  Vote 33 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1299 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Public Service Commission  Vote 33 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Intergovernmental Affairs  Vote 30 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1303 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1303 

 


