



















































Hansard: April 29, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1231 

 April 29, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I have with me to 

assist me Mr. Graham McNamee, the chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, on my left. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Madam Minister. 

I’d like to welcome your official here tonight. As we’ve already 

had a round at this once before, I only have a couple of 

questions left to ask on this subject. The one question, Madam 

Minister, that I would like to start with is to do with the 

Municipal Boundary Committee. And how many municipal 

amalgamation proposals did the Municipal Boundary 

Committee review in ’96 and again and so far in ’97? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer is none. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I’ll get straight to the point. I guess this 

question then is quite appropriate. Are you satisfied with the 

rate of voluntary amalgamation to this point? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

would be yes. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, I’m totally confused. Last 

year, as you know, we had the service districts Act up and I 

think myself and probably about 298 RMs (rural municipality) 

felt that that was forcing amalgamation on them. Did you not 

feel at that point, and I think why you had the memorandum of 

understanding out there, was that . . . And I did myself. I felt 

that in some cases this might start to happen on its own. In fact I 

think I mentioned that a number of times, that I felt some of 

these things would happen. I know in my area, especially with 

the village and the RM, have already joined in the case of 

Wroxton and the RM of Calder. And I applaud that, because I 

think we all gained from that situation where a village gets so 

small that they’re not viable on their own but with the RM . . . 

and if they can come to an agreement it’s a great thing. 

 

In that respect, that we’ve had actually though, none apply to 

this point, do you have any intention to introducing legislation 

similar to the service districts Act or are you thinking of 

introducing something a little different but to the same end? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question that the member poses, we agree on this point — that 

any sort of reorganization incentive should come from the local 

level. Because the local people understand best their trading 

patterns, the affiliations that make the most practical sense, and  

we have the highest level of confidence in local governments to 

make those determinations. 

 

The member opposite refers to Wroxton-Calder, and I would 

refer also to Mikado-Canora, I believe was the rural 

municipality, where voluntary reversions have taken place of 

villages that have reduced in population who are obtaining most 

of their local services from the rural municipality in which 

they’re located. There’s a good sense of cooperation and 

community amongst them and they have voluntarily made these 

decisions. 

 

We think that that’s the way that the evolution of the rural 

landscape in Saskatchewan, as inevitable as it may be and has 

always been, should occur — quite unlike for instance the 

situation in Ontario where they’re going ahead and unilaterally 

amalgamating, well first of all the city of Toronto, and more 

recently 22 rural and small urban municipalities in Ontario. 

 

We don’t agree with that approach. What we have done and will 

soon be in a position to — if we haven’t announced it already 

. . . is a transition fund which will allow municipalities a 

financial incentive if they wish to take the initiative at the local 

level to form more effective local governance units. But we 

have no intention ever, or at this point, in forcing that kind of 

unions because we know that people at the local level know 

best what is the most practical unit of government for 

themselves. And there is no guru in Regina or anywhere else 

that could do a better job of realigning local governments in 

Saskatchewan than local governments can do themselves. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I’m very 

glad to hear that because I think your past experience as a reeve 

and I know mine as being a councillor and a reeve . . . What 

scares me the most is I think that at some point, if a government 

thinks it knows best and decides that eight RMs could be more 

efficient if they joined together or were forced to join together, 

because I know that’s the only way that’s going to happen, I 

cannot see — and I’m sure you’ve heard me say this before — 

where there is a money saving to start with. 

 

I don’t believe it’s there because I believe what we would create 

is a bureaucracy that — and, Madam Minister, as you know 

how the bureaucracy goes but it has a tendency to grow and 

grow and grow beyond what we can control — end up costing 

us more money and really we lose that answerability that we 

have now where we can phone our councillor or reeve and have 

a problem looked at very quickly. That wouldn’t be happening 

in what I’m talking about. So I’m very glad to hear what you’re 

saying tonight and I would hope that your government would 

stick by that. 

 

As far as setting up a fund for assisting amalgamations, I also 

agree with that and I think that would be the right way to go. I 

think we’re going to see more and more of it with our small 

villages happening as time goes on, that they cannot afford to 

function on their own. And I think that assistance is greatly 

needed out there. 

 

So, Madam Minister, with the answers I’ve got tonight, I’m  

  



1232  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

very pleased to hear that. And hopefully we can both keep 

agreeing on what . . . the process that we’re taking. So with that 

I’ll pass it over to the members of the third party. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The point that I . . . (inaudible) . . . 

this is that the only time that these issues would come before 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, which we’re considering 

tonight, is if there is a dispute. So where these reversions or 

movements are voluntary, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

would not be involved. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. You started off this evening, 

Madam Minister, with some short answers, so I’ll start off with 

a short question. 

 

What exactly does your department do? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, maybe I could ask 

which part of my department the member refers to. It’s a very 

interesting and multifaceted department and portfolio. Being 

called the Department of Municipal Government, one of the 

prime functions is to establish a framework to enable local 

governments, rural and urban, to function. 

 

It gives force . . . our umbrella legislation gives force to their 

bylaws. It gives force to the framework of legislation that they 

voluntarily adopt for themselves. It does do some things to 

provide uniformity, such as to provide uniform dates for 

assessment rolls to open; uniform dates for reporting financials; 

uniform dates for the fiscal year of municipalities rather than 

having it all over the calendar. The municipal calendar year 

ends at December 31 and so on, as the member will be aware 

from his experience in Saskatchewan local government, which I 

certainly respect. 

 

On the other hand we also have responsibility for public safety, 

which relates also to municipalities in terms of the operations of 

fire departments, building codes, elevator standards — you 

know how our lives go up and down, and my name is in all the 

elevators and sometimes we’re up and sometimes we’re down. 

And then there is the cultural division, recreation and culture, 

which takes in the scope of the lotteries, the Western Canada 

Lottery Corporation, and all of the community-based groups — 

12,000 in fact — which are funded by the lotteries. 

 

There’s also housing. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

falls under the purview of the Department of Municipal 

Government. The emergency — Saskatchewan emergency 

program and preparedness, the emergency measures 

organizations, the responses to flooding and emergency of all 

sorts, which is why the development of the potential 911 service 

across Saskatchewan is housed in that department. 

 

The Chair:  Can I bring the committee to order? In listening 

to the questions and to the answers, I must remind the minister 

and the members that we are not on Municipal Government. We 

are on Saskatchewan Municipal Board only. So if that’s . . . 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Just as a point of clarification, is that 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board plays a very important role 

at the centre of a number of these activities, being the body  

which hears appeals to the regulations that are made to planning 

and development issues; to boundary issues, which relates to 

municipal organization; to tax appeals, which is a fundamental 

part of financing a municipal government at all levels, 

municipal and education. 

 

So these things may seem to be diverse, Mr. Chairman, but 

they’re very clearly integrated in many ways with the 

operations of communities. And certainly the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board, in many instances, is an arbiter when 

agreement cannot be reached in taxation issues, in boundary 

issues, and in planning and development issues, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  If a municipality, town, or RM ends up in 

financial trouble, obviously at some point government steps in 

and sort of takes over. Is that part of the responsibility of the 

Municipal Board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, yes. The answer to that 

question that the member opposite poses is yes. And also not 

only when municipalities get into trouble, but before the fact, 

when municipalities wish to make long-term . . . As the member 

opposite knows and is familiar with, municipalities have to 

operate on a budgeted balance. They’re not permitted to go into 

deficits on an annual operating basis. 

 

So when they wish to make long-term investments such as 

buying equipment over a long period of time, building buildings 

over a long period of time, issuing debentures to make 

long-term investments that extend beyond the year under 

review — the Saskatchewan Municipal Board is involved in all 

of those issues and approves, before the fact, the plans that 

municipalities have to make in these areas. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  From time to time there are towns and RMs 

that do run into financial trouble and I’m wondering, this past 

year, how many towns and RMs are in that situation where the 

province has had to sort of step in and take over control of their 

finances? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that at this 

particular time there is only one village in the province that is 

under, what we call legally, the supervision of the Municipal 

Board because of its financial circumstances. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Has that community been in that situation for 

quite some period of time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question would be approximately for a three-year period. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Recently Dickson Bailey was appointed to 

the local government elections office, and you’ve expanded that 

office. Is that covered under the Municipal Board or under the 

Department of Municipal Government? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the response to that 

would be really neither. 

 

(1915) 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

Mr. Heppner:  Next question: where is he then? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is . . . the electoral 

officer is an officer who reports directly to Executive Council, 

and in that sense is somewhat independent. And certainly 

departments of government would have input, such as the rural 

and urban Act, as you know, have provisions for rural elections 

and urban elections. 

 

The Health Districts Act has implications for elections in health 

districts. The school boards, of course, have their own regime. 

But if there’s to be coordination between them and the 

provincial and federal levels, then the elections officer, 

appointed provincially, has a role in coordinating and 

supervising all of those. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I guess I’ll have to assume from that answer 

that he’s under the direction of the Premier at that point, 

because that’s about the only one that’s left out there. 

 

There’s been a cut-back to municipal service as implemented in 

spite of the fact that the board, I believe, ran over its budget in 

the ‘95-96 year. That seems to indicate, if they ran over budget, 

that there is a workload that demands more funding, not less. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would ask the 

member opposite for some clarification of that because in our 

figures we don’t have any indication that the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board has ever operated beyond the budgeted 

figures. 

 

There was an expansion of the budget of 1996-97 over the 

previous year of ‘95-96 to allow for what was anticipated as 

additional appeals and additional activity in disposing of a 

backlog of appeals that existed at that time. But I don’t have 

any figures with me and certainly would refute the assertion of 

the member opposite that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

has in recent years, that I have figures for, ever operated beyond 

the budgetary allowance that was allotted to them. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Interesting 

conclusion that they didn’t run over budget. The amount of 

money allotted or given to them was just expanded, which 

comes out to much the same sort of thing. But I guess that’s a 

matter of semantics. 

 

Another of the board’s priority plans last year was to reduce 

backlog of assessment appeals, and I’m wondering has that 

been taken care of, and to what degree has that been covered? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the 

number of appeals under review has been reduced dramatically 

to approximately 200 but none of those are actually in arrears. 

Of that number, they are either all scheduled to be heard, or 

they have been heard and a decision is in the process of being 

rendered. 

 

So in terms of a backlog there really isn’t one at this point. And 

this was the reason that the budget was consciously, ahead of 

time, increased because there did exist a period ago some 

backlog of appeals. It was desired to be dealt with those before  

reassessment occurred, and a number of anticipated new 

appeals as result of reassessment happened. 

 

So I would . . . my assessment of the situation would be now 

that the workload of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board is very 

well in hand, and that the increases in the budget that were 

approved in advance of the workload have been dealt with. And 

the number of additional employees, additional appeals officers 

appointed, have dealt with the backlog and are in a good 

position to deal with the challenges of the immediate future as 

appeals may increase due to reassessment. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. As we know, even though local 

governments are not allowed to operate on a deficit thing, they 

still do incur debt for projects and this sort of thing. I would like 

for you to comment on the total size of local debt that’s out 

there and to what extent it’s been growing or decreasing. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would refer the 

member to the annual report of the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board on page 18 wherein it shows that there are three types of 

debt classified that municipalities have incurred over the terms, 

and they’re for infrastructure, buildings, and machinery and 

equipment. And the chart shows a progression from 1989 to 

1996. 

 

It shows in 1996, particularly infrastructure debt-related at a 

peak, and then probably partly due to the participation of the 

three levels of government in infrastructure projects over the 

last two years, that has been reduced in 1996 to a very minimal 

amount. In fact graphically, it hardly shows. So there is very 

little long-term debt that has been approved by the Municipal 

Board at the current time. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And one last question for this 

evening. The recent changes to The Condominium Property Act 

. . . or how will those changes affect the budget for that 

committee in the coming year? And also will that committee be 

responsible for establishing the proposed condominium 

property registry? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s anticipated that 

there will be some increase as we go to the changes in 

reassessment and so forth because one of the things that . . . or 

the types of appeals that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

entertains is the assignment of unit factors in condominium 

developments. 

 

And as the member opposite and we all know, that the rules and 

regulations and the whole regime surrounding the development 

of condominiums of every sort — be they townhouses, 

apartments, grain condominiums — are relatively new in 

Saskatchewan, and I think we’re still all working our way 

through this. So there will be some appeals anticipated by the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board in this area. 

 

But I think they’re well equipped to deal with them, and as the 

condominium concept matures in Saskatchewan, that everyone 

will find a greater level of comfort with their situation and with 

the results that the appeals board renders. 

 

  



1234  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  If I could, this being the second 

session that the chairman of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

has attended to answer questions, I’d like to thank Mr. 

McNamee for making himself available to us. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And welcome, 

Madam Minister, and since I know both of your officials, I’d 

like to welcome both of them too, Ms. Rafter and Ms. Senecal. 

 

This evening, because we have had the opportunity last year to 

go over a number of the basic reasons why the secretariat is 

here, I think we’ll just get right into the main questions today. 

 

I know that the secretariat has a huge mandate and very 

minimal resources and I know that there’s a controversy on the 

value of the secretariat because of what . . . the amount of 

money that you do have. 

 

Before we talk about funding though, I was interested to read 

some of the material that was given to us on the economic 

status of women, and I have some questions on this if that’s 

permissible. 

 

One of the first questions I have is on page 2 where they talk 

about earnings of women and men by marital status. And I’m 

just wondering if you can comment, if somebody can tell me 

why marriage has a negative impact on women’s earnings and 

marriage has a positive influence on men’s income 

employment. Could you make a statement on that? 

 

The Chair:  Before the minister answers, if I could get her to 

introduce her officials before she answers, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, I’m pleased that you’ve done your 

homework and know who the officials are, but just for the 

record, Faye Rafter, the executive co-ordinator, and Cheryl 

Senecal, education officer with the Women’s Secretariat. 

 

I think rather than just venturing an opinion on that, what we 

have here is a piece of information that identifies a situation, 

and you’d really need to do follow-up research to get into any 

depth about the reasons why that is. I think we could all 

speculate about what it has to do with child rearing and what it 

has to do with a family deciding that one person will be the 

primary wage earner and the other person more of a support 

person in the relationship. 

 

But rather than speculate too much, I would have to say that this 

is very, for this area, this is fairly leading-edge, comprehensive 

overview research. And then if people found that the findings 

caused you to ask further questions, there would then need to be 

more depth gone into in the research to  

really flesh out what these indicators are pointing to as far as 

things we should be paying attention to. But I wouldn’t want to 

speculate too much without having . . . doing some specific 

research on that question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the other 

paragraphs that I found very interesting was, you talked about 

in 1977, one-third of Saskatchewan women with children under 

the age of three were in the paid labour force, and by 1995 this 

figure had increased to 62 per cent. 

 

That leads me to believe that there are, of course, a number of 

women who are going to have problems with day cares or the 

lack of day cares. And I’m wondering if the secretariat has been 

putting pressure on the government or what you’ve been doing 

towards this very important problem of raising or looking after 

our children. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I almost feel bad doing this because 

we’re on such a cooperative footing here, but of course one of 

the promises in the “red book” was child care. And one of the 

difficulties was with the way that that promise was carried 

forward; that the money would only be made available if the 

province could match the dollars. Now at the particular time 

when that offer was made we just did not have the money to do 

that. 

 

However, we have added child care initiatives. In the past five 

budget years 3.7 million has been spent on enhancements to 

child care, and we’ve also enhanced 500,000 in one budget year 

and then another 500,000 committed to wage enhancements for 

people working in the child care area. Three infant-teen centres 

are being developed with 18 new spaces, and there’s been an 

increase in the per child grant, as well as another million in 

child care capital grants. 

 

Now I don’t think that begins to even hit the tip of the iceberg 

as far as child care is concerned. And I’m hoping that women 

will continue to use both elections and in-between elections to 

raise the need for a little more attention yet to this area because 

I think it is really important. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, can you tell me, of that 

funding, how much of it has been spent in rural areas, meaning 

outside of Saskatoon and Regina? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That kind of a detailed question you’d 

have to ask to the minister responsible for child care, and that 

would be the Minister of Social Services. We don’t have that 

kind of detail about another department’s programing. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I also found it interesting to 

read that one quarter of self-employed people in this province 

are women. I’m wondering how that stacks up to other 

provinces. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Can you repeat that question? 

 

Ms. Draude:  One quarter of the self-employed people in the  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

province are women. It talked about it, I think on page 10 of 

this brochure. I’m wondering if that is a sort of norm number 

across Canada or does Saskatchewan have a higher level of 

people that are self-employed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We were just discussing what’s 

happening across Canada. We believe the figures are 

comparable across different jurisdictions, although we only 

actually compared to one or two other jurisdictions that we have 

figures for. 

 

But what we do know is that most of the front-end growth in 

home businesses is women. Women are increasingly — more 

than men are — choosing this as an option to gain a little more 

control over their work, and also to be the boss. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So, Madam Minister, can you tell me, is there 

something, is there something that the secretariat is doing to 

encourage self-employment by women? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We do cooperate with organizations 

like the Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. And I will 

mention that one of the purposes of the Internet project that 

we’ll be having in this year is to assist women in rural, isolated, 

and urban areas to understand how to use the Internet for 

economic development purposes, to set up home pages to do 

marketing. 

 

I think it’s something like 8 billion — I’m a little bit cautious 

about venturing a figure — sales in the United States are now 

through the Internet and so this is a very growing area of sales 

for home businesses, and I think a good marketing tool for a lot 

of the small enterprises in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I’m looking forward to 

getting into a discussion with you on the increased funding that 

you have for this training — Internet, or whatever it may be. I 

just have a couple of other questions before we get into that. 

 

One of them is rural women. In your information you talk about 

rural women earning significantly less than women in larger 

urban centres, and 88 per cent of rural women had incomes 

below $20,000. Now as the secretariat, you have the 

responsibility to all the women in the province and I’m 

wondering what, if anything, is being done to address the 

unique problems? 

 

You’re probably going to come at me with your Internet thing, 

but I’m just wondering if there was anything that is specifically 

being done for rural people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ll just start going through this. I’m 

having a whole range of things here. I presume you’re wanting 

a range of responses — everything from child care to other 

types of initiatives. 

 

One of the things is the Internet but we’ve mentioned that. 

We’ll get into that later. The SCN (Saskatchewan 

Communications Network Corporation) operates two television 

networks that offer rural women opportunity to increase skills 

or further education in their own home or at learning centres. 

 

The SCN’s training network delivers distance education and 

career training, including high school and post-secondary credit 

classes, to more than 130 Saskatchewan communities and it 

supports rural women in this way. There are no other learning 

opportunities that are as available by other broadcasters. 

 

In the child care, there is a new community-based child care 

registry and a survey and analysis of ongoing child care needs 

in Outlook district that has been completed. In Moosomin a 

15-space child care centre was established to provide extended 

evening and weekend care for shift workers and seasonal care 

for farm families, and new child care centres were funded in 

Kerrobert, Shaunavon, Yorkton, and Dundurn. Pilot 

home-based child care centres are also operating in five other 

rural centres, and pilot centre-based projects have been 

approved for Assiniboia and Redvers. 

 

So I think people have recognized for a long time that this need 

is there. There’s child and family resource centres developed 

and equipped in 31 rural service centres across the province 

providing information about child care, child management 

practices, and health and safety issues. 

 

The breast cancer screening program provides access. There are 

satellite centres in North Battleford, Swift Current, Yorkton, 

Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert, and a mobile screening unit as 

well that travels to rural areas to make sure that every woman in 

the province has access. There’s a toll-free farm stress line that 

provides counselling and referrals to callers on issues ranging 

from farm management to depression and addiction; 52 per cent 

of the calls in ’96 were from women. 

 

There’s also shelters for abused women and crisis counselling 

in various rural and northern areas of the province. And also 

outreach programs have been funded so that they can take 

programs out beyond the actual centres. There’s been some 

social housing projects targeted specifically for victims of 

violence — family violence. 

 

And I think there’s been, on a policy basis, there’s been a 

review of federal and provincial programs to determine if they 

contain barriers to women in agriculture — an increasing role 

for farm women through their participation in organizations and 

on boards; and to encourage the operational and managerial role 

of farm women in agriculture. There’s also meetings annually 

with provincial farm women’s organizations. 

 

Now there’s also a number of things within the Department of 

Agriculture. And I don’t quite know how far you want me to go 

with this. I can continue. But the role that the Women’s 

Secretariat increasingly plays is that when new policy is being 

developed we’re invited to be a participant in the discussions of 

new policy development. And then we seek to bring the 

awareness of the women’s perspective on the various issues into 

the discussion. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, most of the information you 

just talked about was actually programing or work that was 

done through different departments like the Department of 

Education, Department of Agriculture, Health, Municipal 

Government, Social Services. None of it is actually something  

  



1236  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

that the secretariat does directly. 

 

From what I see and I guess most people see it, most of the 

work the secretariat does is type of brochures and information. I 

don’t believe there’s the real tangible . . . something tangible 

that people can look to and say that this is what the secretariat 

does besides just giving me some more information on it. So I 

guess the question that I wanted to have answered, I did have 

answered. It just wasn’t the answer that I wanted to hear 

because I don’t believe the meat and potatoes of what people 

really need when it comes to all the concerns that women have 

in this province are being answered. 

 

Maybe I would like to talk about pay equity for a few minutes. 

This year we had an opportunity to hear the secretariat talking 

about that. I found it interesting that the first Crown corp that 

actually was involved with pay equity was Workers’ 

Compensation, which of course we all know is totally funded 

by the private sector. So maybe you can give me some input as 

to why the Workers’ Compensation Board was the first one that 

was . . . introduced pay equity. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m just going to slip back to the 

previous discussion just for a minute because I probably should 

let it go but I can’t. 

 

When you develop a pension plan, the pension plan you would 

develop if you were only developing it for men would be very 

different than the pension plan you would develop if you were 

developing it to be sensitive to women. 

 

Elizabeth Waring, one of the most noted writers on women’s 

economic issues — she was an elected member of the New 

Zealand parliament actually. The youngest woman ever elected 

and appointed to their finance portfolio there. She says that if 

you only look at the male perspective, it’s like going through 

the world with one eye closed. And what the Women’s 

Secretariat does is to try to open the other eye of government so 

that it can see clearly what the broad range of needs of people 

are, and of course then as you get more sensitive on that level, 

you then get more sensitive to other diversity issues. 

 

But the analysis that was done even in our government of the 

CPP (Canada Pension Plan) reforms took on many new 

dimensions when the Women’s Secretariat became involved. 

And if you’re going to develop good public policy, it has to 

reflect all the people not just some of the people. So really 

that’s where the Women’s Secretariat comes in. It’s not our job 

to be a program department, but it’s our job to open the other 

eye of government to the perspective of how programs affect 

women perhaps differently than they do men. 

 

Now on the pay equity question, the Workers’ Compensation 

Board was not the only — it was just the first one that got their 

work done and it’s probably because they’re a smaller unit that 

they were able to get it done more quickly. Some of the bigger 

units like the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Union) that covers all the employees in executive government, 

some of the larger Crowns — it’s a bigger job for them to get 

this done because they have a lot more jobs that need to be 

evaluated and they have a lot more employees that are involved  

in the process. So Workers’ Comp was not the only one — it 

was just the first one. 

 

There is, I believe, eight agreements that are in active process 

right now of doing the work required to determine the pay-outs. 

There’s about another three that are very, very close to being 

completed, and then there’s about another eight who have 

started discussing it at the table but they haven’t actually . . . 

they’ve made a commitment to the discussion, but they haven’t 

actually sat down yet to determine how they’re going to do the 

workplace analysis and to actually set up their 

union-management committee and get going. So everybody’s in 

different stages of getting this done. 

 

But at this point the whole of government, and the Crowns and 

our agencies, are in one way or another involved in this process. 

And we’ll probably have about another three or four agreements 

completed this year. And probably a larger amount will flow 

through the following year because some of these bigger 

agencies will be getting their work done. But it is a process that 

takes awhile because you have to re-evaluate every job in the 

organization. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you have a long-term goal for when you 

expect to have all the government departments and Crown 

corporations actually being involved in pay equity? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It would about three or four years 

probably by the time they’re all done doing their work, and then 

they’ve got five years to pay out the agreements because there 

is quite often substantial amounts of money involved. 

Particularly in the larger departments, it will be quite 

substantial. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, one of the questions that was 

asked last year that we found kind of amazing was the response 

to the number of deputy ministers that were women. Can you 

tell me if that number has changed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  At this point I believe that two of the 

deputies in government are women, and I can certainly indicate 

that there has been — what shall I say? — specific direction 

that there should be an examination of how to improve this 

within the short term, not within the long term. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So this is why we talk about the negotiation 

and your work when it comes to working with the different 

departments, to make sure that the world isn’t going around 

with one eye closed. So how much influence do you actually 

have when it comes to this decision-making process? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly part of our role is to ensure 

that the commitment is there; that the policy is there to do that. 

But the other thing that we need to do is to help in bringing the 

names forward of good women who have these skills. Because 

quite often if people aren’t shopping through the newspaper for 

a job, they might be the perfect person but they don’t phone us 

and if we don’t know about them, we don’t phone them. 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

And I find that one of the areas where we still haven’t got quite 

as good of a network on being able to locate each other. And I 

think that if you know of good and talented women, there’s 

certainly no reason why people’s names can’t be suggested 

either for participation on boards or for looking at openings 

within the government. 

 

One of the things that people who study employment equity 

issues find is that a lot of hiring, maybe not even intentionally, 

tends to take place through networks. And unfortunately if you 

only know some of the people, then quite often women don’t 

get suggested for these jobs. 

 

So I think women have to take a bit upon themselves here to 

develop a bit of their own network so that we’re able to seek out 

these talented and capable women and to ensure that managers 

in government adopt policies where people are given 

assignments that allow them to grow and develop and become 

ready to be senior managers in government. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I know that 

positions like deputy ministers aren’t advertised in the 

newspaper, so I would imagine they come from more of a . . . 

there probably are other lists that are looked at as well. I guess 

it is probably important that women be looked at in all of these 

different roles. 

 

Madam Minister, the new money that was given to the 

secretariat this year that made a lot of people happy — I think it 

was $775,000; is just about double the amount of money you 

had — was intriguing, and when I look at all the different needs 

within the secretariat and women in this province I was very 

excited about it. 

 

And then I think I’m to the point of being more than a little 

disappointed when I understand that the programing has already 

been determined. Maybe you could give me an update and tell 

me exactly where we are when it comes to spending this 

money. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It’s not totally defined yet; we’re still 

consulting, but the foundation should be understood. And the 

foundation was that we have a new communications tool in our 

society. And as we all know, information is power. And it’s 

very important that women understand the use of this new tool 

because this tool is going to radically transform how people do 

business; how they work in their workplaces; how organizations 

communicate with each other; how individuals communicate 

with each other. 

 

So the first thing we want to ensure is an understanding of the 

tool and what it can do, because sometimes the skills come 

before the use of the tool but sometimes an understanding of the 

benefits of a tool cause someone to want to know how to use it. 

And so it’s a little bit, I guess hard to tell which is the chicken 

and which is the egg. But I think through a greater 

understanding of all the potential uses of the Internet, that can 

also become a motivating reason why people gain the skills in 

order to be able to do that kind of work. 

 

Now we know that as we do this consulting we’re going to find  

a lot of needs, because I don’t think governments ever 

undertake the consulting process where they find out just what 

they intended to. One time I was part of an all-party committee 

of the legislature. We were supposed to be looking at an 

environmental bill of rights. And everywhere we went, all they 

did was complain about the Tory bill on oil tanks that we 

inherited from you guys. So we went out with a particular idea 

there of what we wanted to talk about, but people will tend to 

talk about what they want to talk about. 

 

So we will probably find that some people are very interested in 

the Internet. And I think one of our objectives is to make sure 

that people understand all the possible uses and how to access 

the new technology. But I’m sure we’ll also have people who 

identify that they have equipment needs, that they have training 

needs. And I think our job then will be to work in partnership 

with training institutions out there, with sponsors, and see if we 

can get some of those other needs met. But our main focus on 

this is the use of this new communications tool. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So just to clarify it then, the bulk of the money 

is going to be spent on Internet. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The expenditures are primarily on 

training, how to use the Internet access, as well as on support 

materials for the project. 

 

One of the things I find, I very seldom read anything — even 

from the Legislative Library, some of the newsletters that are 

sent out by various organizations — where I don’t get a little bit 

of new information on an important home page for women, 

perhaps a business access information. There’s now a whole 

network for aboriginal issues. And certainly, aboriginal women 

that we’ve talked to are very interested in getting linked up on 

reserve. So there’s many ways that we’ll need to repackage the 

information so it’s suitable for the particular audience that we’ll 

be working with. 

 

And also the training is geared not to all the broad skills of 

computer use, but the skills of using computers to access the 

Internet. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, for the first time in very 

many years the secretariat has a considerable amount of money 

to spend to make a difference. And I just have to ask you: do 

you really believe that the majority of the women of this 

province are going to benefit? This is the best way that we can 

benefit the majority of the women, by allowing it to get hooked 

up to the Internet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If you looked at it as if the only thing 

we were doing, yes, you might have that view. But it’s just part 

of many linked strategies. And I don’t think there’s anybody in 

a modern economy believes that you can participate in a 

modern economy without this. 

 

When I spoke to Dianne Common, the VP (vice-president) 

admin at the University of Regina, one of her biggest concerns 

is that they have the lowest enrolment they’ve ever had of 

women in the whole computer area. Women are just going to be 

left behind in the dust if they’re not involved in this. 

  



1238  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

 

And what surprised me, we consulted with literally hundreds of 

women’s organizations before Christmas, and this came up over 

and over again — from the aboriginal women, from a woman 

who used to work with the Battered Women’s Network who’s 

now an at-home mom who decided to spend her money on the 

Internet instead of cable TV. It comes up with business women, 

many of whom have their own home computer-based 

businesses. It comes up with rural women who find that it is a 

way to combat isolation on the farm. 

 

And so I would have to say that if anything surprised me about 

our consultations, was not that it didn’t come up. What 

surprised me was the number of times it did come up and the 

diversity of women who raised it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, the women that are going to 

be able to take advantage of this Internet training or being 

hooked up to the Internet, they already have a computer, 

probably. They may already have their home business. They are 

already part of a more unique group of people who already 

probably have the wherewithal to become hooked up to Internet 

or part of that system anyway without this. And I think that 

we’re leaving out a whole group of women who have concerns 

and needs that could be addressed with using this money, that 

would benefit from it a lot more than spending the money on 

the Internet. 

 

I’m specifically concerned about people in rural Saskatchewan 

and on reservations. There’s a lot of people with needs there. I 

know that there are some computers there, but I know that there 

is a lot of needs outside of Internet. Is there any . . . are you 

looking at anything else with this money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m beginning to wonder what your 

understanding of the Internet is because it’s a fantastic research 

tool, it’s a communications tool, it’s a networking tool. Again to 

go back to this woman who used to work with the Battered 

Women’s Network and is now an at-home mom with two teeny 

children — she uses it to keep in touch with women’s 

organizations right across Canada. It’s a way to save costs of 

travelling and meeting. It involves a much better ability to send 

documents to each other, to share information, to share budget 

samples, if you want, between non-profit organizations. 

 

For women on the farm — who I just can’t believe that most 

farms now don’t have computers — it’s a way to . . . because I 

hear people talking about it. It is definitely a way for them to 

access business information, program and service information, 

economic development information, even shopping if you want 

to go to maybe a less needed but certainly in some areas 

probably a very useful tool. 

 

So I think it’s important that people know that it’s a long time 

since computers were just something for the kids to play games 

on, and it’s a long time since they were just something to 

process letters on, and understand all the many and varied 

health . . . I mean if you have a disease that you think you may 

have or you’ve been discussing with your doctor, you can even 

punch up on the Internet to get the most recent information on 

that disease. It’s just a wealth of resource for the home. 

 

And our idea is not that everybody would have to own a 

computer. Part of government’s policy is that there be public 

access through libraries, through other types of public buildings 

where people can access computers and freenet. Reserves of . . . 

the women tell me that the reserves have very sophisticated 

computer systems and what they need is to liberate them for 

some rather more public uses in those areas because they’re 

under-utilized simply as workplace tools and need to be 

broadened into all the varied information and services you’re 

now able to get through the Internet. 

 

So the Internet is really just a window into a whole other world 

of services and information and contacts. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I do know 

about the Internet, and I have worked on it. And I’m not saying 

that there isn’t some benefits of it. But I think I had talked to 

you or one of your officials awhile ago and described what I 

think of it. It’s got lots of information. It’s a thousand miles 

wide and one inch deep. I don’t know how much really, how 

much of a benefit it’s going to be for people. I know within my 

own business it wouldn’t make a big difference. 

 

What percentage of the people do you think that really will 

benefit from this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  You know, I’m going to argue with you 

a little bit. One of the things I’ve been doing personally in my 

role as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), not in 

my role as a minister, is harassing the Economic Development 

department and STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership Inc.) to get all our small producers in Saskatchewan 

onto an Internet marketing system. 

 

If you run a little berry farm or a little wild rice operation or a 

little home dried flower operation, and you’re trying to sell to 

all the many craft stores and hotels and tourist outlets in the 

province, you don’t have the marketing capacity as an 

individual for all those addresses, all those stamps, all that 

secretarial work, all that marketing material. On the Internet, all 

you need is one page properly placed in the proper directory 

and every gift shop in Saskatchewan could order your jam. I 

think this is absolutely fantastic. And I don’t know how you 

could even contemplate, that for a small producer this isn’t 

almost a modern miracle. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, do you think that there 

would be more women in this province would benefit from the 

Internet, or the opportunity to actually get some training on a 

computer? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Given the number of women who are 

starting their own small businesses, I would say that anybody in 

business, their immediate problem right after opening a 

business is how to market themselves. So I see this as being a 

very important tool for women. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So then basically, I guess, maybe I should 

have asked this question up front. 

 

What this money is going to do then is . . . you’re targeting  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

women in business. Is that correct? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well I think in a previous answer I 

mentioned how the women who are linking with other women’s 

organizations, the access to research . . . for example, our 

indicators projects . . . there’s many women who are making 

arguments everywhere, from the Inuit Tapirisat women to other 

women are making arguments based on economic information. 

 

They’re able to access this information to get the most 

up-to-date information. It will be used by women’s 

organizations to use as a meeting vehicle, a communications 

vehicle. It’s a health and wellness vehicle. It’s an educational 

vehicle. I mean it’s just the uses for women in isolated places 

are almost unlimited, and it puts a library right in everybody’s 

home. You don’t have to necessarily go out even to the book 

trailer. You’ve got those resources coming right into your 

home. 

 

There’s universities now on the Internet where you can take 

actual university courses on the Internet. There’s no way that 

you can’t convince me that this is the beginning of something 

very big. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like to 

welcome your officials tonight, Madam Minister, and I am 

pleased to be able to ask a couple of questions. As you well 

know, I’m Social Service critic and so I’d like to ask some 

questions pertaining to that area in conjunction with the 

Women’s Secretariat. 

 

I notice that the Women’s Secretariat is responsible for the 

anti-violence initiative, youth strategy of Saskatchewan’s action 

plan for children. I’m wondering why the Women’s Secretariat 

and not Social Services would be responsible for that initiative? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We co-chair the Family Violence 

Committee along with Justice. So this was to enable us to have 

a little more of a presence in contact with a lot of the women’s 

organizations that are doing this, and to do some very specific 

things that they had identified as priorities. 

 

Ms. Julé:  So that anti-violence initiative budget I notice is 

$75,000. Does this funding come out of the operating budget of 

the Women’s Secretariat or out of Social Services or from 

where? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This was new and additional money 

that was new in this budget and it didn’t come from anybody 

else’s budget. It’s part of the new money that was added in. It’s 

$225,000 and it’s for three new violence-prevention initiatives. 

One is the youth strategy; the other one is community projects, 

to support community groups to do some pilot innovative 

treatment models; and the other one is for this farm stress line 

support, again to enhance community access to information on 

services and programs related to family violence. 

 

These were all projects that were identified by the partnership 

on violence. These were not ones that we invented. They were  

came directly out of the community partnership. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Just incidentally, I understand that 

there are farm stress lines that are funded . . . actually in 

information about that from other areas; the Department of 

Agriculture, I believe has some connection to that. So why 

would we duplicate that same information through the 

Women’s Secretariat? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again I’ll go back to my, the other eye 

of government analogy. And what we’re doing here is adding a 

new dimension and enhancing the farm stress line. We won’t be 

operating it. We’ll only be involved in helping to enhance it so 

it’s more meaningful and more useful to other people who use 

it, particularly focusing on the family violence area. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay. Madam Minister, could you please tell me 

what you mean by enhancing it then? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The farm stress support line, as I 

mentioned, is getting 52 per cent of its calls from women. And 

they have perhaps more in-depth information needs than the 

farm stress line has been able to provide them with. 

 

And whenever you add information to a system, wherever you 

add more capabilities to it, there’s a cost involved. And so this 

will be the cost involved to enhance the access to information 

on services and programs related to family violence. It’s just 

there’s no way that you ever add a whole body of information 

to a system without there being a cost attached, and this is the 

cost attached to add that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I notice that the 

government says it will distribute some funds through 

non-profit organizations which provide services to women, yet 

it allowed Working for Women to fold after the federal funding 

was cut. 

 

I’d like to know if there are any organizations similar to 

Working for Women — whose mandate was to get women 

working — which the government has in mind right now in 

order to receive some funding for that same purpose. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I will only say that we all felt saddened 

about that, but the fact is when a government starts a program, 

it has the responsibility to do something with it. It can’t just 

walk away from it like the federal government did, and it can’t 

just assume that some other level of government can pick up a 

brand-new program that it never had responsibility for. 

 

That aside, I recognize the value of that program. There was 

also a fairly substantial immigrant women bridging program 

that was also cut by the federal government that lost 16 staff in 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I’ll just say that as the province gets further into fleshing 

out the details of the new training strategy, we’ve already met, 

the Women’s Secretariat has already met, with the minister 

responsible for the post-secondary training strategy. And as 

recently as today we’ve had discussions on how we’re going to 

bring these perspectives in to the fleshing-out of the training  

  



1240  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

strategies so that the sensitivities are there to things like the 

need for the Working for Women type of programs as well as 

the immigrant ones. 

 

But the fact is, is that when $865,000 in federal funding 

disappears basically without any previous notice, another level 

of government can’t just come in and fill that. Governments 

have enough trouble keeping the programs they’re already 

committed to, without surprises like that. So we value that 

program and certainly Mitchell . . . Minister Mitchell has 

written to Minister Pettigrew to express the province’s concerns 

about it. But as we go . . . 

 

The Chair:  I must call the member to order. You cannot use 

proper names. I think the minister knows that she’s made the 

error with the . . . Just the minister; continue. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I just get too darn personal about this 

governing stuff. Can’t help it. He just seems like a person to 

me. Anyway, we won’t be re-creating those projects exactly as 

they existed but certainly we’ll be trying to bring that expertise 

and bring the understanding of the needs that those projects met 

into the provincial training strategy. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

the government has said that special consideration will be given 

to organizations in rural and northern areas of the province. Are 

there companies and industries, in particularly the northern 

areas, which can provide high-tech computer jobs to these 

women? Because we’re talking about the utilization of 

computer training, etc. 

 

So I’m wondering if you have been able to identify any industry 

in northern Saskatchewan basically that has said that they’d be 

willing to provide these jobs once the training has taken place. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The initial focus of this particular 

project is not job related. The connection of the training strategy 

to jobs will be done through the regional colleges, the 

community colleges, the Indian and Metis educational 

institutions, and the provincial educational institutions. Our 

focus here is getting people totally up to speed and totally 

familiar with a new communications tool. So it is a slightly 

different purpose we’re talking about. 

 

There’s no doubt that there is increased technology in the North 

in health care, in mining, in education. So I’m certain those jobs 

do exist. But that’s a slightly different focus and it’ll be the 

provincial training strategy that’s looking after making those 

linkages. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate your 

comments and your answers and I’ll just turn this over to a 

member of the third party for further questioning. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I want to thank you for your questions 

because I know that you do care about the answers and you do 

pay close attention. I want to thank you for your questions. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I see  

that all members have been waiting abatedly for me to enter the 

debate here. I hate to disappoint them because I think the 

minister already knows from our debate last year I’m not really 

a big fan of this specific secretariat. I think there are many areas 

where women are helped in government through a number of 

other initiatives, and in some ways, Mr. Chairman, I see this as 

money that’s really not well spent. I think there are avenues that 

we can reach out and provide for women. 

 

And I would like to give a bouquet to the women out in our 

society and across our province who have done a lot for 

themselves, for their families, for their communities, on their 

own. They haven’t had to look to government, and they’re 

certainly not looking to this minister or this secretariat to 

enhance themselves in society. They believe that they are 

capable — quite capable and quite able to certainly enhance 

their positions on their own. 

 

A couple questions though that our secretarial staff, who 

happen to be women, came up with as they were researching 

some of the information out of the Public Accounts, and they 

would like a few answers. And so I brought them with me this 

evening. 

 

The first question they have is, since 1994 Ms. Faye Rafter has 

held the title of acting executive coordinator for Women’s 

Secretariat. And the question they’ve asked and asked me to 

bring to the Assembly is the . . . when you use the term, acting 

— and as they see it’s still acting — it refers to a position that is 

temporary, and one would wonder why this . . . what appears to 

be a permanent position is still referred to as a temporary 

position. I wonder if the minister could respond to that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Ms. Rafter . . . I’m actually going to 

answer the question you’ve maybe didn’t want me to answer 

first. You probably do believe that women have achieved 

everything they’ve achieved totally because they’re good 

individuals doing good things. But the fact is that without the 

pressure created by collective women’s experiences and 

women’s expression of disgust at some of the oppression in our 

society, women wouldn’t even have the vote today. 

 

So I just beg to differ, because collective action by women is 

what has given women the vote. It’s what has started the ball 

rolling on pay equity in government. It’s what’s improved 

women’s pensions. It’s what’s improved women getting their 

share of the farm when there’s a marriage break-up. So I will 

just have to tell you that I don’t quite agree with your analysis 

that somehow these things aren’t necessary. 

 

Now on the other particular comment . . . oh yes. Ms. Rafter 

was on leave from the university and so the decision needed to 

be made that in choosing to become permanent in government, 

she would then be leaving her role with the university. And of 

course as you know, she is now permanent. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, I think you would also have to 

agree though when it came to while women may have pressed 

the issue of the vote, it took the initiative of a number of men at 

the time who were in leadership to bring that into fruition. 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

Madam Minister, the other interesting thing that was pointed 

out, going through the Public Accounts, is we see Ms. Rafter 

was originally hired at a salary, in October of ’94, of $77,820 

. . . (inaudible) . . . The former coordinator, Marianne Weston, 

1991 NDP Regina Lake Centre nominee, left with a salary of 

79,575 and was formerly hired at 75,000. The Public Accounts 

for the year ’95-96 show Ms. Rafter received $96,584. Madam 

Minister, it seems to be quite a large discrepancy for little over 

a year, whereas Ms. Weston went from 77 to 79 in that period 

that she was acting director. Can you explain that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This was simply an accounting error. 

What they did is instead of reporting her salary as it should 

have been, the benefits that were part of salary were put on top 

of the salary figure, and then the car allowance was put on top 

of that. And those are not normally included in that way in a 

salary figure. So if you compare what the actual salary base was 

for Ms. Weston and for Ms. Rafter, they’re the same. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well maybe, Madam Minister, you could make a 

clarification in the Public Accounts to that effect. It almost 

sounds like the same format that MLAs are referred to. And 

when I look at these numbers, I would think even you yourself 

would have to say, man, I thought I’m in charge, but I don’t 

think I’ve seen those types of increases. And so it’s interesting. 

 

To the minister as well, someone has brought to our attention 

that Ms. Rafter is Duane Adams’s, the deputy minister of 

Health’s, sister. Is that so? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I don’t understand what relevance that 

question is to the department. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So I guess that’s true. I guess that was the 

question that the staff had brought to our attention. And I raise 

it with the minister and was looking for a simple yes or no 

answer. Obviously that’s quite a concern to the members 

opposite. And it’s interesting how you can raise comments and 

government . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. Order. I don’t think that the minister can 

hear the question. And I don’t think the people that are in the 

Chamber can hear the question; so I would ask the members to 

come to order and allow the member from Moosomin to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. Order. What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. The point of 

order is this: Beauchesne explicitly states — and I forget the 

paragraph — that we protect our officials, that is people of high 

station in this Assembly, from any attack, however direct or 

indirect that might be, and allegations. And therefore I would 

ask, Mr. Chair, that you listen carefully to the comments by the 

member for Moosomin to ensure that there is in fact no attack 

on any officials occurring in this Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

speak to the point of order, Mr. Speaker, I must say that there 

certainly was no attack in place. It was a very simple question 

— neither pro nor con as to any implications at all, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I believe the point of order is not well taken. 

 

The Chair:  Certainly the officials are protected against 

attacks by a member on a personal nature. However where their 

duties are related to may be brought into question. And 

therefore if that is the content of the nature, then I would say 

that the point of order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

when it comes to the Women’s Secretariat . . . and we had, I 

believe, referred to the fact that Women’s Secretariat is 

expending $1.4 million. And I note in the annual report 

discussion has taken place with a number of groups. I think 

you’ve talked about . . . and I’m going through community 

liaison, and it talks about having met with different groups 

about different activities like violence against women, pay 

equity, midwifery, and a number of other areas. 

 

I’m wondering, has Women’s Secretariat conversed with the 

groups like REAL Women as well when they converse and look 

at bringing forward policy regarding women’s issues? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Actually I have met with some 

representatives. Following Beijing, I invited the women who 

had attended Beijing to meet with me, and one of the women 

represented there was from the REAL Women group. And as 

well we certainly invite them to our kind of open house 

functions where women meet and mingle and discuss different 

issues. So we don’t have any direct program involvement but 

we certainly have been in contact. 

 

Mr. Toth:  But, Madam Minister, have REAL Women 

lobbied your department for any funding at any time or for any 

of the services that they provide? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Apparently they share your views on 

their independence in getting things done without us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, like I said earlier, I didn’t have 

a lot of questions and I’m certainly not going to tie up the 

evening with just delving off on little issues. But I want to thank 

you and your officials for the time this evening. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  And I’ll thank you for bringing another 

perspective to the discussion. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just have a 

couple of questions, Madam Minister. First of all, when you 

were talking to the member from Humboldt, we sort of were 

half discussing the Working for Women, the fact that that 

program is no longer funded by the federal government. Maybe 

I was just reading something into your words, but was I hearing 

that you were perhaps going to fund it in some way? 

  



1242  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think if I remember my words 

correctly, I said I don’t see us re-establishing the program in its 

current form. However that doesn’t mean that the value of it 

isn’t recognized or there isn’t expertise from the women that 

work there that could be brought into the new provincial 

training strategy as it develops. But where that will actually end 

up, I mean there’s a lot of change taking place in the whole 

education and training area so it’s difficult to predict right now. 

 

It is a shame we didn’t have more advanced warning of this 

change so there could have been more advanced thinking of 

how that could fit. Because the provincial training strategy is 

largely an institutional-based strategy. And a lot of these 

organizations that were funded by the federal government in the 

community, we have never had that level of funding for that 

kind of activity because all the human resource stuff all came 

directly from the federal government. So some thinking needs 

to go into it, but I would say that in the short term, likely not. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Have you had an opportunity to speak to any 

of the people that are in charge of the program, and do you 

know how much money it would cost to keep that department 

or that group going in some way? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  For the six outreach projects, it was 

$865,000; so we’re talking, you know, a fair bit of money here. 

The actual Working for Women, it was 300,000. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Have you had an opportunity to speak with 

women in charge to determine if there is some way that you 

could use their expertise and their experience in some of the 

programs that you have forthcoming? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education has met with them and I think it would be best . . . I 

met with them before they lost their funding, not knowing they 

were going to. And I think he’s met with them subsequently — 

so you may want to ask him that question when he’s here and 

he could give you a complete answer. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, it’s difficult in a position like 

the secretariat has, to actually evaluate and measure success, but 

I’m wondering now with this program that you’ve got coming 

up with Internet and you’re going to actually be working with 

real people and making . . . Do you have some system set up 

where you can actually measure how successful . . . or what 

impact you’re going to be making on people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, there’ll be an evaluation system 

built into the design of the work being done and I always think 

there’s two evaluations: one is the paper evaluation; another is 

the one that is the response of the people involved. And if the 

response isn’t there, I think we’ll know we’re on the wrong 

track. And if the response is there, then I think we’ll have a 

pretty good idea. But there will be . . . The program will be 

implemented over two years and there will be a formal 

evaluation process of it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I know it’s difficult to be 

your own auditor in things like that; so I’m hoping that there’s 

some sort of system where there will be some response from the  

people who are actually benefiting from that program. 

 

I know from our discussion tonight you probably understand 

that I have . . . I’m disappointed that there isn’t more 

opportunities for something besides the initial decision that 

you’d made on spending this money. Not that I don’t have a 

problem with . . . I’m, I’m excited about the possibility that we 

can actually be out doing something substantial. I guess I think 

we have a very limited view or we have taken . . . or you have 

taken a limited view of what you can be doing And I think that 

we are missing the largest percentage of the people out there; 

and when I look at all the needs that there are, I think that we’re 

touching a very small percentage of the people. 

 

But at the same time, you must be making some impact on your 

caucus or else there wouldn’t have been some increased 

funding. So I am hoping that the door is still open for 

conversation and that there is opportunity yet to perhaps make 

some changes where we can have more involvement with a 

wider range of people. 

 

So I’d like to thank you and your officials, and the member 

from Humboldt would like to ask you another question. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a couple more 

questions have come to mind, if you would be able to answer 

them. 

 

I noticed the B.C. (British Columbia) NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government has developed a tool to analyse government 

policy in order to gauge its effects on women overall. This tool 

is called the gender lens, I believe. And I was wondering, does 

the Women’s Secretariat here have any sort of similar tool? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Although we have, I guess, many of the 

skills involved in doing that type of analysis, we are using both 

the federal government’s gender-analysis policy as well as the 

B.C. policy as a basis for developing a policy for 

Saskatchewan; but it’s in process. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. That’s good to know. 

 

Just one more question also, on the equal-pay framework. The 

government says, and I quote it: “It is anticipated that 

government departments, SaskEnergy, SIAST, and SaskTel will 

conclude their negotiations under that framework this calendar 

year.” And so . . . that was printed in a news release on March 7 

this year. 

 

What I would like to know is, how long would you assess that 

those negotiations or the negotiation process will take? I know 

that we have to the end of the year, but I’m wondering if you 

have any understanding of how long that the negotiations are 

expected to take. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The ones you mentioned will be 

finished this fall and winter, and the pay-outs will be completed 

in this budget year. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Madam Minister, if there happens to 

be a lack of resolve or a potential stalemate, are there any  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

provisions in place to ensure that that doesn’t happen or that 

there will be something to move this process forward? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The Women’s Secretariat, in last year’s 

budget, got the money for a pay-equity specialist who is now on 

staff; has been with us for a few months now. And so we have a 

lot of support we can offer now to people working on these. But 

as well, there is a dispute resolution mechanism within the 

pay-equity framework. So whenever things get stuck there is a 

mechanism to resolve that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Madam Minister, I think the gentlemen in the back 

row there are having some qualms about this questioning. I 

notice that the ex-minister of Highways is really lacking for 

things to do nowadays so he’s coming here to banter the 

women. But that’s all right. We’re enjoying you and we’re 

having a really good laugh off of you. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I’d just like to ask about the battered 

women’s programs, in Regina particularly. Could you just 

mention what programs are in place, and organizations 

basically, that the Women’s Secretariat is connected with, or in 

fact that the government is connected with, that you can bring 

to light for the women of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess there is a variety of 

mechanisms, both service, organizational and legislative. There 

is the PATHS (Provincial Association of Transition Houses 

Saskatchewan) organization, which is the organization of 

transition houses. And they actually work closely with the 

Department of Social Services on setting priorities. And when 

we have additional money, we apply that money in keeping 

with priorities that have been established through PATHS. And 

certainly I think there’s pretty good coverage in Regina on 

transition houses. 

 

(2030) 

 

There’s the partnership on violence, which also brings together 

a range of community and organizational support services. You 

know, there’s women’s centres and a whole variety of those 

kinds of things. And then there’s also the legislative approach, 

The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, which although I know 

we’ve had some debate in the House of some of the difficulties, 

it certainly is progress over the days when the only choice a 

woman had was to leave the home in the middle of the night 

with kids and toys in tow. 

 

So I don’t know exactly how much detail you want, but the 

Women’s Secretariat has produced a wallet card that lists all the 

services. And that card is available to hand out to women. So 

that if they do need any of those services, they have a ready set 

of phone numbers that tells them where to access the various 

services. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have one more 

question. And I know that there are certainly a shortage of safe 

houses in the rural areas in the province, and I know that that’s 

not under your mandate as such. But I’m wondering whether 

the Women’s Secretariat in fact, does look thoroughly into 

what’s happening out there in rural Saskatchewan; and to  

present to the Minister of Social Services and the Finance 

minister some of the views on the need out there; so that we 

can, in effect, have this situation and problem taken care of in 

the near future . . . would be nice. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We have a role that we play in 

inter-departmental discussions but as I mentioned, there is a 

direct relationship between the Department of Social Services 

and the Provincial Association of Transition Houses, and 

through the partnership on violence directly with all the 

organizations that deal with family violence issues. So our 

voice is added in the discussions that take place at budget time 

on priorizing in the policy and program development. But there 

is a very direct relationship between Social Services, as I say, 

and the organizations that are working on these things. 

 

So what we really do is try to make sure that every time there’s 

a bit of additional resources, that they’re added into these 

services. And I’ve had actually women who work in these areas 

approach me recently about how pleased they are about the 

additional resources that were in this last budget and the 

recognition of the wages and benefits for people working in 

these types of organizations. 

 

The rural area has always been a little more difficult because of 

the high cost of providing services to a smaller group of people, 

because of course in an urban area, you’re drawing from a much 

larger population base. But certainly rural services have been 

added, and I think the outreach services are more effective in 

the rural areas as well. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Madam Minister, just one comment. In the rural 

areas, I know that the population density is lower, of course, but 

because of the stress of rural living sometimes, we do have a 

good number of women that are in need, and I hope that’s taken 

into great consideration. I thank you once again. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Item 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 41 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:36 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Municipal Board  Vote 22 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1231 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1231 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1232 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Women’s Secretariat  Vote 41 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1234, 1241 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1234 

  Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1239, 1242 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

  Van Mulligen (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 1241 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 1241 

 


