



















































Hansard: March 25, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 425 

 March 25, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon the hon. member 

for Lloydminster told us that she had lost her place so she 

would just start again at the beginning, and I’m tempted to do 

that just in case hon. members opposite may possibly may have 

missed any of the points. However, I believe I was in the midst 

of developing my theory that modern New Democrats are slow 

Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have reached the stage of talking about roads. 

Now we’re very grateful that this government has finally taken 

some interest in the crumbling road structure system of this 

province. Unfortunately what we weren’t told in the budget is 

that this new money for roads still doesn’t bring us up even to 

where we were in 1991. So much more is going to be needed if 

we are to be guaranteed the sort of road system this province 

needs to enter the 21st century. 

 

I would like to mention just one small road project which was 

of considerable concern to the people of my constituency and 

we have raised on a number of occasions. The entrance to North 

Battleford has several converging highways, unfortunately at 

various angles. This convergence is confusing to those of us 

even who live there and to visitors it is dangerous. Just last fall 

we had another fatality at that intersection which makes it very, 

very serious. 

 

There is a small proposal that we have been pushing for some 

time, namely to have Highway 40, the Prince Albert highway, 

and our Highway 16, the Yellowhead, at a point outside of 

North Battleford so that first of all it could enter on a 90-degree 

angle as it should, rather than at an angle. And secondly, to get 

it away from where all of the converging roads come. 

 

This can be done at modest cost, Mr. Speaker, and indeed the 

city of North Battleford is so anxious to see this project proceed 

that they are willing to provide the land to the province at no 

cost to the province. I ask for the Minister of Highways to give 

this small project his urgent attention as it is a matter of public 

safety. 

 

The other project which is of considerable concern to my 

constituents in North Battleford is the North West Regional 

College and the work on the North Battleford Comprehensive in 

order to accommodate the regional college. That has been a 

matter of ongoing discussions and it was approved a couple of  

years ago. To date it has not occurred and we are very anxious 

for that project to be completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard talk about $22 million from this 

government for infrastructure. Certainly the infrastructure of 

this province needs some serious upgrading; however, this is 

another example of my theory of our government being slow 

Liberals. When we check into the details we find out that this 

spending was spurred on through the infrastructure program of 

our federal government. It was a program of the federal 

government initiated by Ottawa. Thank heavens for Jean 

Chrétien, who has finally gotten this province moving again and 

finally made this government face up to its responsibilities. 

 

And I know the Minister of Highways is a gentleman and a 

decent man and I assume that he will be sending the Prime 

Minister a thank-you note for his commitment to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Our roads need the prodding of an energetic 

and caring federal government and Liberal opposition in order 

to force this government to re-examine its priorities. 

 

I’d now like to talk for a few moments about interest rates and 

what members opposite refer to as the stabilization fund. Now 

just exactly what is this stabilization fund, as the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) euphemistically describe it, Mr. Speaker? 

Well we are told it is the money they have squirreled away from 

liquor and gambling. This is the money which in so many cases 

has come from poor families out of meagre budgets required to 

feed and clothe children. Now the government says we have a 

problem in this province with hungry children; so new measures 

are required in order to feed those children and new 

school-feeding projects are required. 

 

Is it just possible, Mr. Speaker, that if some of the money given 

to feed our children was used for that purpose instead of going 

into the VLTs (video lottery terminal), that maybe the problem 

of hungry children would not be as serious? Would 

school-feeding programs really be required if the money that 

parents have to feed their children had not been confiscated by 

our government through the VLTs? Mr. Speaker, it is the 

money raised through liquor and gambling which the provincial 

government now refers to as its stabilization fund. 

 

What an example of the bafflegab of Newspeak. George 

Orwell’s 1984 has arrived a little bit late in Saskatchewan. First 

the NDP create social problems. Then when the federal Liberals 

step in to try and fix them by coming up with their child 

initiative program, the NDP steps forward to take the credit. 

Then they take liquor and gambling revenues and call it a 

stabilization fund, almost as if they think VLT revenues are 

some sort of form of economic development instead of a way 

for this government to confiscate welfare cheques. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons we can now look forward 

to more funds and programs is the substantially less money we 

are paying on the provincial debt. Why are we paying less  



426  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

money on the provincial debt? Surely this is a direct result of 

the lower interest rates which are a direct result of the fiscal 

policies of the Hon. Paul Martin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we have the lowest interest rates 

in 30 years. These lower interest rates are the real reason we can 

now lower the PST (provincial sales tax). The only decent thing 

for our Minister of Finance to do is to send a thank-you note to 

Paul Martin, and I’m assuming she will get right on to that. She 

will want to tell Mr. Martin what lower interest rates mean for 

the province and the people of Saskatchewan. And I know 

being the honourable person she is she will want to express that 

gratitude in making better days possible for us. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there are still some problems with 

financial disclosure. Our budget, this budget, does not tell us 

how much money was generated by liquor and gambling and 

other Crown corporation activity. The Provincial Auditor has 

pointed out on numerous occasions that in order to have a true 

picture of the province’s finances, we require a provincial 

budget that sets out the whole of the financial activity of the 

public sector. 

 

Instead we get a budget which discloses only 60 per cent of 

provincial government activity. In other words, we get a 60 per 

cent view of the total picture. For example, we know this year 

how much was transferred from liquor and gambling into the 

General Revenue Fund and we know that figure is four times 

last year’s. But we do not in fact know what the net revenues 

were. We do not know how much money was actually 

generated from liquor and gambling in the last year. 

 

Is money being held back in the Crown corporations for use at 

some future time? Or, as in the case of the Conservatives, is 

money being transferred out of the Crowns that they don’t 

have? Because we know that went on under the Tories  that 

the Crown corporations transferred money into the General 

Revenue Fund that the Crown corporations simply didn’t have. 

They simply loaded up debt on the Crown corporations in order 

to provide dividends that didn’t exist. It was all a shell game. 

The answer is, we simply don’t know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And it’s time we did know by having full 

financial disclosure in the provincial budget, a budget that 

shows 100 per cent of the picture, not 60 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — If even a Conservative government can do that 

in Alberta, surely that is possible for us in Saskatchewan. I say 

to hon. members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I say to hon. members 

opposite, they have got to quit cooking their food in aluminium 

pots. It’s having a bad effect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have spoken about the 

puny 1,000 jobs created in Saskatchewan this past year 

compared to over 20,000 in Manitoba. However I am extremely  

pleased to see that the government is taking some initiative to 

try and improve the situation. To find out about creating new 

jobs, our provincial government has taken a truly novel 

initiative. They have found a country, a small country, Mr. 

Speaker, one with the same population as Saskatchewan which 

has managed to create 30,000 jobs in one year and they have 

gone to that country to see how it can be done and how it can be 

duplicated here. Mr. Speaker, that country is Guyana. 

 

(1915) 

 

When I first heard we had invested $30 million in Guyana, I 

thought this was maybe something in the nature of Third World 

aid, particularly when I read about Guyana having one of the 

world’s highest debt ratios. And I said in the throne speech 

debate that I was worried that our money might disappear into 

the Amazonian rain forest. Now I find out that I was wrong, 

that the real reason for this investment is so our government can 

find the secret of how to create jobs by looking at one of the 

poorest countries, which last year managed to create 30 times 

the number of new jobs that Saskatchewan did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk for a few minutes about the 

North. The hon. member for Cumberland says that he would 

like to hear me discuss the North and I am pleased to 

accommodate him. First let me . . . first I want to pay tribute to 

my colleague, the hon. member from Athabasca. He continually 

gives our caucus and this House valuable insight into the 

perspectives of the North and of aboriginal peoples. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I am proud to work closely with him on all 

matters related to northern issues and I am proud to call him a 

friend and colleague. 

 

Now the Hon. Minister for Northern Affairs says he finds it 

strange that I would be interested in the North. He wants to 

know what I’ve done in the North besides working and being 

married in the Territories, besides spending my summers 

canoeing the rivers in the Churchill, the Clearwater, and the 

Nahannie. He wants to know what I’ve done, besides in my 

professional life often flying through the North, and I have to 

say, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. All hon. members 

will recognize that the appropriate place to make comments is 

on the record when you’re on your feet, and not shouting across 

the floor. And I’ll ask all hon. members to restrain themselves 

and to look for opportunities to express their enthusiasm for the 

debate in more acceptable ways within the rules of the House. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well what do you suggest? 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I think all hon. members are quite 

capable of arriving at their own conclusions. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker . . . Okay, back to phase 1, okay. I 

find it no more odd that I would have an interest in the North 

than that the hon. member for Regina Centre should be Minister 

of Indian and Metis Affairs. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

Mr. Speaker, in the many times that I have been, in the many 

times that I have been in La Loche, Mr. Speaker, I have never 

ceased to be disgusted with the state of St. Martin’s Hospital in 

La Loche. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in La Loche, this government has built a 

brand-new, spanking, large liquor board store — quite a 

luxurious facility. No doubt this was contributed to the people 

of La Loche to make sure that they would be . . . no doubt the 

provincial government wanted to make sure that La Loche . . . I 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I have this strange feeling that I may 

have struck a sensitive chord. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why was this beautiful new liquor board 

store built in La Loche? Was it to make sure that the people of 

La Loche would be generous contributors to the stabilization 

fund? 

 

But while the people of La Loche, while the people of La Loche 

are deemed worthy for a beautiful, big liquor board store, the 

hospital the government gives them is a collection of 

dilapidated old ATCO trailers pulled together. Surely they 

deserve better. 

 

Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that we subsidize the transportation of 

alcohol into the North but not milk? Is it because, is it because 

milk sales revenues do not go into the provincial stabilization 

fund? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was sorry not to see any new initiatives in the 

budget for youth in conflict with the law. However I was 

extremely pleased to see that the Minister of Justice is now 

moving on another Liberal suggestion, to create a justice 

committee under the Young Offenders Act. 

 

These committees were supposed to be a part of the Young 

Offenders Act and were included in the initial Young Offenders 

Act passed something like, I believe 15 years ago, but nothing 

was done about them in this province. Only now, only now our 

government appears to be moving in setting up a justice 

committee to bring together all of these services and players to 

take an in-depth look at all of the factors which are important if 

we are going to deal with the issues of youth crime and problem 

youth, and try and do something positive about it. 

 

And I want to congratulate my colleague, the hon. member 

from Melville, who spearheaded the petitions that have been 

coming into this House on a daily basis, these petitions saying 

we need a youth task force. The Minister of Justice has not 

responded to them in any way, shape, or form. The Premier 

ridiculed them. The Premier was derisive about them, and now 

we see his government adopting this Liberal proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is another example of the government being 

slow Liberals. But I do not criticize them for it, I congratulate 

them. I congratulate them on adopting our initiatives and our 

policies and I just wish they would adopt more. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order, order. Now I’ve 

requested all hon. members to resist the temptation to shout 

across the floor, and there’s still one hon. member persisting.  

And I would ask all hon. members to refrain from shouting 

across the floor, to provide for the hon. member from North 

Battleford the opportunity to make his remarks with the amount 

of attention that is befitting debate in the House. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is sad that it has 

taken this government so long to respond. However we should 

all still be grateful that the minister has now responded to the 

Liberal suggestion to establish youth justice committees. 

 

I’d like to speak on SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 

for a moment if I may, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago when this 

government introduced no-fault insurance, we were told that the 

measure was required in order to avoid rate hikes. We were told 

there would be rate hikes if we didn’t get no-fault. We were 

also told . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes, okay, I’m a 

lawyer. But we were told that the only people who would suffer 

from the introduction of no-fault was greedy, overstuffed 

lawyers. They were going to be the only victims of no-fault. 

 

Since then, Mr. Speaker, we have heard stories on an almost 

weekly basis of one accident victim after another who has fallen 

through the crack of no-fault. The serious pain and suffering of 

people who are not working basically goes uncompensated. 

And now, to add insult to injury, we are told that there is going 

to be rate hikes for SGI after all. 

 

Municipalities, Mr. Speaker. Many groups last week were 

relieved when the budget was read. They were happy to know 

that the bleeding has stopped or at least slowed a bit. Our 

municipalities have no such comfort. The municipal cuts 

continue to the point where most municipalities are receiving 

less than half the grants they received when this government 

took office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces which 

does not make grants in lieu to municipalities for provincial 

properties and buildings within urban municipalities. 

Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the federal government does 

make grants in lieu for property taxes. The province of 

Saskatchewan does not. Every province but one other and 

Saskatchewan pays grants in lieu. The federal government pays 

grants in lieu. This has become a serious problem for all of our 

municipalities, but of course especially for the city of Regina 

which has such a high percentage of government buildings. 

 

Now where are the Regina members in pointing out the burden, 

the pressure, on Regina assessment and Regina property owners 

as a result of our province being one of only two that does not 

make grants in lieu for provincial buildings. It’s another 

example, Mr. Speaker, where the federal government makes 

these grants. The city of Regina gets grants from the federal 

government for federal buildings in this city. It does not get 

grants for provincial buildings — another example where the 

slow Liberals on that side of the House would be well advised 

to adopt federal Liberal policy and start making these grants to 

ease some of the pressure they have put on the cities and towns 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



428  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, our municipal governments have 

been the most responsible level of government in Canada. They 

did not bring up large deficits in the 1980s like some, some 

unmentioned parties did. Our municipalities did not go 15 

billion in the glue. They have been responsible, Mr. Speaker. 

They have stuck within our budgets. 

 

But now I fear that because of the dramatic cut in municipal 

grants, they will be forced to raise property taxes in order to 

protect basic services. Mr. Speaker, the property tax is now 

being forced to finance a higher percentage of education costs 

than ever before in our history. The government says we should 

be moving in the other direction. We should try and lower the 

per cent of the education bill covered by property tax, but 

instead their policies have forced it higher and higher until, as 

my colleague points out, it is now 60 per cent. 

 

My serious concern, Mr. Speaker, is that the money being saved 

by our taxpayers through the reduction of the sales tax will be 

lost through higher property taxes that our municipalities and 

school boards will be forced to levy as a result of this budget. 

 

My concern also, Mr. Speaker, is that with so many of our 

health districts running huge deficits, that the increased funding 

to health  for which we are grateful  will simply be 

required to cover these deficits and will not result in improved 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will we be able to have improved services and 

nurses hired back into the systems, some of the 2,000 nurses we 

have lost, instead of going to cover health district deficits? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about the Wheat Board. 

Mr. Speaker, hon. members opposite said they were unclear of 

the Liberal position on the Wheat Board. I find this startling. It 

seems to me if there is one party’s position that is crystal clear, 

it is surely that of the Liberal Party. I would think it’s far clearer 

than anyone else. 

 

It was the Liberals, it was the Liberals who said, the producers 

have grown the wheat; the producers must decide the 

appropriate method of marketing; we will allow the producers 

to decide. It was the Liberals who said, we believe the Wheat 

Board has served the interests of western farmers well. 

 

But ultimately it is not for the politicians or the bureaucrats to 

decide whether the Wheat Board has made a valuable 

contribution to western agriculture. Ultimately it is our 

producers, and our producers alone, who must make that 

judgement. The Liberal Party allowed them to make that 

judgement. 

 

(1930) 

 

It was the Liberal Party who allowed a vote of our producers to 

find out what the wishes of our farmers was. Now we had on 

one side, we had people who were prepared to shout obscenities 

at anyone who suggested there should be a free vote. On the 

other side we had people who suggested that it was tyranny for 

a majority to decide on a closed marketing system. And then we  

had a Liberal Party who said, we respect the intelligence of the 

producers; we respect their right to make a decision; the 

decision is theirs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So don’t tell me that the Liberal position is 

unclear. It is clearer than that of any party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that pretty well concludes my introductory 

remarks and I’m now prepared to embark on the main body of 

my speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk about the hidden taxes this 

government collects, the taxes this government prefers to call 

fees. Mr. Speaker, we all understand that a government 

provides many services. Some are provided to all citizens out of 

general revenues — health care, education, and roads are 

examples of these. Others are provided by a mix of general 

revenue and user-pay. An example of this would be our 

provincial park system. Our provincial park system is paid 

roughly 50/50 — half out of general revenue, out of general tax 

revenue, and one-half by the fees charged to park users. 

 

Then there are the fees which have been levied for a specific 

purpose. These fees are not intended to be used in general 

revenue, but to cover the costs of certain specific services 

offered to certain special target groups. These fees are charged 

when there is agreement that the public should not have to 

subsidize a service to a specific group. It is also agreed then, 

Mr. Speaker, that when that specific group is charged for a 

service, that that charge should not become a way of 

subsidizing the general operations of government. 

 

But what is happening in practice, Mr. Speaker? When I 

initially inquired about the environmental handling charge, I 

was told that the money was required for recycling in order to 

recycle disposable containers and to finance the operations of 

our SARCAN depots  the SARCAN depots and the sheltered 

workshops, which are such a worthy cause, and which are 

certainly supported by all Liberal members. 

 

But then I dug a bit deeper, Mr. Speaker, and I found that this 

wasn’t quite the whole story. It turns out that much of the 

revenue from the environmental handling charge is taken into 

the General Revenue Fund and is not given to SARCAN and 

the sheltered workshops. To make the deception even worse, 

Mr. Speaker, the government charges the EHC (environmental 

handling charge) on a variety of containers which aren’t even 

recycled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this age of cynicism about politics, what can 

one say of a government which charges a recycling charge on 

containers it refuses to recycle. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not that 

these containers can’t be recycled. In fact they can be, and in 

fact SARCAN wants to recycle them and is convinced that if it 

is given that money, the EHC, it can in fact recycle them at a 

profit to SARCAN and the sheltered workshops. But the 

government refuses to give them the environmental handling 

charge revenues. It prefers to pocket them for its own purposes. 

 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

Mr. Speaker, to the extent that the environmental handling 

charge is not used for recycling, it can only be described as a 

hidden tax. It can only be described as money taken away from 

the sheltered workshop clients, some of the most disadvantaged 

people in our province. 

 

Now we hear that the government is considering extending the 

environmental handling charge to milk containers. Will they 

recycle milk containers or will they pocket that money? In 

either event, Mr. Speaker, let the Minister of the Environment 

be well warned: we in the Liberal caucus will vigorously 

oppose any tax hike for children’s milk. 

 

Another example of a hidden tax is the province’s land registry 

and personal property registry systems. Mr. Speaker, we all 

understand the need for a public land titles system and we all 

understand that that system should be paid for by those persons 

registering transfers, caveats, and mortgages. But while I agree 

that people using the Land Titles Office and registering 

documents in the Land Titles Office should pay for the service, 

it is fundamentally unfair for land titles fees to be used to 

finance other government activities. If the land titles fees are at 

a high profit, funnelled into the General Revenue Fund, then it 

becomes a tax on young people — a tax on young people 

buying their first home. It becomes a tax on someone trying to 

get into farming. It becomes a tax on someone trying to set up a 

new business. The same principle applies to the personal 

property registry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hear some chirping from members opposite 

that this is money that goes through lawyers’ hands; it is true. 

But it does not get paid by lawyers. Lawyers do not pay land 

titles fees, their clients do. And let no one be deceived on that 

point. 

 

Then there is the 1 per cent levy on all fire insurance contracts, 

Mr. Speaker. Now what is this for? Well this levy is ostensibly 

supposed to be used for fire-prevention education. But what 

happens, Mr. Speaker? Is it spent on fire-prevention education? 

Well in fact a bit of it is. Some of it is, but guess where most of 

it ends up? Again in the General Revenue Fund. It becomes a 

tax on people insuring their homes, again in the guise of a fee. 

 

How many taxes are we in fact paying in the guise of fees? 

How many other charges paid by the people of Saskatchewan 

are hidden taxes? How many other fees and charges are not 

spent on the purposes for which they are raised, but go into 

general revenue? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget that was introduced last week has 

adopted some of the Liberal program. Now in times past, when 

the NDP would accuse the federal Liberals of adopting some of 

their program, they would take great offence. They would call 

this robbery. Well I would like to say that we on this side of the 

House take no offence at the government adopting some of our 

ideas. In fact we are delighted to see it. Our only complaint is 

that they haven’t adopted more. 

 

Instead of being slow Liberals, be active, energetic, aggressive 

Liberals. Don’t half do the job, do the job completely. We need 

fast Liberals, not slow Liberals — committed to the protection  

of basic services, Mr. Speaker; committed to the protection of 

basic services in health, education, and roads; committed to the 

creation of jobs and opportunities for our young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say to the government that in 

some respects you’re on the right track. In some respects some 

initiatives have been taken in this budget which we are pleased 

to see. But please, Mr. Speaker, just speed up the process, 

please. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to leave friends 

opposite with the benefit of some reading I’ve been doing by 

the eminent psychologist, Dr. Scott Peck. In it Dr. Peck 

describes the symptoms of serious personality disorder and I 

just throw out to my learned friends opposite if this might not 

have some relevance to this government. 

 

He describes the symptoms of personality disorder as follows, if 

I may quote briefly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

(1) consistent, destructive scapegoating behaviour which 

might be quite subtle; 

 

Is it possible that applies to friends opposite? We’d have to 

remove the “subtle” though. 

 

(2) excessive intolerance to criticism; 

 

And I think we’ve seen examples of that tonight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(3) pronounced concern with the public image and the 

denial of vengeful motives; and 

 

(4) intellectual deviousness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know if Dr. Scott Peck has familiarity 

with the Saskatchewan NDP or not, but it seemed to me a pretty 

good prognosis, and I would commit his writings to the 

attention of friends opposite. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member:  Both barrels now . . . 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley 

says something about both barrels, but I want to say that having 

listened to the presentation by the member from North 

Battleford, I think I’d rather deal with items of substance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, I did listen with some care 

to what the member from North Battleford had to say. It was 

not easy because quite frankly it was very hard to follow, but 

after listening to him struggle through his speech it became 

obvious to me that a comment which some journalist said after 

the budget speech was very true. The member from the 

journalistic corps had written somewhere that the job of the 

opposition after this budget was going to be very difficult. And  



430  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that even the journalist wasn't 

correct on that one, because listening to the argument that the 

member opposite made about everything but the budget, it’s not 

difficult. It’s clearly, for the opposition to respond to this 

budget, it’s impossible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now, Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech 

debate I was pretty kind to the member for North Battleford and 

I meant it because one should be to new members. And I said 

that I don’t know long he’d be in this House because that’s 

really not my decision nor any one of us; it’s a decision of his 

electorate. But I was a little disappointed to hear him busy 

trying to defeat himself in the last hour-and-some that he was 

addressing this Legislative Assembly. He said something about 

the NDP being slow Liberals. Well, Mr. Speaker, to be a slow 

Liberal one would have to go backwards. 

 

And I don’t think that when you look at the budget which we 

have presented before us here today — or last week — that the 

progressive nature of this budget and what this budget shows 

has been accomplished since 1992 and ’91, that this is certainly 

not a slow budget. It is probably, Mr. Speaker . . . in fact it is 

not just probably. There is no doubt that it is the most 

progressive budget in all of Canada in this budget year from one 

end of this country to the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if the 

member from North Battleford thinks that the federal 

government — the federal Liberal government — cutting $7 

billion from health care, from post-secondary education, from 

social services, is progressive and it’s something that we should 

follow, that is the last thing we would ever want to do. Here is a 

government in Ottawa, a Liberal government in Ottawa, that 

has betrayed the people of Canada more even than the man they 

have to apologize to — Brian Mulroney. So I say to the member 

from North Battleford, please don’t make such suggestions, 

because you know that your colleagues in Ottawa, who tell you 

what to say in this House, have not done a great deal in the 

interests of this country. 

 

(1945) 

 

What have they done for Saskatchewan? They have taken away 

$400 million from the farmers of this province when they 

eliminated the Crow rate, after they promised by the Prime 

Minister in Saskatoon that it would never, never be abolished, 

Mr. Speaker. This is the federal government that . . . 

 

And member from North Battleford talks about hidden taxes. 

Well here is the Liberal member who talks about his colleagues 

in Ottawa, who are the masters of developing the hidden tax  

harmonization of the PST and the GST (goods and services tax) 

in what they call the blended sales tax. And then they insist that 

in Atlantic Canada that that tax be hidden in the price, so that it 

is not known and shown to the public when they come to buy 

the items at the store. Now that is a hidden tax, Mr. Speaker. So 

I think for the member from North Battleford or for any Liberal  

members to talk about hidden taxes is really putting a big 

stretch on any kind of an argument. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me speak directly to the budget. And first 

of all, let me commend the Minister of Finance who has 

presented just the other day a budget which we can all be proud 

of. And I say to the Minister of Finance and to the members of 

the Treasury Board, having been there myself and knowing the 

kind of diligence and commitment and hard work that it takes to 

put together a budget, that we appreciate what they have done 

and that we appreciate what is presented here because of their 

labours and their work. 

 

This Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, has shown the courage, 

the determination, and the leadership, against some very 

difficult odds, to be able to stick to the agenda of the 

government and to the agenda of the people of Saskatchewan 

and bring a budget based on the need for investing in people 

and building this province for the future. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in our lives every one 

of us can speak of days or events or experiences which are 

particularly significant. Today is such a good day for me. Today 

I can stand in this legislature, in my place, and speak about a 

budget which has been made possible by decisions made when 

this government was first elected in 1991, and about 

Saskatchewan people sacrificing and working together to 

prepare for a better future. This budget invests in people. There 

is after all, Mr. Speaker, no more important obligation of 

government than to build for the future, for our children and 

their children, and to make a better quality of life for future 

generations. 

 

Governments that pay attention only to the present — as I hear 

some members of the opposition doing, only pay attention to 

the present — but governments that pay attention only to the 

present are governments who take our society backwards. They 

put in debt the futures of our children and cater to greed and 

selfishness when they should be fostering cooperation, 

community, and compassion. It saddens me to say that we have 

had such governments in our province. The length of time that 

they have governed has not been long but the harm that they 

have inflicted has been very severe. 

 

In 1982 this province was debt free. On the Consolidated Fund 

of government there was no debt. Oh, the member from 

Rosthern laughs — I don’t know what he’s laughing about — 

but he obviously does not know anything about the history. But 

in l982 this province was debt free. There was debt in the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, which was debt used for 

investment purposes and its repayment was done by revenues, 

or like you would do in any business. Self-liquidating debt; not 

dead-weight debt, which is what the debt is on the Consolidated 

Fund. And you know, Mr. Speaker, in nine short years the 

Conservative government — through mismanagement, through 

short-sightedness, and worst of all, driven by ideology — 

caused our debt to grow to almost $l5 billion. 

 

In 1983, Mr. Speaker, the premier of this province — a 

Conservative premier of this province, Mr. Devine — went to 

New York. I think it was either New York or Chicago. I think it  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

was New York. And he said, and I quote: “Saskatchewan has so 

much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still 

break even.” I don’t have to say any more. That said it all. That 

said it all, Mr. Speaker. And from that day that’s exactly what 

they did — they mismanaged this province to the point where it 

almost reached a crisis situation and mortgaged the future of 

our children for many years to come. 

 

Now what’s even more remarkable, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Liberals in this House are proposing to do the same thing. Just 

listen to them. Just listen. The member for North Battleford 

says . . . Well I invite the member from North Battleford to take 

all the speeches that the Liberals have made and to look at the 

questions which they have asked and add up the numbers. 

That’s all I ask him to do. Even lawyers could do that, I’m sure. 

 

But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if he did that and compared 

what they are saying to what was said by the Conservatives in 

1981 and 1982, you would think it was from the same speech, 

the same script, the same speech writer. We hear them in this 

legislature every day making the same speeches, asking, as Mr. 

Devine did and his Conservatives did in 1981 and 1982, the 

same questions. 

 

It seems, Mr. Speaker — and some might think this is an 

unkind thing to say, but this is the way I see it — that their 

personal political futures have become more important than the 

future of this province. And I find that very disappointing. 

 

Day after day they defend a Liberal government in Ottawa that 

has inflicted more harm on this province than any federal 

government, at least in my lifetime. None has done worse. 

 

Their research staff spends so much time thinking up gimmicks 

that they provide no constructive debate on any item of 

substance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this afternoon when the Minister of Agriculture rose to 

address the question of great importance to this province and to 

the farmers of this province, and the Leader of the Third Party 

rose to respond, I think it was very telling that no Liberal 

member rose when that opportunity presented itself to say 

something about the vote on the Canadian Wheat Board vote as 

it applies to the sale of barley. It said everything, Mr. Speaker. 

And I have been here as long as most people, and I’ll tell you 

this is the first time I can recall that it’s ever occurred in this 

House. 

 

Now what does it tell us? Well I think it tells us two things. 

One, I think it tells us that the Liberals want to put themselves 

in the position where they can go to people who oppose the 

Canadian Wheat Board and say, well we agree with you; you’re 

right. And then when they run into somebody in the next coffee 

shop who says, I want the Wheat Board protected because it’s 

the best thing for Saskatchewan farmers, the Liberals then want 

to say, oh I agree with you. 

 

That’s what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker. That’s about that kind 

of hypocrisy that the Liberals have had a tradition of having 

over the years. 

 

Now the next point, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  It’s called democracy. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Oh democracy is telling one person one 

thing and telling persons something else. I don’t think that’s 

what democracy is, Mr. Speaker. The basic tenet of democracy, 

Mr. Speaker, is for the politicians to be honest. And there’s 

something dishonest about the position that the Liberal Party 

took in this House today. 

 

The other thing that troubles me, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member 

impugning the integrity of members opposite. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Hon. members will be 

aware that the rules of the House have for a long time 

prohibited the impugning of bad motives on members of the 

House. And all hon. members will be aware that the rule’s 

applied when directed to other members of the House and in a 

personal kind of way. I was listening very carefully when the 

hon. member from Regina Dewdney was making his remarks, 

and I did not hear the impugning of bad motives by other 

individual members, hon. members of the House. The point of 

order is not well taken. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was my 

first point. The second point I want to make is that because we 

know, and we listen to the Liberals with some care, that 

everything they say in here is being said and directed by the 

federal government in Ottawa, the Liberals in Ottawa . . . That’s 

what they’re doing, they’re puppets. 

 

So although on one hand they want to be able to deceive 

Saskatchewan people by talking about different sides of the 

issue on the Canadian Wheat Board, they have also signalled in 

here by not getting up to speak on that issue . . . Mr. Speaker, 

something about the federal Liberal government. And what it 

says about the federal Liberal government – who said to them, 

don’t get up and speak on that issue – is that we are going to say 

what we’re going to say about the Wheat Board vote that just 

took place, but get us elected with a majority after the next 

election and something may change and that vote may not mean 

a thing. Just like the promise on the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker, the 

promise by Liberals on the Canadian Wheat Board is about as 

reliable as that one was or the promise on the GST. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, governments and all people in public life 

must do more than that, Mr. Speaker, or they betray the trust 

which their electors put in them. I’m proud that this New 

Democratic Party government has been prepared to provide the 

leadership with the courage and the political will to make the 

right decisions for the people of Saskatchewan, even when 

those decisions were unpopular with some, at least until they 

were able to see the results. 

 

This budget is one of the results of those decisions and that 

leadership and that’s why I’m proud of it, Mr. Speaker. It’s  



432  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

because the right decisions were made that we are presented 

with a budget that invests in people, that creates growth and 

jobs, that provides hope and optimism, and most important, 

prepares a future for our children and our young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know I’ve been reading a lot about what has 

been said about this budget. Some of the analysts have 

suggested that somehow this budget is the result of good luck, 

that somehow it’s because of a thriving economy. Well it’s true, 

we have a thriving economy. But that’s not solely why we’re 

able to do in this budget what has been done, and I will address 

that in a moment. 

 

But I really do wish that some of the people who report the 

news and write the articles about public affairs would learn 

something about history and look a little bit in the past so that 

their stories are less cynical and more based on the reality and 

objectivity. 

 

And while acknowledging in the business page of the 

Leader-Post on the Friday after the budget . . . an article, while 

acknowledging the positive aspects of the budget, just couldn’t 

resist dwelling on a cynical view of why the decisions were 

made and how they were made possible. I quote one part of it, 

Mr. Speaker. It said: 

 

So MacKinnon’s decision to provide a major 

across-the-board tax break to consumers and business 

appears to have been more of a Hobson’s choice than 

enlightened fiscal policy . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Good grief. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  One of the members says, good grief and 

I say good grief. 

 

That is not objective analysis, Mr. Speaker. Had the writer of 

that article bothered to read the budget of 1992 he would have 

seen that getting to what is possible today was clearly set out in 

that period of time. It’s not good luck; it was more than that; it 

was good government. 

 

Then I must say that another analyst — in this case in the 

column on the sort of fourth page where we have reports from 

the legislature — had it more correct, because he said, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . MacKinnon’s budget is making a believer out of you, 

me and likely most of us in this province is an issue that’s 

certainly worthy of more exploration before we leave this 

column. 

 

And then he said further on: 

 

Fortunately, wisdom of past budgets has braced the 

government’s coffers for this hit. 

 

And then he said later: 

 

. . . let us not lose sight of what’s been accomplished here 

by dwelling on the petty. 

Perhaps more importantly, though, it’s a faith rebuilder. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, we have needed for a long time in this 

country and in this province some faith rebuilding and I’m 

pleased that this budget and this government is doing that. 

There should be no doubt that if this government had not 

managed the finances in the way that we did, all of the growth 

in our economy which we are blessed with today would have 

been swallowed up by the interest charges on an even greater 

debt. People would not have benefited for the improvement that 

we see in the economy today. 

 

(2000) 

 

The bond dealers and the bankers would have gotten richer, and 

Saskatchewan people would have gotten poorer, and our 

children’s future would have been grimmer. This wasn’t luck, 

Mr. Speaker; this wasn’t accidental; this was decisive 

government. In fact our economy might not have grown to the 

extent that it has because of the lack of confidence if those 

decisions had not been made. In fact there would likely have 

been a need for a tax increase instead of a 22 per cent sales tax 

decrease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the budget of 1992, which I had the honour to 

present, this government spoke of, and I quote: 

 

. . . eliminating wasteful spending, ensuring accountability, 

and restoring financial well-being, and these actions prove 

our commitment to rebuilding the public trust. 

 

And it was also said in that budget, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

. . . today our province stands at a critical crossroads. We 

must choose a path for the future and that choice must 

reflect the harsh realities of what the (former government) 

did to the financial integrity of (this province). 

 

Mr. Speaker, those choices were made and that future is here 

today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the first page of that speech, Mr. Speaker, 

we talked about rebuilding Saskatchewan together — not just 

the government, not just members of the legislature, but the 

people of this province. And that’s what was done. And that’s 

why although in other provinces where some of the difficult 

decisions are being made there are protests and there are 

demonstrations and people are upset because of the way those 

governments are doing it, in this province Saskatchewan people 

understood. Saskatchewan people understood and they 

appreciated the fact that the approach that was taken was 

balanced and compassionate and it wasn’t just the hack and the 

slash that we are seeing in Liberal and Conservative provinces 

across this country. 

 

Now during that time, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’m going to take 

this opportunity to commend the people who were involved, 

and I can’t speak of them all so I’m just going to use some 

examples to highlight what I mean. But the members of this 

caucus showed the courage and the determination to get the job 

done. And I will recall for ever the Minister of Agriculture at  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

that time, who’s the member from Rosetown, who had to 

withstand the kind of criticism that came from the opposition 

when this government was bringing forward changes in 

agriculture which have made the diversification which is taking 

place in Saskatchewan today possible. 

 

On the other side of the House, that was a terrible thing to do. 

They wanted the status quo. They wanted to leave things just as 

they were, so that nothing would change. Well had we done 

that, Mr. Speaker, we would not have the diversification that we 

have today. 

 

I recall the leadership that was shown by the former minister of 

Health. I can mention her name because she is not a member 

now — Louise Simard — who provided the leadership to bring 

about the most important and progressive renewal of the health 

care system in Saskatchewan — greater than anywhere else in 

this country and North America — to the point where it is 

recognized everywhere in this continent except maybe by the 

Liberals and the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. Every member of 

this side of the House knew what had to be done and they 

committed themselves to do it. It wasn’t easy, but it was the 

right thing to do. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing here is considering a 

budget whose time has come. But also we’re considering it in 

the context of a book which I remember reading called A Tale 

of Two Cities. I think one could stand and speak at some length 

about the tale of two budgets in an address to the budget speech 

here today. And we are seeing here the difference between a 

New Democratic Party government in keeping its promises and 

restoring trust, and a federal Liberal government which has 

shamefully broken its promises and fostered mistrust. 

 

In the area of taxation, Mr. Speaker, for example, the federal 

Liberal politicians promised to eliminate the GST. The Prime 

Minister promised it. Mr. Martin promised it. Mr. Goodale 

promised it. They all promised it. Instead they have pushed hard 

to harmonize the GST with provincial sales taxes and shift 

billions of dollars in taxation from business to consumers and to 

families struggling to make a living. 

 

This Liberal government has not only had to apologize to Brian 

Mulroney, but it’s implementing every Mulroney policy 

initiative which he began and could not quite accomplish. And 

every one of those things, Mr. Speaker, when those Liberals 

were in opposition they said they would never, ever do any of 

them. But the minute they got elected, they began to do every 

single one. 

 

But because people forget, members of this House forget — 

especially the members opposite — I will read again what the 

Prime Minister said about the GST. I quote: 

 

I am opposed to the GST. I have always been opposed to it, 

and I will always be opposed to it. It is a tax that is both 

regressive and discriminatory. 

 

This is from The Globe and Mail, October 29, 1990. 

 

Well when the time came to deliver, Mr. Speaker, that promise  

was forgotten and instead the proposal became, well he’s now 

going to harmonize the GST and he’s going to call it the 

blended sales tax and he’s going to hide the tax in the price of 

the product so the people wouldn’t know that they’re paying the 

tax. What a difference, Mr. Speaker. That’s what Liberals do. 

 

But when this government went to the voters in 1995, our 

commitment was, as the economy improves and we have some 

money to spend, one third of it would be spent on enhancing 

services and programs — which this budget does — one third 

would be spent on repayment of debt, and one third of it would 

be spent on tax reduction as is possible. 

 

Well last Thursday we had all three. The debt has been reduced 

considerably. The services have been enhanced by funding 

which is being provided, not only replacing the huge cut-backs 

that the federal Liberal government has made, but actually 

putting more money than just replacing those cut-backs in for 

those services. And the sales tax has been reduced from 9 per 

cent to 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. A promise made and a promise 

kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  The Liberal GST-PST harmonization 

would expand and include almost every purchase that is made 

by the consumer in Saskatchewan. Our provincial sales tax has 

got more exemptions than any other sales tax in this country. As 

a matter of fact some more items were added to those 

exemptions related to health care: glucose monitors and 

cholesterol testers, medical supports, and braces. 

 

If the GST was ever harmonized with the PST, Mr. Speaker, all 

of those things would be taxed. That’s the Liberal proposal. 

That’s the proposal that the members opposite support, because 

when the new leader, the researcher in the Liberal caucus office, 

was asked about the GST, he said unequivocally, very clearly, 

that he was in favour of harmonizing the GST with the PST. 

That’s the Liberal position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The same, Mr. Speaker, could be said about social services and 

in particular child poverty, which is, as the speech said, I think 

it said something like, it’s a blight on our society. There is 

nothing more hypocritical than the way that the Liberals have 

dealt with child poverty. After four years of cutting back on 

programs to provide assistance to children and people in need 

— $7 billion from the transfers to the provinces for health care, 

education and social services — after four years of cutting back 

and increasing the numbers of children in poverty, all of a 

sudden they have seen the light. 

 

And in this budget they’ve put in a pittance of $600 million for 

all of Canada — for all of Canada — but you can’t have it until 

1978 after the election is over . . . ’98, Mr. Speaker, 1998 after 

the election is over. Now why is that — why is that Mr. 

Speaker? Is it because, is it because their commitment to do 

what they say they’re going to do is as firm as their 

commitment was to preserve the Crow rate and eliminate the 

GST? 

 



434  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

The voters of this country will have to ask that question when 

they go to the polls sometime this spring or sometime this year. 

And I think they’re going to find it very difficult to believe that 

promise which is in the budget but somehow isn’t going to be 

put into place for another year, in fact over a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a contrast to the budget in Saskatchewan by 

an NDP government — what a contrast. Here in this budget 

there is $30 million more for the assistance of children in need, 

to support those children that need the help that they need. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even during our most difficult time when we 

were struggling with trying to bring balance to the budgets, 

while we were struggling, Mr. Speaker, to keep the bankers off 

the backs of our backs in Saskatchewan — a problem which 

was created by the previous government — even during that 

time in 1992 when we presented our first budget, I can proudly 

say that we said after we were showing where we had to save 

money we said very clearly there will be an additional $28 

million for social assistance, to help people in need. 

 

That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker, between the kind of 

handling of a financial difficulty by an NDP government and 

the handling of a financial difficulty by a Liberal or a 

Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. This government, this 

NDP government, did it with balance and compassion and 

looking after those who needed the help that they needed. Those 

Conservative and Liberal governments, Mr. Speaker, tried to 

solve their deficit problem on the backs of those kind of people 

and cut the funding from them which they can sorely afford, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude the way 

the budget of 1992 concluded because it says a lot about where 

we were and where we are. And that budget said: 

 

Today is a new beginning . . . (for our) province. Today we 

begin to confront the future with high hopes and great 

faith, secure in the knowledge that New Democratic 

governments throughout our province’s history have been 

successful in achieving their mandate(s). 

 

. . . as they have succeeded, so too will we. 

 

It will not be easy. (because) Nothing (this) important ever 

is. (And) While we have to pay for the mistakes of the 

previous administration, let us (all) look forward to the day 

when our community can join together in celebration of 

financial freedom. 

 

Safe in the knowledge that the mistakes of the last 10 years will 

never happen again in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let us look forward to the day when we can tell our 

children that though we entered the 1990s plagued by 

financial crisis, we made the difficult decisions. We turned 

a new page in our history and put this province firmly on 

the path for prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is now time to rebuild Saskatchewan 

together. 

And this budget achieves those objectives. I am proud of that 

fact, Mr. Speaker. I am proud of our Minister of Finance for 

presenting it. I am proud of our Premier for providing a 

leadership through these years so we could get to this point. 

And I am proud of all of this caucus that stood up and did what 

we did and did not succumb to the kind of debate we’re hearing 

from the members opposite, which is based solely on the 

politics and very little on the reality of what needs to be done. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you is so good — even I 

think the Tory leader will agree with me — that everyone in 

this House should be able to support it. Now I know that the 

Leader of the Conservative Party said before the budget, he says 

— this is not the exact quote, but it’s pretty accurate — he says, 

we will not be able to support the budget unless there is a 2 per 

cent cut in the sales tax. Well there is a 2 per cent cut in the 

sales tax. 

 

I look forward to Friday to see whether the Conservatives stand 

up and vote for the budget, Mr. Speaker. Because that will not 

hurt them. That will not hurt them. In fact it’ll probably enhance 

their status. And it’s being enhanced pretty good now when you 

compare to what we’re hearing in the House here in this 

session. But I really urge the Leader of the Opposition to stay 

true to his word and stand up in this House on Friday and 

support the budget. I will praise him if he does. I will go outside 

and praise him if he does. 

 

(2015) 

 

And I say to the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, they can do the same. 

They can do the same. Oh this is true that this budget does not 

spend another $500 million like they’d like us to spend and put 

the province into greater debt. But this budget does provide a 

balance. It provides more funding for education. It provides 

more funding for health care. It provides more funding for poor 

children. It invests in people and therefore it is worthy of the 

support of everyone in this House. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I ask them to join me and the rest of my 

colleagues when we stand up on Friday and vote in favour of a 

2 per cent sales tax cut, or vote against a 2 per cent sales tax cut. 

But I think it would be much wiser if they voted for the 2 cent 

. . . 22 per cent sales tax cut instead of voting against it. Their 

voters would appreciate it, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that even 

they would enjoy a much happier Easter if they took that noble 

step and voted in favour of the budget on that day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, in the budget address last Thursday 

was a message from this Premier and his government to 

supposedly inform the people of Saskatchewan on how their tax 

dollars would be used within the next year, and how our money 

will be portioned out and utilized in order to make the province 

a better place to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some time ago the Premier gave us a hint that this 

budget was going to be a good news budget, and so many 

people had their hopes built up. Mr. Speaker, they were hoping 

for changes, because in the past five years they had experienced  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

the overwhelming destruction of this province’s infrastructure 

through health, education, and municipal cuts. They have 

experienced great feelings of helplessness and frustration and 

anger as a result of cancelled contracts and broken promises; 

and ineptness and incompetency of government in dealing not 

only with funding issues, but also with negligence and 

inefficiencies on the part of this government surrounding the 

red tape of bureaucracy. 

 

People tell me daily, Mr. Speaker, of the obstacles that they 

encounter — of being stone-walled by this government and 

government departments. They speak of government inaction or 

lack of ability to act because they don’t have consistent policy 

guidelines to follow. And why is that? Because policy can be 

and is manipulated to suit this government’s political agenda, 

and that’s the only agenda that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, laying out a budget is only one factor to consider 

in good governing. The other factors are, number one, ensuring 

the electorate that government will commit to consistent, 

effective, open, and accountable policy direction. And number 

two, ensuring that government’s budgets are geared towards 

creating opportunity that will result in an optimum quality of 

life for everyone in this province. 

 

In short, people do want a government that they can trust; a 

government that adheres to a vision, and a vision that is 

supported by a clear-cut, responsible, and detailed plan — a 

plan that offers complete disclosure in a timely, accountable 

manner. 

 

Governments must state what they are hoping to achieve — 

determine and state exactly how they are going to achieve it; 

monitor some progress carefully and report every action in 

detail to the citizens of this province. But this is not being done. 

Instead, what we’ve had is 30 years of back-room, clandestine 

meetings with plans being made behind closed doors on how 

our money is to be spent; plans that serve only to accommodate 

the need of inflated egos, that serve only to quench the thirst of 

power-hungry individuals rather than a sincere dedication to the 

well-being of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to have greater transparency in how 

government is doing their business. For instance, Mr. Speaker, 

this government has stated that there is a need to redesign social 

assistance, and I agree with that. But I don’t agree with shifting 

money around from one department to another without 

presenting a detailed plan to explain the changes in funding and 

exactly why, where, when, and how this redesign will be 

effectively implemented. And if there is no disclosure of a plan, 

the people of this province have a great reason to be concerned. 

 

I can’t condone this haphazard approach of fixing things. We’ve 

had a prime example of that with health care, and it appears that 

we are headed in the same confusion with social services. It’s 

important for this government and all governments to recognize 

that at all times the people of this province have a right to know 

exactly what government initiatives are when dealing with 

public money and public trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I question whether this government is far-sighted  

enough to implement “trainfare” in an effective manner because 

they have already attempted to do this through the New Careers 

program which was implemented a couple of years ago. 

 

The idea was good; however, many social service recipients 

applying for entry into training courses were told that they 

would be placed on a waiting-list. Some waited for up to two 

years. Others started some form of training only to be told about 

half way through that funding had dried up and they couldn’t 

complete their course. To top it off, there were insufficient 

spaces available at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) facilities to accommodate the number 

of applicants. 

 

How in the world will we now accommodate that even greater 

demand? I notice that there is an extra $7 million targeted for 

provincial training allowance under Post-Secondary Education 

and Skills Training. I also see that Social Services spent $524 

million last year, and that’s down to $511 million this year — a 

$13 million difference — as well as 13 million being used for 

the child action plan. However, only twice did I see a specific 

reference to where some of this money would be spent. That 

was to a Youth Futures pilot project in Prince Albert and teen 

wellness centres in six specific centres. 

 

And so many questions come to mind. Does government intend 

to spend $18 million to expand physical facilities and hire staff 

to accommodate the growing numbers requiring training? Has 

the government determined what courses will be developed to 

meet the need of employers? Has the government considered 

the rapidly changing world we live in? And do they have the 

appropriate classes to meet the changing needs of our world? 

 

Money has been targeted for training programs. But 

government is not working well to determine where training is 

needed or how to meet the great needs out there. And the 

minister responsible for post-secondary skills and training 

stated in a news release that over a period of three years their 

new training strategy will create 10 per cent more training and 

employment opportunities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that translates into about a 3 per cent 

increase in employment and training opportunities each year. So 

how will this strategy accommodate the 5,923 single 

employables and 6,196 that are partially employable and 

presently on social assistance? How will this formula 

accommodate all the single moms in need of training and their 

need for child care and transportation? How will this change 

contribute to meet the complex and immense needs of northern 

communities? 

 

And if funding and facilities are not adequate to meet the needs, 

how will the Department of Social Services meet the financial 

needs of those employables who cannot obtain training or 

employment with only $13 million left in their budget? 

 

How? Well I can imagine that the provincial government may 

use their portion of the $600 million — which would end up at 

approximately $40 million for Saskatchewan — that the federal 

government will be distributing to this province in July of this 

year. Maybe it’s time to give credit where credit is due — to the  



436  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

federal government for its unwavering support to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many issues surrounding Social 

Services that are deserving scrutiny. The challenge is 

unbelievable in this area. But one thing is sure. As long as this 

government refuses to create a climate for the growth of 

creative, entrepreneurial activity, the problems will only 

escalate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point I would like to make reference to the 

budget . . . to the budgeted $250,000 allotted for street youth 

and youth prostitution initiatives. Mr. Speaker, government says 

it will provide a means of helping children get off the street 

safely, and it will provide an option and a point of contact for 

those children about to run the street. But I question how 

government intends to do this. Will safe recovery houses be 

constructed? Is $250,000 enough to construct safe recovery 

houses and provide alternative measures for this immediate 

need in all Saskatchewan cities? 

 

I ask this NDP government to state what the intended plan is, if 

there is a plan. Clearly there is no excuse for delay on this issue, 

as there have been well-thought-out written submissions to the 

minister from individuals and community organizations 

throughout Saskatchewan outlining very effective programs — 

programs that would include professional voluntary assistance 

in alleviating and healing these young people, who need help 

right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I introduced the Bill to take measures to 

combat child prostitution, it was my hope that from that Bill 

would emerge the greater possibility of defining victims of 

prostitution as victims of child sexual abuse, and entitle them to 

protection under the care of the minister. The minister would 

then have the authoritative responsibility of ensuring 

appropriate treatment and safety for those children. The Bill 

would also open the doors for perpetrators to be charged with 

child sexual abuse — pedophilia — and be given a sentence 

that suits the crime. 

 

Saskatchewan could take the lead along with Alberta to ensure 

that the penalty for such a crime would be effective enough to 

act as a major deterrent to pedophiles. Mr. Speaker, we need to 

have penalties that will make pedophiles think twice about the 

consequences of their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues of violence against women and 

children, poverty, and youth at risk are closely related. One in 

two females are physically or sexually abused by the time they 

reach the age of 17. To continue to do nothing about this 

violence is to condone it and, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province are frustrated with government’s inadequate action on 

these issues. We must immediately take measures to put a stop 

to these crimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a few other points regarding the budget 

that I would like to make. 

 

In listening to the budget address, the absence of support for 

rural Saskatchewan was glaringly apparent. Approximately 30  

million in funding cuts to municipalities this year. An 

unbelievable withdrawing of funding to the NISA (Net Income 

Stabilization Account) program to the tune of $60 million. A 

pittance of an increase to district health boards that will do 

basically nothing to support health funding to rural areas. 

 

In the Central Plains Health District, the 1.8 per cent increase in 

funding will do little more than pay for the increased wages of 

district management. Boards of education have quickly realized 

that there is no increase at all in their funding from the 

provincial government. 

 

And yes, the PST is down 2 per cent — wonderful. That is truly 

wonderful. But the overall effect of higher income and 

corporate taxes, higher utility rates, higher property taxes for 

most, exorbitant payroll taxes for business, and excessive 

regulations will continue the almost unbearable burden for 

many striving to exist. And there is no guarantee that this NDP 

government will not continue to broaden its tax base as it has 

discreetly done in the past. 

 

And speaking of taxes, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the 

members opposite and the people of this province that we are 

still paying 790 million more in taxes than when this 

government came into power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is fooling itself if it thinks people 

will ever regain their confidence in this NDP administration. 

People from all walks of life have spoken to me of their 

disillusionment and distrust of the government. People from 

SaskPower, SaskTel, Workers’ Compensation, Social Services, 

farmers, business people, doctors, nurses, lawyers, and teachers 

say that they have very little confidence in this government’s 

ability to create opportunity and jobs because they say that they 

are incompetent managers trying to play in an arena of free 

enterprise with the social conscience — an arena that they’re 

not familiar with or capable of understanding. 

 

(2030) 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I cannot support the budget 

as it does very little to support the dreams and aspirations of 

those that do understand the meaning of government’s role to 

empower, to enrich, and enable the people of this province to 

seek out and determine their own solutions, to seek out their 

own destiny. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite cannot blame me for my 

lack of support, as even the member from Regina Victoria was 

dozing off during the Finance minister’s address. If it’s not 

exciting enough for him it’s surely not exciting enough for me 

or the people of this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am going to 

address my remarks tonight to my two main areas of 

responsibility, being the Labour portfolio and Post-Secondary 

Education. 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

I want to begin with the Department of Labour. And not to talk 

about the Department of Labour but to talk about working 

people and some of their concerns. And I’m glad that I follow 

the member from Humboldt in the speaking order tonight 

because what she said caught my interest. 

 

She was talking about the point of view of people with respect 

to this government. And I, Mr. Speaker, do not know who in the 

world she’s talking to. Talking to her colleagues perhaps, and 

perhaps to some members of her own executive. But I want to 

talk tonight about the views of a growing number of working 

people who are viewing what’s happening in this House with 

increasing concern. 

 

I’m not talking here about the Tories because the working 

people of this province have got a pretty good fix on the Tories 

right now. They understand that if the Tories were to ever form 

the government in this province again, they are toast. The 

working people of this province are toast if those people ever 

make it back into power in this province. 

 

The concern that they’re having, Mr. Speaker, is with the 

Liberal opposition — with the Liberal opposition. And people 

are fooled when they first think about the Liberal Party because 

they think that that word, liberal, signifies the small “l” 

meaning of the word, which denotes a kind of a progressive 

frame of mind, kind of a liberal attitude towards things, a kind 

of an intention that they will make things better, that they will 

improve the quality of life of people. 

 

But that’s not so and that’s not . . . and the fact that that is not 

so is being made increasingly plain by utterances from the 

leadership of that party. And I want to bring that to the House 

tonight because it is becoming more and more the subject of 

conversation among working people in this province. 

 

Let me just take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the 

labour legislation that we have in this province. This is 

legislation which affects working people. It affects all working 

people. And when we talk about working people, we’re not 

talking about some union leader in Toronto or some activist that 

we see on a picket line in a television image, we’re talking 

about our neighbours. We’re talking about our friends and our 

neighbours and people among whom we move every day. 

We’re talking about our constituents. We’re talking indeed in 

many cases about our own children. That’s what we’re talking 

about. 

 

So when we talk about the labour laws of this province, we’re 

talking about the legislative provisions and the regulations that 

affect our friends and our neighbours as they go about the 

ordinary business of making a living. 

 

The Labour Standards Act, for example, provides in effect the 

employment contract for most of the people who are employed 

in this province. It sets the annual holidays. It sets the public 

holidays. It sets a wide range of conditions and benefits that 

apply to everybody. If we talk about fooling with the labour 

law, fooling with The Labour Standards Act in this province, 

we are really talking about tampering with the employment 

contract of practically everyone who works in this province. 

And so it is with occupational health and safety — a piece of 

legislation that tries to guarantee that our workplaces are safe 

and healthy for our friends and our neighbours and our children 

and our constituents who have to work for a living. Now those 

people are very much aware that those laws are in place and are 

in place for their benefits. And so when they hear of a news 

release from the office of the Liberal opposition, dated February 

5, 1997, which I have in my hand, and when they hear that the 

Leader of the Opposition says, in quotation marks, in his own 

press release the following, and I quote: 

 

Only when this government begins to address its present 

taxation and labour policies and reduces the regulatory 

nightmare facing business will there be any hope of 

significant gains in terms of job creation. 

 

When they hear that, Mr. Speaker, it is a chilling experience for 

them, because they know when they’re talking about the labour 

polices they are talking about The Labour Standards Act, they 

are talking about The Occupational Health and Safety Act, and 

they’re talking about The Trade Union Act. And these are the 

very things that guarantee to our working people a quality of 

life which is the pride of this country — which is the pride of 

this country. 

 

And they know that when you talk about addressing those 

policies, what it means, it means that these policies are to be 

weakened, that this legislation is to be changed, that rights and 

benefits that are guaranteed to working people will be watered 

down and taken away, and it frightens them. It frightens them. 

 

And then when they hear stories and rumours about speeches 

made in this House to the same effect, they become even more 

frightened. And I quote from the speech of the House Leader of 

the opposition, the member from Melfort, given in this House 

on March 20. I quote from that speech the following, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan’s onerous labour policies remain 

impediments to small businesses. Labour standards, The 

Trade Union Act, The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement, these are only but a few of the hurdles this 

government has thrown in the way of small business. And 

if we are to continue to build a strong economy and 

promote economic development, we must find a friendlier 

climate for small business. These things have been pushing 

us in the opposite direction. 

 

Which things, Mr. Speaker? The Labour Standards Act, The 

Trade Union Act. Not mentioned is The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act, but I’m sure the member from Melfort would 

admit that that’s included in this list. And it scares our working 

people in a very fundamental way because they all know that it 

is the labour laws of this province that govern what happens to 

them when they’re on the job. It defines their rights, it defines 

their benefits, and it defines their protections. 

 

And we’re not here talking about some union leader from 

Toronto or some activist that you see on a picket line on TV. 

We’re talking about our friends and our neighbours and our 

constituents and our very families. And those are the people  



438  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

who we should be protecting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, those are the people 

whose quality of life we should be seeking to enhance. Not to 

tear apart, not to reduce, not to drive them down in a race to the 

bottom. 

 

Let me talk about a race to the bottom because I think that’s 

very much the point that the Liberal Party is trying to get at 

with this press release and with the speech from which I quoted. 

And no doubt we will be hearing more about this in the future. 

 

With the so-called globalization of the world economies, the 

internationalization of the economies, and the free trade 

agreements and all the rest of it, there are incredible pressures 

on all governments to weaken labour laws, to weaken labour 

and environmental standards, to reduce the cost of doing 

business — all to support the business sector. Now we do a lot 

of things in this government to support the business sector, but 

there are some things that we’re not prepared to do. 

 

But the pressure on us and on all governments to take steps in 

that direction is significantly heavier, significantly higher than it 

has ever been, and it is . . . The pressure comes to us, Mr. 

Speaker, from manufacturers and exporters who are having to 

compete against countries of the Third World where wages are 

low and working conditions are bad and environmental 

standards are bad. And the pressure on these governments, 

including our own, is to lower our standards so that they will be 

in the better position to compete against manufacturers and 

exporters from Malaysia and from Mexico and from Ecuador 

and from the other less fortunate countries in the world. 

 

And we have people, and many of them sit across the House 

from me now, who are prepared to engage in this race to the 

bottom, to weaken standards and lower standards in Canada so 

that our manufacturers can compete against manufacturers from 

the Third World. Mr. Speaker, we have made it as plain as we 

can that we are not going to engage in that race. We’re not 

engaging in the race to the bottom. 

 

Our philosophy on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we should be levelling up, that what is sacrosanct is the quality 

of life of the people who live in this province and in this 

country. And all of their hard-won gains ought to be 

maintained; the fact The Labour Standards Act applies, as I 

said, to practically every person who works in this province. 

And those gains in that Act have been a long time coming and 

many people have worked hard and long to achieve those 

advances and they contribute a great deal to our quality of life. 

We’re solidly in favour of protecting and safeguarding and, 

where possible, improving those benefits. We are not about to 

engage in the race to the bottom. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The rhetoric that we’ve heard so far 

from the opposition have indicated that they are prepared to 

participate in that race to the bottom. When you talk about  

rolling back the labour legislation of this province, that’s 

precisely what you’re talking about. And we on this side of the 

House are not going to do that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to my other responsibilities 

with respect to post-secondary education. And I want to begin 

by talking about the training system, the SIAST and regional 

colleges and the group of policies that have to do with training 

and retraining people who want to enter the workforce, or 

people who are already in the workforce and want to upgrade 

their skills so they can improve their jobs. 

 

We had a discussion in this House about these matters in the 

last session of this legislature, and it was quite an interesting 

discussion. I would remind members that . . . well I would 

remind members of the history of this issue. 

 

It was the case in this country for about the last 30 years that the 

federal government was the lead government with respect to 

training and workforce . . . or at least training-related issues. We 

used to call them manpower issues, but political correctness 

does not permit us to use that term any longer. But the federal 

government took the initiative in that group of issues about 30 

years ago and they provided the leadership in this country and 

in this province with respect to those issues. 

 

We in this province were content to go along with that and 

succeeding governments cooperated with the federal 

government and supplemented the programs of the federal 

government, filled in around the federal policies, and the 

combined efforts of the two levels of government provided us 

with a training and labour-market system as we have known it. 

 

Now for a number of reasons, the federal government decided 

that they were going to get out of the training field. Primarily it 

was a jurisdictional question, and I think aimed at the province 

of Quebec, who have always objected to federal participation in 

these issues because they are education issues and that’s within 

the exclusive jurisdiction of the province. Well the federal 

government accepted that argument a couple of years ago and 

they are getting out of the training field in a big way — for all 

practical purposes they’re getting out altogether. 

 

(2045) 

 

This created in Saskatchewan, as it did in many other provinces, 

a vacuum as far as training and labour-market policies are 

concerned. And so we have moved as quickly as we can to 

develop a Saskatchewan training strategy that will do the things 

that used to be done by the combined efforts of the federal and 

provincial government. We have worked intensively at this, Mr. 

Speaker, over the past year, approximately a year, and that work 

continues. 

 

And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and tell the House that in 

about three weeks time the training strategy will be in a position 

to be made public and be out there for discussion among the 

training partners and people who are interested in the 

labour-market system. 

 

We have to thank practically all of the people of the province  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

who have an interest in post-secondary training for the 

cooperation we’ve had in putting this strategy together. We 

began with a paper which set out some choices and options and 

alternatives that were important in putting this strategy together. 

We circulated that paper across the province and we had 

extensive consultations last May and June about this. Some of 

the members opposite participated in some of those discussions 

and we were grateful for that. 

 

That was then followed by another round of consultations in 

September when we went back to the employer community to 

obtain their views with respect to a number of issues that related 

directly to them. And those meetings were set up across the 

province by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and by 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, who organized 

very successful meetings in 8 or 10 centres in Saskatchewan. I 

attended every one of those, Mr. Speaker, and it was a very 

useful exercise. 

 

One of the things that impressed me during that round, that 

second round of consultations particularly, was to realize what I 

really ought to have known all along, and that is that this 

province of Saskatchewan presents a number of different labour 

markets; that the labour market in Swift Current is vastly 

different than the labour market in Meadow Lake; that the 

labour market in Tisdale is vastly different than the labour 

market in Estevan. 

 

And so it would be a mistake, I think, if we tried to formulate 

all of these policies centrally in Regina. We came to that 

conclusion and it is our plan — and this’ll be included in the 

training strategy — to push out a lot of the responsibilities for 

the labour market to the regions. 

 

And there are enormous advantages in that. One of them has to 

do with the kind of information you need in order to run a 

training system. You need information about what kinds of 

skills employers need now and what kind of skills they’re going 

to need a year from now and five years from now. And you 

have to know that so that you can be sure that you’re going to 

mount the training that will be necessary to equip your people 

with the skills they’re going to have to have to qualify for those 

jobs. 

 

That’s an old issue, Mr. Speaker. The federal government tried 

to do that for the whole 30 years that they were involved in this 

field. And they worked hard at it. And they tried many, many 

different elaborate schemes and a lot of information was 

collected. But none of it really seemed to work very well; at 

least it didn’t work very well in this province of Saskatchewan 

because it didn’t seem to fit us. It didn’t seem to work in Swift 

Current and certainly didn’t work in Prince Albert and so on. 

 

And we in the provincial government have from time to time 

made a stab at doing this, at collecting labour-market 

information that would be useful to SIAST and the regional 

colleges and to other labour partners in organizing training, and 

being sure that people had some way to equip themselves with 

the skills necessary to get these jobs. 

 

We have concluded — now I think rightly — that that kind of  

intelligence is best garnered and gathered and collated at the 

community level. At the community level in Saskatchewan 

everybody knows everybody else. Everybody knows every 

employer. People are able to talk to each other. People in our 

regional colleges and in our other organizations concerned with 

these issues can go to the employers whom they know, who 

they curl with, who they probably went to school with, and talk 

to them on a personal basis to get a clear idea of what kind of 

plans are being formed in that company and what kind of skills 

are they going to need. 

 

And so on a community basis, on a community-by-community 

basis, information can be gathered that will be sounder, better, 

than any information we have ever had in this province as far as 

the labour market is concerned. At least that’s my belief and I 

think that the government is accepting of that belief and we’re 

going to give that a try, and that will be part of the training 

strategy. 

 

This is a very difficult world so far as the labour market is 

concerned because it is changing so rapidly and the jobs that are 

relevant 10 years ago where people went to university or went 

to SIAST in order to equip themself for those jobs, they simply 

no longer exist. And in their place are a whole bunch of new 

jobs that require entirely different skills. 

 

And I think we all agree, Mr. Speaker, that not only is there 

change going on all the time but it’s going on at a more rapid 

rate all the time. And this is a particular challenge for people 

working in the labour market to get a fix on. There is no pause 

button on this situation where you can sort of freeze the frame 

and do your analysis and make your decisions, because by the 

time you’re done your analysis the picture has changed. And it 

presents an enormous challenge to the people I just spoke about 

who are trying to get some handle on what the skill needs are 

going to be next year, next month, leave alone five years from 

now. 

 

So it’s a difficult challenge but we have confidence in the local 

people at the level of the community to do a better job of 

identifying these skills than any central bureaucracy would be 

able to do. So that’s the direction in which we head. 

 

Another part of the labour-market situation that is challenged by 

the rapid pace of change are the institutions, SIAST being a 

good example. That institution has served this province very 

well over the course of its existence and it has a very complex 

array of programs that it offers in the four centres where SIAST 

has a presence. 

 

Their programing is challenged by this pace of change because 

they have to continually ask themself the question of whether 

the training that they’re offering in these courses is relevant to 

the labour market outside the walls of their institution. In other 

words, are their graduates going to be able to go out and get a 

job for what they’re being trained for? 

 

Too often we have seen in SIAST, courses being given to 

prepare people for jobs that used to exist and that don’t exist 

any more. And of course with the scarce resources that now 

face all of us, including that institution, that just can’t happen  



440  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

any more. But it is a challenge for SIAST to be able to 

understand the labour market well enough to be able to plan 

now to give a course starting next fall for jobs that won’t exist 

for two years. But they have to do that because many of these 

courses will take more than two years to equip the student with 

the skills necessary to be certified as proficient for that 

particular occupation. 

 

Another thing that I foresee in the training strategy is an 

increased emphasis upon partnerships between various actors in 

the labour market. In other words, we do not foresee a system 

that is driven by the institutions, by SIAST and by the regional 

colleges. They are major partners in it and have to be involved 

in it at most levels, but there are other partners who also have a 

very significant role to play. And I mention for example, 

employers and their associations and organizations, who are 

going to have to focus very, very carefully on their future plans 

and their future skill needs. I also have in mind employee 

organizations, including trade unions, but other organizations as 

well who are going to have to turn their mind to these same 

problems. 

 

And I also have in mind communities who are very interested in 

educating their children for jobs that will be available in that 

community. So that they’ll be able to stay in that community 

and raise their families and provide the kind of stability that 

those generation-after-generation citizens of a community will 

bring to their home communities. 

 

So that there are a lot of people — I’ve mentioned only some of 

them — who will have to become partners with each other and 

work together. 

 

I must also mention the aboriginal organizations who have such 

an intense interest in the labour market and in post-secondary 

education for their children and for their . . . I mean it’s no 

longer appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to speak of children or young 

people when you’re talking about training. Because training 

will become more and more retraining and retraining as time 

goes on and as the economy changes and people have to go 

back to school to become re-skilled at different occupations in 

order to continue as valuable members of the workforce. 

 

But the aboriginal people and their organizations have a great 

interest in these issues and they will also become partners in all 

kinds of arrangements that affect the labour market. 

 

So I want to save something, Mr. Speaker, for the day when the 

strategy is formally released about the middle of next month, so 

I’m going to stop there. But I thought I’d mention those 

elements because they will be very important elements in that 

strategy. 

 

I want to say a few words about universities. I spoke at some 

length about them last year and we had interesting exchanges in 

this House about aspects of the functioning of the universities. 

And the Assembly will recall that we appointed Harold 

MacKay as a facilitator to facilitate discussions between the two 

universities, and between the two universities and the 

government. 

 

And I think that members of the Assembly who have taken the 

time to read Harold MacKay’s report must have been very 

pleased with the fact that we gave him the responsibility to 

carry out this task. If I may say so, it was an excellent report. I 

have been around government, in one way or another, for many, 

many years and I’ve read many reports. And from a literary 

point of view only, Mr. Speaker, disregarding content, it was by 

far the finest piece of work that I’ve ever seen. 

 

And from a content point of view, it was excellent. That is to be 

judged by the reception given to it by the universities and by the 

government. Everyone was enthused with the report and the 

progress that he was able to report. 

 

Members of the House will know that attached to his report as 

appendices were no fewer than 17 agreements which he had 

facilitated between the two universities with respect to various 

things that they could do together, which they had formerly 

been doing on their own. Each one of those, Mr. Speaker, has, 

or almost every one of them has, cost implications in the sense 

that it saves money. And it saves money for the two universities 

who have been in a financial pinch and they will be able to . . . 

well, they’re the better for it. And this was only the beginning. 

This was only the work that was being done during the time that 

Harold was doing his job. And he completed that job last 

September and reported to the government. The work goes on. 

 

The two universities, who a year ago were having relatively 

little to do with each other, are today working in close contact 

with each other on a broad range of issues. And it is very 

encouraging for us in government to see that change take place. 

We’re a small province of a million people. It is difficult to 

imagine that we are going to ever be able to afford two 

full-service universities. By full service, I mean universities 

offering a full array of programs. 

 

And so a lot of cooperation is going to be necessary in the 

future to ensure there is no duplication, that there is no overlap, 

that the two universities are doing the things that they do best in 

cooperation with each other rather than in competition with 

each other. Because as I say, it is just impossible to imagine that 

this province would ever be able to afford two separate 

universities operating in isolation from each other and each 

trying to present to the public a full array of programing. 

 

(2100) 

 

So I am extremely pleased with the progress that has been 

made. I’m extremely pleased with the attitude with which the 

two administrations have approached these challenges. And I 

look forward to the future that I think will be filled with all sorts 

of cooperative efforts on the part of the two universities so that 

they can function together and provide our students with the 

best possible university education that we can afford in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were able in this budget to provide a lifeline to 

the universities in terms of funding. Last year, for reasons that 

we articulated over and over again in this House, we had to 

announce to the universities a reduction in funding for the 

following two years. Now I’m talking about the budget that was  



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

delivered about a year ago which kept university funding level 

as far as operating funds were concerned, but said that they 

would be reduced by $5 million in ‘97-98 and a further $5 

million in ‘98-99. 

 

And we were able this year, by a stint of all of the efforts that 

we’ve put into the running of this government, to be able to say 

to the universities that that cut will not take effect. This has had 

the effect of relieving a great deal of the financial pressure 

under which the two universities found themselves. 

 

In addition to that, we were able to provide increased capital 

funding so that they’ll be able to do some of the necessary work 

that has to be done on their buildings and on their plant and 

equipment. And we have made funds available also for 

technological purposes at the universities so they’ll be able to 

update their equipment and maintain their equipment and 

indeed introduce some of the new technologies that Harold 

MacKay talked about in his report. 

 

So all things considered, I believe that we have treated the 

universities in a very appropriate way and in a way that will 

allow them, particularly with their new spirit of cooperation, to 

revitalize themselves, to sort of reposition themselves to meet 

the challenges of the new century. And we’re very, very pleased 

with that. 

 

I want to say a final word about SIAST and I’ll conclude my 

remarks on that note, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have said that SIAST has a proud tradition and has delivered a 

remarkably broad array of technical and vocational training 

programs in this province over a long time. And the graduates 

from SIAST take their place in Canada with the graduates of 

every other comparable facility and are held in high regard and 

are very successful. 

 

SIAST is in the process, Mr. Speaker, of trying to reposition 

itself with respect to the challenges that I’ve mentioned earlier, 

the challenges presented by a labour market in the midst of a 

rapidly changing world. And it is not easy. And I want to 

publicly state my admiration for the way in which President Art 

Knight and his principals and his staff have approached this 

problem. I want to recognize that the faculties in the four places 

where SIAST has a presence have been totally cooperative in 

the effort to renew and reposition the institutions. 

 

And finally I want to pay tribute to the board of governors, the 

board of directors of SIAST, led by the Chair, Paul Dudgeon, 

who have worked tirelessly in an effort to deal with some of the 

issues with which SIAST is faced — issues of a financial 

nature, of a management structure nature, and of a policy nature 

— so that SIAST can take its place, its appropriate place, in this 

province and meet the demands of the labour market in this 

province, as it has always done and as I expect that they will be 

able to do in the future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your attention and I appreciate the 

attention of the members opposite on these important issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker — actually all day Friday, 

morning and afternoon — I had the occasion to be in Saskatoon 

and to go door to door in my constituency to secure comment 

from my constituents on the provincial budget. And this is 

something I do periodically. I don’t do it every week but 

especially at budget time the last number of years I’ve done this 

exercise. And I went to four different parts of my constituency, 

four different streets, to secure comment from my constituents. 

I would say I must have visited in oh, 60 or 70 different homes; 

not everyone was home. There must have been about 20 or 25 

people home during the course of the day. 

 

What I would like to do this evening is to share first of all the 

thoughts of my constituents and their verbatim comments on the 

budget, and then I will add some of my own commentary to put 

their comments in some kind of perspective perhaps. 

 

I must say that when I was on the doorstep I resisted the 

temptation to give any comment, such that I could secure their 

own thoughts and expressions of concern on the budget. So 

some of the constituents will no doubtedly recognize their 

voice. And I think that members in this Assembly will hear the 

voices of some of their own constituents that they have visited 

over the last number of months, or even years, because this 

represents really a broad cross-section of public opinion. It’s all 

over the political map. Some of it is very informed. Some of it 

is very thoughtful. Some of it isn’t so informed. But here we go. 

 

The very first home that I went to where someone was actually 

home when I knocked on the door, there was absolutely no 

comment whatsoever about the budget or anything else. I think 

the individual was shocked that I was at their door. As has often 

happens with elected members when they go door to door, you 

run into people who simply don’t have anything to say. 

 

So I handed that individual a brochure on the budget and left 

her alone. I didn’t take too long to get a comment though, 

because at the very next door I introduced myself and asked the 

woman if she had any comment on the budget. And she said, 

and I quote: 

 

It sucks! I’d like to see a bit more than 2 per cent. I’m 

working and I can’t really complain. I don’t know how to 

vote. Sometimes I’m just so fed up. I just paid $72.20 to 

dry cleaners for my bathroom curtains. Everything’s so 

expensive. 

 

Well I don’t know whether the budget — well I won’t use her 

word, because it’s unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker . . . but I 

certainly concur with her opinion that everything is very 

expensive these days, and that’s why I would say we want to be 

very careful as a government before we add to the expense of 

goods and services by going to a harmonized sales tax in 

Saskatchewan as Atlantic Canada has done. 

 

We have brought down the cost of many goods by a 2 per cent 

cut in the sales tax. This individual wishes to see more than 2 

per cent, and I think a lot of other people in the province would  



442  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

concur and I certainly would concur with her as well. As a 

matter of fact, this is going to have to occupy the government’s 

agenda in the coming years — to try to do what we can to 

control household expenses. 

 

The next door that I found someone home at, I received this 

comment and I quote verbatim again: 

 

Yes, there are a lot of things you can’t do anyway because 

you can’t fight gun control. You can only make a speech 

but you can’t fight gun control. That 2 per cent we got 

there now, but who’s in control of gas prices? It seems 

there’s nothing that can be done about that either. 

 

Well that’s a pretty good summary of, I guess, the gun control 

issue and the issue of high gasoline prices. There’s a lot of 

frustration behind that comment and I understand why a lot of it 

would be directed to an elected official. There are a lot of things 

that nothing can be done about. 

 

Saskatchewan people, I think, assumed for awhile that nothing 

could be done about the mountain of debt that we had. Nothing 

could be done about the deficits that we were running for more 

than 10 consecutive years through the Devine era. And yet that 

seeming insurmountable mountain of debt, that obstacle where 

nothing could be done, something has been done. We’ve tamed 

the deficit beast here in this province and it results in being able 

to have a little bit more breathing space in this budget to give 

some modest tax relief and some enhancement of services. I’d 

also say that although this individual is frustrated with the fact 

that things can’t be changed, they don’t seem to change 

politically, I want to say to this individual and to all my 

constituents that this government is about change. 

 

Fundamentally we are about rebuilding Saskatchewan and 

investing in people and investing in our future. And we are 

rather optimistic that some things can be changed for the better. 

We’re not perfect but we have that goal and objective. 

 

The next household, the individual said this, and I quote: “Oh, I 

don’t have any thoughts.” And that was basically the end of the 

conversation. I simply handed my brochure. 

 

The next door a man answered and he had this to say, and I 

quote: 

 

I was very interested to see what’s done and very pleased 

to see the reduction in the sales tax. It makes a big 

difference in the purchase of big items. 

 

Well that’s certainly true. I don’t know that most of my 

constituents are purchasing big-ticket items. I think most of my 

constituents tend to purchase the smaller-ticket items and I 

don’t know that a 2 per cent reduction in the sales tax is the 

be-all and end-all of taxation. I don’t know that it provides that 

much palpable help for many constituents who aren’t making 

big purchases. They won’t save $500 unless they are purchasing 

a new car on that basis. 

 

But I do know that in this budget, and I’m proud of the fact that 

in this budget, the government has reduced all sales tax . . . has  

eliminated the sales tax on medical supplies and equipment 

such as cholesterol testers, glucose monitors, medical supports 

and braces, and such things, not just a 2 per cent reduction but 

an elimination of the sales tax on those items because they’re 

viewed as a necessary part of not only the family budget, if 

there’s illness, but a necessary part of a commitment to wellness 

in this province. 

 

The next household — and I must say, I should say 

parenthetically, this was on 108th Street in Sutherland in 

Saskatoon — the next household shared perhaps one of the 

most interesting comments of the day, and I read the quote. This 

woman said: 

 

The debt should be paid down, but not at the expense of 

social things, of course. It’s kind of nice to see the taxes 

come down, but I would rather see others in need get 

something first. 

 

And I’ll applaud this woman. I really agree with her. Sure we 

all would like to see a little bit more money in our own pocket, 

but there are many people who have very little money in their 

pockets. And they deserve something first, I think, before all of 

us get back into the selfish mentality and start thinking about 

ourself first — the me too, I, greed sort of syndrome. And so I 

hail this woman for her comments, and I note that in this 

budget, there is a doubling of funding for the child action plan, 

$13 million in new money for child action programing in this 

budget. 

 

(2115) 

 

And the next area — that was 108th Street in Sutherland — the 

next area I went to, Mr. Speaker, was on Kenderdine Street in 

Sutherland constituency. And there I ran into a man who had 

this to say about the budget, “It was a surprise to me. I certainly 

wasn’t expecting this.” 

 

This meaning what? I don’t know exactly what he meant. I 

didn’t press him to explain. I presume he must have meant the 

sales tax, but he didn’t say so. 

 

There’s some things that surprised me in the budget. I was 

surprised that there was $1.7 million more for our parks system, 

which is falling to pieces — $1.7 million for each of the next 10 

years. I must say quite frankly, as a member of the government 

side, there were many surprises for me in this budget. 

 

Next door there was a woman who said: 

 

It was pretty good, except I didn’t like them cutting grants 

to municipalities. The rest of it seemed really good. I liked 

the fact that they got a balanced budget. 

 

Well I could say a couple of things about this comment, Mr. 

Speaker. First of all, that if you look at the totality of what is 

going to municipalities this year in the budget, it’s more than 

they received last year. And secondly, the fact that we have a 

balanced budget really is something to be saluted. 

 

And not only a balanced budget I would say in this instance, 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

but here we have a budget for the first time in Saskatchewan . . . 

We’ve had balanced budgets before. Last year we had a 

balanced budget. We had balanced-budget legislation, as a 

matter of fact. But this year for the first time we’ve really come 

full circle to have a balanced approach to fiscal policy, as we 

promised Saskatchewan people, with one third of resources, 

financial resources, for debt reduction; one third directed to 

program enhancements in health, education, social services and 

the like; and another third directed toward tax relief. 

 

We’ve been a little bit shy, as the Saskatchewan public will 

know, in the tax relief side. This budget really brings a balanced 

approach to public financial policy as we promised. So we don’t 

just have a balanced budget, but we have a balanced financial 

picture as a whole for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Another door on Kenderdine had this to say: 

 

I’d just like to see the roads get patched. Get No. 16 

twinned. 

 

Well we’re investing in highways in this budget. We’re 

investing in fact $11.7 million this year to twin the Yellowhead 

from Saskatoon to North Battleford. So this is certainly good 

news for this individual constituent. 

 

I move on now, Mr. Speaker, to Kerr Road in the Sutherland 

constituency, and here’s an individual who had this to say: 

 

Well basically I’m the same as anyone else. People in 

Saskatchewan are sick of being taxed to death. Basically 

that’s my biggest problem with Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think this woman speaks for many Saskatchewan people 

in feeling that the level of taxation is too high here. And the 

simple answer for that is that Saskatchewan has the . . . virtually 

the highest level of public debt of any province in Canada. 

Newfoundland and Saskatchewan are basically tied as being the 

debt kings of Canadian provinces. And when you have big debt 

you have big taxes. And that is why our government is trying so 

deliberately and intentionally, to not only pay down the debt but 

to build the economy so that there’s resilience in the economy; 

so that people are employed and working so we don’t have to 

pay as much into social services, so that we don’t have to have 

such high taxes. Big taxes are there because of big problems in 

the past, namely big debt. 

 

Another individual on Kerr Road had this to say: 

 

I’m in the film industry and I would like information on 

the labour-sponsored tax credit, whether it applies for films 

in Saskatchewan in this budget. 

 

And I had to tell this woman that no, basically as far as I 

understand it, we are not introducing a venture . . . a 

labour-sponsored venture tax . . . venture capital tax credit for 

film development in this budget, but we are investing in jobs so 

that we can create a climate for economic growth in the 

province. 

 

Some of the measures that we’re doing in this budget to invest  

in jobs are to introduce a sales tax rebate on building materials 

for livestock facilities. I know that that doesn’t mean a lot for 

many of my constituents, who are in urban Saskatchewan, but 

there is a manufacturing and processing tax credit that’s been 

extended to used equipment. It had been on new equipment. 

This will certainly help to encourage investment, economic 

activity, and jobs. It’s already done so because it’s been applied 

to the new equipment. It’s now extended to used equipment. 

 

We’re investing $640 million in this budget on capital projects 

to build schools, telecommunications projects, power projects, 

and other infrastructure projects. As I said, we’re putting money 

into highways — an 18 per cent increase in highway spending 

over the next 10 years, each year. 

 

So there are a number of initiatives to invest in jobs in this 

particular budget. Although not the credit for films. Another 

individual had this to say: “It’s a step in the right direction; you 

can only do so much at one time.” And isn’t this true. In any 

household we can only do so much at one time. And I will say 

in this respect that given the limitations that we’re still 

operating with, this budget is all about investing in people — 

investing in health care for Saskatchewan people. And that has 

been a priority from day one. When we were in the deepest, 

darkest days of financial distress we did not cut the 

Saskatchewan drug plan. We trimmed it but we did not 

eliminate it. And so there is only so much we can do, but for a 

New Democrat government health care will always be a 

priority. 

 

The next couple of doors one woman said, “No, I don’t have 

any concerns or comments.” The next door after that the woman 

said, “I can’t think of anything.” The next door after that an 

individual said — and this is very interesting, Mr. Speaker — 

I’d like . . . and I quote: 

 

I’d like our taxes to be the same as Alberta’s but it’s good 

the PST went down. That’s all right. 

 

In truth — this is a little known fact — but in truth 

Saskatchewan taxes are really not that far out of line with 

Alberta. 

 

And in fact if anyone would like the details on this I’ll certainly 

share that with constituents or anyone else who wants to contact 

my office. But I think what we have to remember in this regard 

is that while Alberta has no sales tax, Alberta families do pay a 

medical premium of $816 a year, which is not all that far 

removed from the amount that the average Saskatchewan family 

would be paying in sales tax. 

 

So you take those two things into considerations, they do tend 

to even out some of the perceived distortion in taxation policy 

with respect to Alberta. Not only that, but I would go on to add 

that an interprovincial comparison of sales tax for a family with 

an income of say $50,000 a year really shows Saskatchewan as 

having the lowest sales tax of any of the other provinces except 

Alberta, and this is because the sales tax is not paid in 

Saskatchewan on many, many items that it is paid on in other 

provinces. 

 



444  Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 1997 

Saskatchewan exempts food, drugs, medicine, children’s 

clothing, reading materials, residential electricity and natural 

gas bills. If people look at their power bills, they’ll find that 

they don’t pay the sales tax on those bills and that’s because 

these are viewed as being basic necessities for most families. 

And so when you take this into consideration, Saskatchewan’s 

tax policy with the sales tax is not that far out of whack from 

what Albertans pay. 

 

I want to sort of wind down, Mr. Speaker, with just a few more 

comments. One more comment from Kerr Road — this is very 

interesting. This gentlemen said about the budget: 

 

That was a waste of taxpayers’ money. You should do 

something once about the highways. That $2 million over 

10 years is (well, I’ll say blank because I can’t say the 

word) is (blank) in a bucket. 

 

Well this individual was actually quite irate. I gave him a 

brochure and he immediately set it aside. He wasn’t interested 

in talking to me. 

 

The only thing I can say to him is that I think I heard him say 

$2 million over 10 years. In actual fact we’re putting 2.5 billion 

— two and a half billion with a “b” — into highways over the 

next 10 years, an 18 per cent increase. And we’re investing in 

our highway system, maybe not as much as he would like, but 

we are attempting to preserve the existing highway 

infrastructure that we have and to take care of what we have in 

the highway system. 

 

And a final comment, and this actually was the final comment 

on Kerr Road on last Friday and it’s basically a good note on 

which to close. And I quote. This was a woman who said this: 

 

I don’t know. What do I think? Investing in education was 

great, I thought. The PST reduction was good. We all 

suffered and now it’s better. 

 

Isn’t that true. Over the last 5, 10, 15 years, we’ve all suffered. 

Oh some of us have profited over those years, some of us have 

taken money for Jacuzzis. We all, most of us, enjoyed cheap 

gasoline, but in some fundamental respects all of Saskatchewan 

have suffered. And now, as this woman says, some things are 

better. And I think that’s a good note to conclude on. 

 

Saskatchewan people have suffered many things at the hands of 

their government. And I say at the hands of the New 

Democratic government. There are some very strong medicine 

that was administered over the last five years, but now things 

are getting better and that is due not simply to the government 

and what it’s done, but to the innate goodness of Saskatchewan 

people and their willingness to make sacrifice, and their 

willingness to hold out for a common good and a better vision 

of Saskatchewan as big and as broad as the Saskatchewan sky. 

 

And I’d like to close then this evening, Mr. Speaker, by reading 

a poem by Ken Wah — that’s spelled W-a-h — a poem entitled 

“Waiting for Saskatchewan” from a book of the same title 

Waiting for Saskatchewan that was published in 1985. And if 

I’m not mistaken, it was in that year that Mr. Wah won the  

Governor General’s prize for poetry for this book. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Wah was born in Swift Current of Chinese and 

Saskatchewan parents, and it’s been said that characteristically 

his poetry combines imagery with a strong musical use of word 

and line that reflect some of his background or training in 

music. At times his poems are simply a succession of word 

images with a certain cadence to them. I’m not sure that I can 

read this properly, but I’m going to take a stab at it and ask that 

you and others bear with me. 

 

“Waiting for Saskatchewan” by Ken Wah: 

 

Waiting for Saskatchewan 

and the origins grandparents countries places converged 

europe asia railroads carpenters nailed grain elevators 

Swift Current my grandmother in her house 

he built on the street 

and him his cafes namely the “Elite” on Center 

looked straight ahead Saskatchewan points to it 

Erickson Wah Trimble houses train station tracks 

arrowed into downtown fine clay dirt prairies wind waiting 

for Saskatchewan to appear for me again over the edge 

horses led to the huge sky the weight and colour of it 

over the mountains as if the mass owed me such 

appearance 

against the hard edge of it sits on my forehead 

as the most political place I know these places these strips 

laid beyond horizon for eyesight the city so I won’t have to 

go 

near it as origin town flatness appears later in my stomach 

why 

why on earth would they land in such a place 

mass of pleistocene 

sediment plate wedge 

arrow sky beak horizon still waiting for that 

I want it back, wait in this snowblown winter night 

for that latitude of itself its own largeness 

my body to get complete 

it still owes me, it does 

 

Amen, a member of the legislature says. Amen. So be it that 

Saskatchewan owes all of us and all of its people a future as 

good as its people. And that’s what we’re trying to do in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to end debate, 

adjourn debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you do that. 

 

The Speaker:  Well I have to have a motion. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 



March 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

MOTIONS 

 

Legislative Assembly Sitting Hours 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion 

with respect to the sitting hours for the beginning of next week. 

In consultation with the members of the opposition and of the 

third party, the members expressed their view that they would 

prefer to be home for Easter Monday and they also expressed 

the view that it would be advisable to be in their constituency 

offices which they expect to keep open on Tuesday so that we 

can attend to business at home. 

 

Ordinarily this motion is made on the last day before Good 

Friday, but in order that you may advise your staff and we may 

advise our families and our staffs, we thought we’d make this 

motion tonight. So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move, seconded by the member of Regina Northeast: 

 

That not withstanding Rule 3(4) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, March 27, 

1997, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, April 2 at 

1:30 p.m. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:35 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 425 

  Tchorzewski .............................................................................................................................................................................. 429 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 434 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 436 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 

MOTIONS 

 Legislative Assembly Sitting Hours 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 445 

 

 


