



















































Hansard: April 30, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1245 

 April 30, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of citizens — the great communities of Melville, Duff, and 

Goodeve. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d also 

like to present a petition; represent people who would like to 

create a regional telephone exchange within the province. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The community involved is Odessa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

That the St. Martin’s Hospital in La Loche must serve as a 

facility to meet the health needs of a large percentage of 

people living in north-western Saskatchewan; 

 

That the present hospital facilities in La Loche are 

inadequate to provide comprehensive health care to these 

residents; 

 

And that there is a desperate need for a new facility to 

serve the health needs of the people living in this area of 

the province: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a  

new hospital in La Loche that will provide adequate health 

care to northern residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Regina, and they’re primarily from La Loche. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to support the 

creation of regional telephone exchanges. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Johnson as Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members’ Bills presents the fourth report of the said 

committee, which is as follows: 

 

Their committee has considered the following Bills and has 

agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 

Bill No. 301 - The Lutheran Church-Canada, Central 

District Act 

 

Bill No. 302 - The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company 

Act, 1997 

 

Your committee has considered the following Bill and has 

agreed to report the same with amendment: 

 

Bill No. 303 - The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

 

Your committee recommends under the provision of rule 

66 that fees be remitted less the cost of printing with 

respect to Bill No. 301. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from North Battleford: 

 

That this fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in and that the 

said Bills be accordingly referred to the Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

  



1246  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for northern highways and 

transportation: (1) what is the financial breakdown in terms 

of (a) location, and (b) type of project for the $5 million 

the government allocated to northern highways; for 

example, how much of that money will be spent on roads 

and how much on bridges; furthermore, where are these 

roads and bridges located; (2) what proportion of the 

money allocated to northern highways was collected from 

the following sources — please break down accordingly: 

(a) the forestry industry; (b) the mining industry; (c) Indian 

bands; (d) the federal government; and (e) community 

contributions; (3) how much money was allocated from 

specific training programs to the above projects from any 

of the following sources: (a) Metis pathways; (b) the 

forestry industry; (c) the mining industry; (d) Indian bands; 

(e) the federal government; and (f) community 

contributions; and finally, (4) of the total expenditure on 

highways in the North, what proportion is allocated for the 

primary purpose of extracting resources from the North; by 

primary purpose we are referring to those roads with a 

higher rate of use by heavy-haul vehicles as opposed to 

that of civilian traffic. 

 

And I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to my 

colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, 51 grade 5 students 

from McLurg School in my constituency of Regina Sherwood. 

 

They’re here this afternoon accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 

Verna Taylor and Mrs. Carol Grant. And I also would like to 

introduce a chaperon that’s here with the group, Mrs. Flo 

Coffey; and a special student of the group who, I might say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is also the Easter Seal representative or 

ambassador for southern Saskatchewan, Ms. Jennifer Hall, here 

on the main floor. 

 

I’d ask that everyone join with me in welcoming these students 

from McLurg School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the members of the Assembly, I have some special 

guests in your gallery today. With us of course is my wife, 

Beverley, who resides in Imperial with me most of the time. 

Sitting next to her is my or our newly married daughter, Mrs. 

Nicole Bateman, from Eastend, Saskatchewan. Next to her is 

her sister-in-law, Bonnie Bateman, and her mother, Ellen 

Bateman, who reside in the Dubuc-Grayson area. 

 

And I ask all members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a constituent of mine in the west gallery, Paul Meid, 

who’s joined us today. And Paul is an active participant in the 

democratic process and is probably here to make sure that his 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) is doing her job 

today. So thank you for joining us, Paul. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Maintenance Payments Improve 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we in 

this Assembly have been reminded this week during our 

discussion of The Family Maintenance Act, the issues 

surrounding the care, support, and custody of children from 

separated families is a very complex one. With the well-being 

of children our primary concern, we have recognized that there 

is no single solution, no one-sided approach, to ensure this 

well-being. 

 

First I want to echo the Minister of Justice by complimenting all 

members from all sides who contributed to the improvement of 

this Act. Secondly, I want to report briefly on some 

just-released statistics from the maintenance enforcement office 

showing that on the maintenance side, substantial progress has 

been made. Non-custodial parents are either taking their 

responsibilities more seriously or are being made to take their 

responsibilities more seriously. Either way, Mr. Speaker. the 

results are good. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, money going to support dependent 

children is up substantially; defaults on those payments are 

down tremendously. When the program began, the default rate 

was approximately 85 per cent; last year it was less than 25 per 

cent. So over $24 million was collected for children in the past 

year — more than the office collected in its first five years of 

existence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is only part of the child support 

equation, but it’s an important part. These improvements, I 

believe, demonstrate that this government’s priority is children 

and their well-being. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Street Proofing Our Kids 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in this Assembly I 

would like to recognize the efforts of Frank Olson, who 

developed and brought to Saskatoon and Saskatchewan a 

program called Street Proofing Our Kids. The program is 

designed to teach our children: number one, how to avoid 

situations where they may be vulnerable to abductions; and 

number two, how to fight off an abduction once it happens. 

These types of community programs are important initiatives 

and should be encouraged. 

 

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

It is most unfortunate that the provincial government’s 

underfunding has forced the closure of the community policing 

program in the Riversdale district of Saskatoon. This program 

was a natural fit for similar types of volunteer programs. 

Because of the closure of the Riversdale police satellite, such 

programs that assist vulnerable children may never be 

developed as was previously planned. 

 

Again I would like to commend not only Frank Olson on his 

commitment and his efforts, but also the United Food and 

Commercial Workers, local 1518, which made this initiative 

possible through a $12,000 donation. This is a much needed 

initiative and deserves great applaud. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vancouver Port Corporation Conference 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today a very 

important conference is being held in Regina — the Vancouver 

Port Corporation conference. The Vancouver port provides 

Saskatchewan shippers and users access to world markets, 

especially Asian markets. This year’s theme is therefore 

appropriately called, “Port of Vancouver, Saskatchewan‘s 

Gateway to the Asia Pacific.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, choosing Saskatchewan as the location for their 

first conference will allow us an opportunity to meet and 

discuss issues of mutual interest. The Vancouver port is an 

important part of Saskatchewan’s transportation system. It is 

our gateway to important world markets that have a tremendous 

impact on our economy. 

 

Working in partnership — shippers, producers, labour, 

governments, and the Vancouver port — to ensure the most 

efficient and effective operation of the port, is everyone’s 

common goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on average, Saskatchewan ships approximately 13 

million tonnes of product through Vancouver. Almost one-third 

of our total rail exports are directed there. And our exports 

account for 20 per cent of all Canadian exports shipped through 

Vancouver. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does have a stake in the 

successful operation of Vancouver port. The crisis our prairie 

farmers suffered this past winter must never be repeated. We 

are committed to working with all stakeholders to improve the 

competitiveness of the port and thereby help secure our future 

success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Accomplishments of Battlefords Athletes 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise to inform you and members of the House of 

two remarkable women from the Battlefords. 

 

Fiona Smith of North Battleford, presently living in Edmonton, 

was born and raised in Edam and she was a member of that  

Canadian women’s hockey team that recently won the gold 

medal in Kitchener. Now she’s been asked to move to Calgary 

to train full time with our national team in preparation for the 

1968 Olympics in Nagano, Japan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

1998. And she is one step closer to her dream of winning an 

Olympic gold medal. 

 

Also attending training in Calgary will be Hayley 

Wickenheiser, formerly of Shaunavon, and Shannon Miller, the 

coach, born and raised in Melfort. 

 

I would also like to inform you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of another 

remarkable Battleford woman, Alma Jean Peters. Ms. Peters 

just ran the Boston Marathon. The 51-year-old grandmother 

didn’t begin running until she was aged 34. She started by 

running down country roads in the Battleford area. 

 

Now she has taken to running marathons. She qualified at the 

Boston Marathon to come back. However, her next plan is to go 

to France with her daughter where she’ll be running a tour. She 

will be running 50 miles a day. 

 

We wish her well in her tour of France and continued success in 

her running. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Preservation of Swainson’s Hawk 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

commend a truly remarkable Saskatchewan person, Dr. Stuart 

Houston, who has an international reputation not only for 

radiology but for the preservation of the Swainson’s hawk. 

 

Dr. Houston can be seen often with a pair of well-worn 

binoculars to his face as he scans the Saskatchewan horizon for 

Swainson’s hawks. 

 

Dr. Houston is especially concerned about the population of 

hawks in their breeding grounds. He monitors a study area near 

Kindersley and hopes to sight the return of a special hawk 

wearing a radio satellite transmitter. This mature female hawk 

winters in Argentina and flies 11,000 kilometres to return to its 

mate and breeding grounds in Saskatchewan. 

 

Dr. Houston tells us that in both wintering and breeding 

grounds, the hawks’ population is under pressure of steady 

decline. A mass killing of hawks occurred in Argentina last year 

due to pesticides. In Saskatchewan the hawks’ primary food 

source has also declined drastically. The grasslands have seen a 

decline and so has the Richardson’s ground squirrels over the 

last eight years; and this food source is not as available to feed 

the nesting young, themselves declining from two to one chick 

per nest. 

 

In the future we can look forward to viewing a video about the 

Swainson’s hawks that Dr. Houston and a Saskatchewan 

company have produced, soon to air on the Discovery Channel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



1248  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

Prairie West Terminal in Dodsland-Plenty Area 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, this is the beginning of 

Saskatchewan’s biggest annual megaproject, spring seeding. 

During the past number of years we have witnessed many 

changes in the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. There’s 

been rapid diversification and, to support this, increased 

development and research into new technologies including 

biotechnology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have also been many negative changes for 

our farm people through . . . the federal Bill C-101 has allowed 

railroads to abandon branch lines without consulting the public 

or proving that the branch line being abandoned is no longer 

economically viable. 

 

One consequence of the increased rail line abandonment is an 

increase in the number of local elevators that are being forced to 

close. In the face of threatened loss of rail and elevator service 

in the west-central region of this province, in the 

Dodsland-Plenty area, Mr. Speaker, producers are taking 

control of their situation by spearheading a project to build an 

eight and half billion dollar grain terminal. This new, 

32,000-tonne facility is scheduled to begin construction in late 

May or early June and be operational by August 1, 1998. It will 

employ approximately 120 people, Mr. Speaker. The terminal is 

expected to handle approximately 200,000 tonnes of grain per 

year and have a cleaning capacity of 6,000 bushels per hour and 

a drying rate of 2,500 bushels per hour. 

 

This initiative demonstrates the determination of our farmers to 

succeed in the face of federal policy changes which caused the 

loss of the Crow and the loss of branch lines across . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time is 

expired. 

 

Moose Jaw Dance Festival May 2 to 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

always with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to talk about the 

city of Moose Jaw, and today is no exception. 

 

I wish to share with members of the House today that from May 

2 to May 10, the friendly city once again will hold and host the 

Moose Jaw festival of dance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the course of that week and a few more days, Mr. Speaker, 

over 1,500 dancers from all across Saskatchewan and Alberta 

will showcase individual and group talent in a variety of dance 

styles, including tap, jazz, ethnic, ballet, and musical theatre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is this occasion good news for we fans of 

dance and the participants, but it’s good news to an increasingly 

vibrant business community in Moose Jaw. The visitors will 

have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to tour and explore the many 

attractions, shops, and services that Moose Jaw has to offer. Our 

hotels, our restaurants, our stores will be alive with activity to 

accommodate the visitors to our city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no event of this magnitude can take place without  

hours of time and commitment from all involved, and a special 

thanks must be extended to all the organizers, the volunteers, 

and the adjudicators, who unselfishly offer themselves to host 

such a first class event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Dance Festival is a great 

opportunity to see the talents and the hard work of our young 

people and adults alike, and to visit the friendliest city in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this occasion is a must-see for anyone that wants 

to be swept off their feet. And good luck, Stephanie. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Cellular Phone Service Fraud 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The popularity of 

cellular phone service is one which has exploded in the last 

several years. In fact thousands of Saskatchewan residents have 

cellular phone service and many more would have cell phones 

too if this government would give us better service across the 

province. 

 

This growth has also increased concerns about the pirating of 

signals from cell phones, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the minister in charge of SaskTel today if this is a 

common concern and if it’s a problem that we should be 

worried about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, SaskTel now covers, or 

provides service to, over 85 per cent of the Saskatchewan 

population, and we are adding to that network at least a half a 

dozen communities every year. There are very few spots now 

that do not get reliable cell service. 

 

But we have to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, because this is a 

competitive service, and we cannot put up towers where there is 

not an economic return because the new wave of technology, 

satellite technology, is already here. As soon as it becomes 

more portable and cheaper, which is likely to be a relatively 

short period of time, the towers will be obsolete. So in the name 

of business prudence, Mr. Speaker, we have to expand the 

network as we can afford to pay those capital expenses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As usual, the 

minister responsible is out of touch with the people of 

Saskatchewan, and she’s out of touch with the Crown 

corporation of SaskTel. 

 

My question was about pirating, Mr. Speaker, and it appears 

that the minister doesn’t believe that there is a problem. 

 

Let me give you an example, Madam Minister. Recently I was  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

contacted by a neighbour of ours who had recently received a 

cellular bill for $33,000. That was in the month of March, 

Madam Minister. Following, in April, he received another bill 

for $62,000, Madam Speaker. 

 

The constituent, the neighbour of mine, contacted SaskTel and 

of course was told that he would not have to pay the bill. And 

that’s great, and that’s the way it should be. 

 

Will the minister explain how these matters are taken care of 

and who pays for this bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this is a very grave 

problem in the telecommunications industry for all cellular 

telephone providers. It is of course not . . . it’s a violation of the 

Criminal Code in Canada, but there are devices which will 

allow people with unscrupulous objectives to pick up through 

cellular conversations, the code number of the telephone and 

have the ability to copy, to clone that code. 

 

So people should be reminded to be very discreet when they’re 

using their cellular phones as to the kind of conversations 

they’re carrying on and the locale. A land line is always more 

secure. And of course these costs are always absorbed by the 

telecommunications companies. 

 

If for instance these calls were placed into the U.S. (United 

States) or somewhere else, the cost of writing off these bills 

would be shared by all of the telephone providers involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that maybe SaskTel 

has been communicating with the minister very well. When Mr. 

Baht brought this issue to the attention of SaskTel, he indicated 

he’d like to pass on his concerns to the minister in charge of the 

Crown. 

 

He was very surprised to hear that the SaskTel rep said that he 

didn’t need to know who the minister is. Which suggests that 

maybe the minister in no way is accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan who indeed are picking up the tab for this bill. 

 

Madam Minister, a private business would not allow this 

situation to take place. In fact no private business would sink 

$16 million into a dead-end venture such as you did with NST. 

If not you, maybe the problem is with your high-priced 

patronage help, Don Ching. Maybe you should talk to Mr. 

Ching and find out what’s happening. 

 

Madam Minister, this case represents a cost of almost $100,000. 

There probably are others. How much are the taxpayers of this 

province on the hook for, for this type of pirating? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, is the member opposite 

talking about privatizing the telephone company? Is he talking  

about privatizing it? Is he talking about a company that would 

not extend digital service to each and every remote and rural 

customer in this province, Mr. Speaker? Is he talking about a 

private company that would not extend their network on to the 

first nations’ reserves? Is he talking about a private company 

like the other private cellular providers we have in this province 

who confine their activities to the large, urban centres only? Is 

that what he’s talking about? 

 

And when he talks about the staff at SaskTel handling a 

problem, agreeing to write-off a bill, then why in the world 

should the minister, or should the CEO (chief executive officer) 

of a private company be involved in that? The staff is doing 

their job. There’s no need to affect the political level. 

 

And if you’re talking about privatization, you better tell us, and 

turn people’s eyes towards the privatization south of the border 

and look what’s happening there, where farmers are out putting 

up new telephone poles and new wires because the rural 

infrastructure has been so neglected by the private company. 

That’s not the kind of service we want in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Madam Minister, what I’m asking you is a 

very simple question. It involves taxpayers’ money — in this 

case, $100,000. How many more are they, and how much is the 

taxpayer of this province on the hook for inadequate 

management of SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, again it sounds as if the 

member opposite is talking about privatizing. This is not 

taxpayers’ money; this is a cost to the telecommunications 

companies worldwide, private or public. This is what happens 

in the normal course of business. And that’s what SaskTel 

operates, on behalf of its shareholders, the people of 

Saskatchewan, is an efficient, accountable, and the best 

telephone service, Mr. Speaker, in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Income Tax Surcharges 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to point out an example of how unaccountable this 

government can be. Officials have gone on record saying they 

have no idea of how much money is collected from the 

province’s three income tax surcharges. 

 

I thought I misunderstood or misheard the report, Mr. Speaker, 

but I didn’t. Officials said that they don’t have the breakdown 

of how much is collected on the 2 per cent flat tax, the high 

income surcharge, and the debt reduction surcharge — all three 

courtesy of Mr. Blakeney, Mr. Devine, and the current Premier. 

 

It seems incredible, Mr. Speaker. How can this government 

properly plan if they don’t have a breakdown. Will the minister 

give us the breakdown of these three income surcharges? 

 

  



1250  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question because it gives me an opportunity to 

clarify a story that obviously never was intended to be a 

balanced story. 

 

First of all the government did give the information in terms of 

what we collect from surtaxes. What is absolutely amazing to 

me though: here’s what we collect from surtaxes in the province 

— they’re obviously trying to hide that. Well the other thing 

that we’re trying to hide is how much we give to people in tax 

credits, because we gave that information in exactly the same 

way. It occurs on the tax form in exactly the same way as the 

surtaxes. 

 

So what I would say to the member opposite is, don’t be fooled 

by a story that had no intention of balance. 

 

We have a fair tax system because we have surtaxes at the top. 

We have a fair tax system because we have credits at the bottom 

to help low income people and help seniors. That’s what we call 

tax fairness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker. If this information is 

available, then I take your answer is that yes, the detailed 

breakdown of the money coming from these three surcharges is 

available. 

 

And if that’s the case, Madam Minister, I note that one of these 

surcharges is a debt reduction surcharge which was put in 

specifically to be applied against the long-term debt of this 

province that was left to us by the previous administration. 

 

Madam Minister, can you tell the public where indeed this 

money specifically has gone and how that the fact that the debt 

reduction has been largely accounted for solely by the proceeds 

of the Cameco shares? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  To the member opposite, again I 

have to correct his answer. If you look at the Cameco shares, 

that was all applied to debt. But if you look at what this 

government did in terms of paying down government debt, not 

Crown corporation debt, government debt this year, we 

exceeded our own Cameco targets by $100 million. 

 

So in fact not only have we applied all of the proceeds to 

Cameco to debt, we have exceeded our own targets and paid 

down an extra $100 million in government debt, never mind the 

fact that we’ve reduced Crown corporation debt. 

 

And I think the one number that Saskatchewan people should 

be very proud of is, by the end of this cycle the government’s 

debt will be $4 billion less than it was four years ago. That’s 

something all Saskatchewan people can be proud of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Shand Accident Lawsuit 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Six workers 

who suffered serious injuries and the families of two others who 

died in the 1990 Shand accident appeared before the Supreme 

Court of Canada today. This is part of their ongoing fight to sue 

the provincial government for allegedly failing in its duty as a 

workplace regulator. 

 

Should the Supreme Court of Canada rule in favour of the 

injured workers and the family of those who were killed in the 

Shand accident, it will have major implications. Such a ruling 

would open the door for anyone to sue the government 

following a workplace injury. It could also make the very 

existence of the workmen’s compensation board redundant. 

 

As a matter of responsibility, will the minister tell the House 

what plans have been developed in the event Canada’s highest 

court rules in favour of these workers? Does the minister realize 

the workmen’s compensation system is at stake, and have you 

done any forward planning? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member has indicated, 

lawsuits have been brought against the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, Procrane limited, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan on behalf of five people who unfortunately were 

injured and the estates of two people who were tragically killed 

when a crane collapsed at a work site on May 25, 1990. 

 

As the member knows, this matter is before the courts, as the 

member has stated, and it would not be appropriate to comment 

further on it. 

 

Income Tax Surcharges 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Minister of Finance, following on the member for Melfort’s 

questions. 

 

Madam Minister, as you know, the deadline for income tax 

returns is today, and your government will collect about $1.3 

billion in income tax this year. Yet you say that you do provide 

a breakdown between the different taxes. 

 

Well we would ask you, Madam Minister, if you would commit 

to the legislature here to provide the details on the 10 per cent 

debt surcharge, the high income tax surcharge, and the flat tax, 

and commit to the legislature to release that information. In 

order that we can have a meaningful debate on tax relief and tax 

reduction in future, we need to have that information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, thank you for the question, but it’s the same question 

that I just answered. We did give to the press the amount that 

we collect from surtaxes. 

 

Now what I want to get clear here from the members opposite is  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

one thing. A couple of years ago the members opposite were in 

the House saying, you’re getting less money from taxes — bad 

news, because our economy is not doing well. Now you’re 

saying, you’re getting more money from taxes. 

 

We have no increased taxes in this province for four years. In 

fact we’ve been lowering taxes each and every year since 1993 

— lowering taxes. We’re getting more money from taxes 

because the economy’s doing well. People are making more 

money, people are buying more things, companies are more 

profitable. And now they’re still unhappy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the only conclusion I can reach is the 

opposition is perpetually unhappy, but the people of 

Saskatchewan aren’t. They’re proud of what we’ve done in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 

don’t understand your reluctance to release this information. So 

much for an open and accountable government. 

 

You know, Madam Minister, you could learn a lesson from the 

federal Liberals about open and accountable lesson. You won’t 

even share basic, you won’t even share basic tax information 

with us, and yet Jean Chrétien has shared his entire platform 

with Preston Manning. Now that’s an example of open and 

accountable government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, all we’re asking for is a simple 

breakdown on how Saskatchewan income tax is split between 

the four types of taxes that you collect. Will you commit to give 

us that information today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, the Department of Finance has provided the 

information on how much is collected from surtaxes. 

 

And the members opposite will understand, I very rarely 

criticize a story. But when I heard this story this morning, it was 

absolutely no attempt to be balanced. That is, there was mention 

of the surtaxes at the top; no mention of the tax credits for low 

income people, seniors, at the bottom. There was mention of 

increases in surtaxes; no mention of decreases in surtaxes. 

There was mention of all the problems in the tax system by the 

same radio station, by the way, who had a tax expert, Mr. Perry, 

on at the time of our budget who said very complimentary 

things about Saskatchewan’s tax system, ending with a quotable 

quote. Mr. Perry said what lots of people in Canada say, “I wish 

I lived in Saskatchewan.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my final  

question is for the Premier on an unrelated subject. 

 

Mr. Premier, I understand Elections Canada has now decided to 

screw this election time issue up even worse. Three ridings in 

Saskatchewan — Churchill, Battleford-Lloydminster, and 

Cypress — have been given the option of picking their own 

polling times. Two of them have selected Mountain Time, 

which means their polls will be closing an hour earlier than 

everyone else in Saskatchewan. That’s Ottawa’s solution — 

two different times for Saskatchewan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Premier, I don’t think this is a big, serious 

issue. It isn’t rocket science. All they have to do is use the same 

time or polling times as Alberta to correct this problem. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you give the Prime Minister a call and explain 

this simple solution to the federal government? Will you tell the 

federal Liberals that they’d better figure out what time it is in 

Saskatchewan before in the election they get their clock 

cleaned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I think with or without 

the time foul-up by the federal Liberal government, they’re still 

going to get their clock cleaned in this federal election on June 

2. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  But on a more serious note, on a more 

serious note I have written to the Prime Minister and I’ve 

written to the Chief Electoral Officer of Canada, twice now, as 

late as yesterday the second time, asking for a response from 

one of them. Perhaps the Prime Minister on the campaign trail, I 

can understand is occupied. But we are owed the courtesy from 

the Chief Electoral Officer — I believe we, the members of this 

Assembly — to explain exactly why they’re doing what you say 

they’re doing. 

 

It makes no sense. It is really a hodgepodge, it’s a mélange of 

the kind of a mix-up which flows quite naturally and 

unacceptably from the very fact that they didn’t know we’re on 

central standard time. 

 

I don’t know what more I can do. I’ve written both the Prime 

Minister and the Chief Electoral Officer of Canada. I still have 

not received a response from either one of those officials. I’m 

hoping that I will get a response. And if I don’t have any 

influence, maybe the very close kissing cousins of the 

provincial Liberal Party do have some influence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Disaster Assistance for Manitoba 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier. Mr. Premier, I think everyone in our province is 

watching the growing flood disaster in southern Manitoba and 

praying for all the families who have been forced from their 

homes. However, these families could use more than just our  

  



1252  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

prayers. 

 

You recently signed an order in council setting aside $300,000 

for disaster relief, including flood relief in foreign countries. 

We think disaster relief in Canada should take precedence over 

disaster relief in other countries. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you take that $300,000 today and redirect it to 

providing flood disaster assistance for the people in Manitoba? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the fight by the people 

of Manitoba against nature is courageous. It really tells the 

strength of western Canadian people, in fact of all Canadian 

people. And to state again — it has to be said; it cannot be said 

enough times — our hearts, our sympathies, everything goes for 

what’s going on in Manitoba. 

 

Now the question is about the issue of money. What I’ve done 

is I have written to Mr. Filmon, the Premier of Manitoba, on at 

least two occasions. I’ve endeavoured to get a hold of him by 

telephone, asking him if there’s anything that we can do as the 

Government of Saskatchewan, as the people of Saskatchewan, 

to assist. I’ve not been able to contact him because he’s 

obviously tied up in his day-to-day problems there doing his 

job. 

 

We know that there are volunteers from Red Cross; we know 

there are reservists that are coming across to Manitoba. We 

know there are just people who are volunteering in the 

Saskatchewan spirit to help out in Manitoba. 

 

Before any kinds of commitments of sums or anything is done 

in a concrete and tangible way, I think we should await exactly 

what the needs of Manitoba people are. They’re a proud, 

independent, self-reliant group of people, as we are in 

Saskatchewan as well. Let them sort out their difficulties and if 

they need some assistance from us, we’ll consider what, if 

anything, we can do in the light of our situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In spring when the 

Provincial Auditor released his spring report, he noted a litany 

of problems. And of course at the head of the list was the health 

districts. 

 

The result of this government’s failure to properly plan its 

health reform has put these districts in a tenuous situation and 

part of the problem is with the CEOs. In fact between January 

of 1996 and ’97, at least 10 district CEOs have been fired or 

have resigned. In fact ads have appeared in major newspapers 

the past two weekends advertising for CEO positions in the 

Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek and the Greenhead health districts. 

 

Can the Minister of Health explain if this turnover rate is further 

proof of a health care system in crisis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the House and to the 

member, Mr. Speaker, that what the Provincial Auditor said in 

his report was this. I don’t have the report in front of me, but 

the Provincial Auditor said that considerable progress and 

improvement was being made in the health districts in terms of 

financial accountability. And the Provincial Auditor 

congratulated the health districts for the job that they’re doing. 

 

The other thing I want to tell the member in the House is that 

the deficit situation that the health boards were in three years 

ago has done what my predecessor, the member from Moose 

Jaw, said would happen — it’s moved into a surplus position, 

Mr. Speaker. We used to hear the opposition ask questions 

about the deficits every day. There are no deficits across the 

board in the health districts. 

 

And I want to say before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, that I want to 

thank the member from Arm River for answering the question I 

have asked in the past, which is, where in the world is there a 

better health care system than this province. And yesterday, and 

I want to quote the member, he said this: 

 

The minister has stated on many occasions that there is no 

better health system than here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we agree with that. 

 

And so do we, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the minister 

could continue and read the rest of the quote, but he’s reluctant 

to do that — if these guys stay in power much longer we won’t 

have a health system in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, there have been many, many 

problems created by this government’s so-called health reform 

— the wellness model. A December 7 Leader- Post article hits 

the point and hits the nail right on the head. It points out that 

many of the problems district boards are encountering are the 

result of the financial stranglehold this government has put on 

them. The news item goes on to state, and I quote: 

 

At least partly because of the financial crunch, bitter 

administrative fights and feuds have developed in the 

health districts and heads have rolled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the actions of this government have a great 

deal to do with the high rate and . . . a high turnover rate of the 

district CEOs. Will the minister agree that perhaps future CEOs 

should have written into their contracts, a prerequisite that they 

have their suitcase packed and a good severance package? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the chief 

researcher for the Liberal caucus office have his suitcase 

packed. I don’t think the CEOs need to have their suitcases 

packed. Yesterday the member’s up on his feet agreeing that we  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

have the best health care system in the world. Today he’s 

quoting an article pre the March 20 budget saying that there’s 

some financial problem. 

 

I want to remind the member in the House, Mr. Speaker, that 

the leader of that member’s party said, on CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) television in November, that we 

should take hundreds of millions of dollars out of the health 

care budget. That’s what he said. In April he said, in response to 

our provincial budget, that we should be more fiscally 

conservative and not put the money into health care we’re 

putting into health care. 

 

Now today, this member gets up and says somehow that we’re 

not putting enough money into health care even though we’ve 

back-filled the Liberal cuts to health care 100 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I want to ask the member where the Liberal Party stands. Do 

they agree with their leader who says we should cut health care 

spending, or do they agree with what the member said 

yesterday, that we have the best health care system in the 

world? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Out-of-province Medical Expenses 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister won’t 

answer the question about the CEOs so we’ll move on and we’ll 

talk about the user pay concept that the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) has in this province. 

 

Allen Serdachny is just one of the many people in this province 

who are suffering from this policy. Mr. Serdachny suffers from 

a rare disease called amyloidosis. The doctors at the Plains 

hospital said there was nothing they could do and gave him two 

years to live. The family wasn’t prepared to give up so easily 

and they headed to the Mayo Clinic for treatment. Today he’s 

living a prosperous and healthy life. 

 

The family has no problem with the personal expenses they 

incurred, but the family does have a problem with the medical 

expenses the province refuses to fully reimburse them for. The 

bill from the Mayo Clinic, over $6,900; the payment from the 

province, 1,600. User pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the Minister of Health agree this is unacceptable, and 

reimburse this family for the full treatment they could not get in 

this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with the case 

that the member raises because the member hasn’t had the 

courtesy to refer that case to me. If the member would do so, 

which is part of his responsibility as a member of the legislature 

and on behalf of his constituents, I’d be happy to look into it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’d like to know how that member has the audacity to get  

up in this House and ask about two-tiered medicine, when last 

year this is what that member had to say. He said, if there are 

people that are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them 

pay. That’s what he said. 

 

And then the Leader of the Liberal Party, Dr. Melenchuk, had 

this to say. This is a quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

Private surgical clinics should be permitted to open in the 

province, says Liberal leader Jim Melenchuk. Profits, he 

says, I have no problem with for-profit medicine. 

 

That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that 

question no. 60 be converted to notice of motion for return. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  It has been moved that question no. 

60 be converted. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on behalf of 

the government to hereby submit question 61, and with leave, in 

the interest of open, accountable, and responsible government 

to also submit the responses to questions 62 and 63. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The questions are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and Security 

Guards Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 

1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation in this area was introduced 

in 1976. And the security industry has undergone a significant 

evolution since that time, both in terms of operations and in 

terms of the variety of functions which modern security guards 

are asked to perform. 

 

This Bill recognizes these fundamental changes by providing 

for the following initiatives: (1) the creation of a framework to 

implement specific training and equipment standards for the 

industry; (2) the statement of clearly enunciated rules and 

responsibilities for the security guard and private investigator 

industries; (3) the establishment of an industry advisory 

committee; (4) a provision for a code of ethical conduct; and 

finally, the modernization of the role and the powers of the  

  



1254  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

registrar to enforce and administer the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to advise this House that the security 

guard industry itself has been in the forefront in acknowledging 

the need to update the existing legislation to provide for the 

development of training and equipment standards in their 

rapidly changing industry. 

 

The members of the industry are concerned that any such 

requirements be fair and effective. As a result, they have agreed 

to participate in consultations to develop the regulations 

required to implement these changes. 

 

The registrar’s powers are being modernized. Security guard 

companies who play by the rules, as well as members of the 

general public, can be assured that companies who do not 

comply with industry standards will be required to answer to 

the registrar. This will require that the registrar be empowered 

to monitor practices and to respond to any concerns raised by 

the public. 

 

It is the intention of this government to extend the operation of 

the Act to cover the Corps of Commissionaires. This step is 

being taken in recognition of the security guard functions which 

they undertake in our communities. The commissionaires have 

been leaders in the field of security guard training. By including 

the corps within the scope of this Act, we hope to learn from 

this well-established and professional organization in creating 

consistent and appropriate industry training requirements. 

 

This Bill also covers the armoured vehicle industry for the first 

time. As with the Corps of Commissionaires, this step is taken 

not in response to any particular problem but as a recognition 

that their function is one which should properly fall within 

security industry legislation. Through the licensing of armoured 

vehicle companies, the government will enhance its ability to 

ensure proper training and standards within this important 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the security guard and private investigator 

industries continue to evolve, the development of a code of 

ethics and the need for an industry advisory committee become 

even more apparent. The goal of this framework legislation is to 

increase professionalism in these key security industries 

through the leadership of the owners, the employees, and the 

union representatives. 

 

Recent tragic events have crystallized the need to require that 

all reasonable steps are taken to ensure the safety of both the 

employees who work in the security guard industry and the 

members of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to advise this House that during our 

consultations, the employers, the employees, and the union 

representatives have all consistently supported training and 

education as the best way to increase safety for security guards. 

 

This government strongly supports this position. We have 

already commenced consultations within the industry to 

establish mandatory training and equipment standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through ongoing consultations, as well as through 

initiatives such as an industry advisory committee and a code of 

ethical conduct, Saskatchewan’s private investigator, security 

guard, and armoured vehicle industries will continue to build a 

modern, professional security industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 

Private Investigators and Security Guards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been 

looking forward to debating a Bill on this subject matter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, since hearing of the tragic death of Jason 

Nikolichuk. After the death of this young security guard in 

Saskatoon, the government was urged to tighten up the law to 

better ensure those involved in the private security field in 

Saskatchewan are adequately trained and adequately equipped 

to do their jobs with a minimum amount of danger. 

 

Now obviously there is no law that can be passed by this House 

that will be able to ensure that no security guard will ever come 

to harm again in our province. But laws that we do pass must do 

all they can towards that end. And the question here before us 

today is whether or not this Bill C-50 does that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though I’ve had a 25-year career with the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), I’m not an expert in this 

particular field. However, in speaking with some 

representatives and experts in matters dealing with private 

security and private investigations, I’m told that at this point 

this Bill comes up short in some very key areas in keeping those 

involved in this industry safe. 

 

I believe we have to be honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan. The government has spun this Bill as a law that 

will help to prevent deaths down the line. But those from the 

industry who obviously know it best, say there are several areas 

of the legislation that need improvement; that it doesn’t go far 

enough in determining in black and white what specific 

measures are being taken to ensure better safety of those who 

work in the field, and the safety of the public as well. 

 

The minister calls this framework legislation — something to 

build future regulations on. However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

without knowing what those regulations will look like, it’s very 

hard indeed to comment on very many specifics of this 

particular Bill because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are in fact 

very few specifics in the body of this legislation. 

 

Yes, we’re all for a strengthened law. But how do we as 

legislators in good conscience, vote for or against this Bill 

without knowing in the end what measures are really going to 

be taken. And that same concern has been brought to our 

attention by representatives of security firms in Saskatchewan. 

 

First and foremost, those who are involved in the private 

security field have told me they don’t feel the Bill itself goes far 

enough in mandating who is licensed to act as a security guard 

in our province. 

 

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

(1430) 

 

And furthermore, I’ve heard that there’s not enough in the Bill 

to spell out who is trained, what training they receive, and who 

in fact oversees that training. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to 

ensure the safety and well-being of all security guards 

throughout the province, adequate training is first and foremost 

a prerequisite. And we have to ensure we have qualified people 

overseeing the industry. 

 

Again, I’m told by those who know the industry better than 

myself, is that we still will not have an adequate governance of 

this industry. While the Bill gives the registrar great authority 

and great power to regulate the licensing of individual security 

guards or firms which employ security guards, the Bill does not 

state what his or her qualifications must be in order to carry out 

these duties. 

 

It simply states that, “The minister appoints a Registrar of 

Private Investigators and Security Guards . . .” Who is this 

person to be who will be overseeing this entire industry? Do 

they have the experience in the field itself? Do they have to be 

licensed in the field themselves? Should they have to be 

licensed in the field? 

 

These are all questions that have been brought to our attention. 

And I believe they are important questions, given the sweeping 

powers the registrar will have over private security companies. 

 

The language in the Bill regarding the provisions for licensing 

is extremely ambiguous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It seems to give 

the registrar tremendous discretionary power in these matters. 

 

Section 14, for instance, states the registrar can cancel a licence 

where he or she sees a person or a company no longer as, and I 

quote, “fit and proper” to carry a licence. Who is going to 

determine what fit and proper means, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

The industry should know as well the registrar will have great 

authority to simply pull a licence on a company without any 

notice and without the right for the company to be heard. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, obviously this provision is meant to allow 

quick action to be taken against a company that is not living up 

to the standards set by the province — whatever they might be. 

 

But there is a concern that if the registrar with such wide 

discretion somehow jumps the gun and makes a rash judgement 

in pulling a licence, it will jeopardize the business. That’s 

because many of these security firms have contracts to provide 

service. If a licence is revoked, only to be returned shortly after, 

it will be irreparably hurt . . . it will irreparably hurt — I’m 

sorry — the security company since its clients will be forced to 

go elsewhere for service in the interim. The chances of 

regaining those clients would be rather slim following that kind 

of a process. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, aside from those issues that are of concern 

to the industry, the most important thing we have to do with this 

Bill is to make being a security officer a safer job. And like I 

say, we’re not totally convinced that this Bill will do that — not 

when we don’t really know how the regulations will look  

like. We don’t know if there will be parity in the types of 

firearms, the type of safety equipment. 

 

I am encouraged by the fact that an advisory committee of 

interested parties will have input into the creation of the 

regulations. However given this government’s less than stellar 

record in actually listening to what’s said in these types of 

consultations, I’m not filled with a great sense of confidence. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to all do everything we possibly 

can to make sure the role of a security guard is safe. Is this the 

Act that will do that? Until we see the real meat and potatoes, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we simply will not know. And that’s of a 

concern to us, and it should be of a concern to all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

There is a limited role for regulations in legislation, to be sure. 

But in a case like this where simply everything that the Bill is 

supposed to accomplish is left to regulations, I don’t think it’s 

fair to this House or to the public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the government introduces 

legislation, they are aware of the type of legislation well in 

advance. They have ample members within their caucus that 

could have been working on some of these regulations in order 

that when the Bill is introduced, the regulations may also be 

presented. So that we in the opposition, on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, have an opportunity to review those 

regulations and ensure that they are in fact adequate enough to 

meet the standards and to meet the needs and to complement the 

Bill and the legislation that is being proposed, and 

subsequently, Bills that we have to vote for or against. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also wish to 

make some comments on second reading here; although I may 

at the outset say that I think the hon. member for Melville has 

very adequately set out the basic concerns that our caucus has 

with this legislation. 

 

As we are all aware, the initiative for bringing forward 

legislation on security guards was the tragedy last year in 

Saskatoon which showed the need for some assistance for this 

industry. Now admittedly tragic events can never be totally 

eliminated. And even with care and security and proper 

measures, unfortunately awful things do from time to time 

happen. 

 

But I think there is a strong feeling in this province that that 

particular tragedy of a security guard with no equipment on him 

whatsoever — was killed in a dark area, in a very isolated area, 

where he was all by himself, and that raises some questions as 

to whether his life could have been spared, had some proper 

measures been in place. 

 

And I know that the public was looking to the minister and 

looking to this government to give a signal today as to how they 

intended to address the situation. And I think there will be  

  



1256  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

some disappointment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there really is 

nothing in the legislation that has been placed before us this 

date which specifically addresses that issue, the issue of the 

security of security guards. And I wish we could have had a 

clearer statement from the minister as to what he intends to do 

by way of regulations to address that issue. 

 

I’ll come back to that in a moment, because I think that is the 

key in the Bill presently before us — that we have a Bill which 

has been brought before us because of the problem of poor 

security for our security guards, the safety of our security 

guards, the tragedy which occurred in Saskatoon last year. So 

we get regulation of the industry, but we don’t find anything at 

all in the Bill that addresses that issue. I want to speak on two 

other matters first, but I will be coming back to that basic issue. 

 

First of all, the attempt to regulate professional standards in the 

industry — it appears that the main point of this Bill is to 

regulate companies as opposed to the individuals who are 

security guards. We would like to pose for the minister whether 

it would not make more sense to certify security guards, as 

opposed to companies. 

 

And the reason for this is that of course when you obtain 

professional certification, be it as a teacher or a nurse or a 

lawyer or whatever, then you have that certification, you have 

that qualification as an individual and you can of course take it 

to any prospective employer. Whereas if instead we are 

certifying employers, the companies, that really doesn’t say 

anything about the individuals who are being retained. 

 

So would it not make more sense, if the minister wants to 

regulate the industry, to regulate the front-line workers, the 

actual practitioners, the security guards themselves, as opposed 

to regulating the employers of security guards? Surely the issue 

is, who is going to be a security guard, what professional 

standards they have to meet, and what personal and ethical 

standards they have to meet with regard to criminal record, etc. 

 

My colleague from Melville has mentioned that we have some 

concerns with the very sweeping powers granted to the registrar 

here, the fact that a company can be shut down without hearing 

and without notice. 

 

Now what we understand from the industry is that if a company 

is shut down even for a very brief period, it effectively puts that 

company permanently out of business. The reason for that is 

that these companies provide security to various operations that 

must have security on a daily basis. 

 

So consequently, if the registrar came along this date and said, 

security company X is shut down, then the customers, the 

clients of that agency, would immediately have to retain other 

security, on the spot. So that even if a week down the road the 

registrar decided that there really was nothing to this complaint 

and decided to return the licence, it wouldn’t make any 

difference. By that time, the customers would be gone and the 

security company would be a shell. 

 

So even a brief cessation of operations caused by the registrar 

would have devastating effects, and they would not merely be  

losing income for say a week; they would in fact be 

permanently out of business. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is the old saying, if it ain’t broke, 

don’t fix it. Well in this case of course with the security 

industry, that’s not entirely on the mark. I mean the demand, the 

public demand for legislation came about because of a tragic 

occurrence which outlined the necessity for some provision to 

be made for the safety of security personnel. 

 

But instead of addressing that issue, that very serious, that very 

important issue, the minister seems more bent on regulating an 

industry, creating a new bureaucracy, and not really addressing 

the issues that gave rise to the demand for this legislation in the 

first place. 

 

And I think that will be of concern to a lot of people when they 

actually read what’s in the Bill and they say, well how does this 

relate to the tragedy in Saskatoon. And I really would invite the 

minister, when he closes debate, to tell us how this relates to 

addressing the concerns which have come about as a result of 

that unfortunate incident. 

 

I think we require a clear statement from the minister as to 

where his thinking is going. For example, this new Act, I 

understand, will regulate everyone from commissionaires to 

security officers working in isolated areas, as Mr. Nikolichuk 

was. Would it not make sense, I say to my friend the minister, 

would it not make sense to give some clear indication as to 

what minimal standards of safety the government intends to 

enact? 

 

There are many suggestions . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry 

this isn’t an issue which interests members opposite. I don’t 

know why they are indifferent to this issue, but I know many 

people in Saskatchewan are extremely concerned about safety 

for security guards since this incident. 

 

To just throw out some obvious suggestions. When we have . . . 

when security . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Why don’t you support this Bill? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Because it doesn’t address the problems. Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I would ask members to please 

allow the member to make his statements. There is ample time 

for anyone to get into the debate whenever the member’s done. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I appreciate that 

intervention and I assure the hon. member opposite that I will 

be very pleased to listen attentively to his remarks in debate. I 

hope he will have some remarks in this debate because this is a 

serious issue. I’ve told him before, he’s got to quit cooking his 

food in aluminium pots; it seems to be having a deleterious 

effect. And I just hope he’ll take my advice before it’s too late. 

 

Back to the issue though of safety for our security guards. There 

are some suggestions that are obvious here and I’d like to hear 

the minister respond to them. And one is, should there be  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

mandatory radio contact for all security officers working in 

isolated areas? Should there be mandatory beepers? 

 

Should security officers working in dangerous situations and in 

isolated situations, should they be required to work in pairs? 

Should other equipment such as, say flashlights, radios, become 

mandatory equipment? 

 

(1445) 

 

Does the minister intend to provide for minimum technological 

equipment for all officers working, say in isolated areas? 

 

I think the public would like to hear these answers. I think the 

public would like some clear statement from the minister as to 

how he intends to regulate the industry instead of simply 

intruding into the public security industry and setting up a new 

bureaucracy and seizing more power for the department. 

 

Can he simply tell us how this Act will address the tragedy 

which occurred in Saskatoon last year? That’s what the public 

really wants to know. The public is upset, and rightly so with 

what happened to this unfortunate young man and his family, 

and we would be only too eager to support any Bill which 

attempts to address that problem. 

 

But I say, I’ve been all through it, my learned friend from 

Melville has been all through it; we can’t find anything in this 

Bill that addresses that tragedy or tells us how the government 

is going to try and prevent incidents like that in the future. And 

I really invite the minister in his closing statement to tell us 

where his thinking is at and how he can turn this Bill into an 

attempt to prevent tragedies like this in the future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 

intrigued to listen to the remarks of the member for North 

Battleford because it points out, as they do so often, that the 

member for North Battleford and the Liberal caucus tend to take 

one position one day and take another position an entirely 

different day. 

 

Here’s a case where the member for North Battleford is 

evincing concerns about the measure of protection that will be 

there for security guards, putting aside, putting aside the 

question that there are measures in this Bill and there are 

measures that are covered by occupational health and safety. 

But this is the same caucus that turns around and will attack the 

government for trying to protect the interests of workers in 

Saskatchewan through occupational health and safety. Attack, 

attack, attack, attack. Attack the government and attack workers 

for these things, and now saying: you don’t go far enough; you 

need to be more specific. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are words for these kinds of inconsistencies. 

We should not use these words in this Chamber, but I think the 

public and the Assembly knows full well what word I’m talking 

about, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I listened to the debate and listened to the remarks 

made by the minister in his presentation and second reading of 

this Bill, I have to just draw to the Assembly’s attention that 

while I think the minister is meaning well, and I think the 

government are meaning well, the unfortunate part, as I’ve 

talked to some of the private groups out there, security guards 

that are providing, offering security, and many services across 

this province for companies . . . and like we had the situation 

that arose in Saskatoon, that this is being centred around, the 

unfortunate and tragic death of a young security guard. 

 

I find from many of these private companies that they really 

don’t feel that this legislation does anything for them. They 

don’t feel that this legislation, had it been in place, would have 

even protected the young individual who unfortunately lost his 

life. It doesn’t do anything for the family. 

 

And one of the concerns they really have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is the fact that in their discussions in trying to formulate and 

bring forward information that would bring forward a piece of 

legislation that would really address the concerns and bring 

some controls, is the fact that they’re told that the real meat will 

come through regulations. 

 

Now I believe they’ve asked the government to let them see 

what the regulations will state — how the regulations will read, 

how they will address the concerns, and make the act of being a 

security guard . . . protect them and make it safer; so that they 

can do their jobs, certainly properly and appropriately and 

provide the security that they’re offering. 

 

And right to this date they really have not been informed as to 

how those regulations will read, what will be in them, and 

whether or not the regulations will address those concerns. 

 

And so I think it’s appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

government indeed even to this legislative body, really indicate 

what the regulations will be saying. Unfortunately I would like 

to see some meat in the legislation rather than just dropping 

everything into the area of regulations, where the government 

through order in council changes and can change an Act that 

may not have any meaningful support for security guards in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these private companies that are offering 

security to many companies across the province are very 

concerned that the legislation we have here is just a 

window-dressing and doesn’t really address the major problem 

that is out there. 

 

In regards to these comments, Mr. Speaker, I think it certainly 

wouldn’t be beneficial for us at this time to move through and 

to even allow this Bill to move into Committee of the Whole at 

this time, based on some of the discussion I’ve had. I’m sure 

discussion that members of the Liberal caucus have had as well. 

 

I think it’s . . . I think there’s more that needs to be done, more 

time needs to be taken to address this a little further, and  

  



1258  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

hopefully as we address it in a little more detail before we move 

into committee, we can get the government to recognize that 

there are some concerns here that they need to take a serious 

look at — that they need to look at — and sit down with the 

companies and with the individuals that they have been talking 

to and certainly recognize that there are some issues that need to 

be addressed. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s imperative that 

we allow that to happen — we allow the minister and his staff 

to see if they can come to a consensus. And in allowing that 

process to take place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s 

appropriate at this time that I move adjournment of debate on 

Bill No. 50. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

second reading of The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997. 

 

This Bill is the first of three major pieces of financial services 

legislation that are being reviewed by the Department of 

Justice. The other two Acts are The Saskatchewan Insurance 

Act and The Credit Union Act, 1985. We are continuing our 

work on these Acts and expect to introduce amendments in 

future sessions of the legislature. 

 

These three pieces of legislation have not been amended for 

many years. Indeed some of the provisions we are examining 

are more than 30 years old. The financial services industry has 

undergone significant change in the past three decades. Other 

jurisdictions have amended or are in the process of amending 

their financial services legislation. 

 

This trust and loan Bill is the first example of state-of-the-art 

legislation that will take our financial institutions into the 21st 

century. In reviewing this legislation, we have consulted 

extensively with the financial industry, consumer groups, and 

other governments. We greatly appreciate the time, effort, and 

cooperation they have contributed throughout the consultation 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these trust and loan amendments are progressive. 

They move to eliminate costly and unnecessary duplication in 

the regulation of financial services. Many of the people who 

were consulted in reviewing this legislation strongly endorse 

the need for reduction in regulatory duplication. Currently more 

than 90 per cent of the trust and loan companies operating in 

Saskatchewan are already regulated with respect to their 

financial solvency by the federal government or by another 

provincial government. 

 

Until now, Saskatchewan has been duplicating this regulation 

by conducting audits and other financial tests. Not only have 

companies found this duplication to be burdensome, it has also 

required the dedication of valuable resources within the 

Department of Justice. With this new Bill Saskatchewan will no 

longer be regulating the solvency of companies that are already  

regulated by their home jurisdiction. This will save time and 

costs for both companies and the provincial regulator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must emphasize that these amendments will not 

mean a loss of assurance for Saskatchewan consumers. Trust 

and loan companies will still be subject to full financial 

regulation in their home province. The effect of this Bill is that 

regulation will no longer occur twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the financial services industry has become 

extremely complex with a vast array of products available to the 

consumer, many different groups selling these products, and 

new ways of reaching the consumer, including telemarketing 

and the Internet. 

 

It is for this reason that market conduct, or the way in which 

these financial products are sold to the consumer, must be 

monitored to ensure consumer protection. Although the 

majority of financial products are marketed in a responsible 

manner, legislative changes will require trust and loan 

companies to establish practices and standards so that their 

representatives adhere to market conduct standards in selling 

their products. 

 

This Bill will allow companies to design their own market 

conduct systems and makes them responsible for insuring, 

among other things, that consumers are given an accurate and 

fair description of products, the personal financial information 

which consumers provide to companies is used only for the 

purposes that the consumer designates, and consumers are able 

to exercise free and informed choices about the financial 

products they purchase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consumers should not be forced to buy products 

that they may not need or want in order to obtain a product they 

do need, such as a mortgage. By requiring the companies to 

have these market conduct systems in place and to file them 

with the regulator, this Bill aims to prevent these inappropriate 

practices from occurring. 

 

Consumer groups have expressed their support for the inclusion 

of market conduct provisions in our legislation. However, Mr. 

Speaker, we do not intend to proclaim these new market 

conduct provisions in force immediately. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, a very important part of the design of 

this legislation was the consultation process. As a result of 

responses that we have received from financial service 

representatives during this process, it was determined that more 

time was needed for the industry and government to work 

together to continue this consultation in developing market 

conduct rules and procedures. 

 

Since many of the market conduct provisions will be contained 

in regulations, we will want to continue this extensive 

consultation before these regulations are implemented. We 

believe in the need for market conduct regulation, but we also 

believe in the need for a thorough consultation process. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in order to balance the needs of both 

the industry and consumers, we will not be proclaiming the 

market conduct provisions within the Act until these  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

consultations are complete. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation allows the 

regulator to enforce compliance by using a single sanction; that 

of cancelling the trust or loan company’s licence. 

 

Modernizing our legislation requires that we have a range of 

remedies that is comparable to that of other regulators. This Bill 

provides us with a range of remedies, allowing the regulator to 

respond more appropriately to infractions under the Act, from a 

very minor incident to a more serious breach of the Act. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have incorporated the principles in 

the administrative process to ensure that companies facing 

sanctions are reasonably provided with an opportunity to know 

and respond to the case against them, and to be heard by the 

regulator regarding the appropriateness of the sanction. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, The Trust and Loan Corporations 

Act, 1997 will eliminate costly and unnecessary duplication of 

regulation; provide better consumer protection by regulating 

how financial services and products are sold to Saskatchewan 

residents; give the regulator the ability to enforce the 

requirements of the Act, while at the same time giving 

companies the right to be heard; and modernize the first of three 

pieces of this province’s financial services legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Act, 1997. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

stand today to address the Bill before us, Bill No. 56, The Trust 

and Loan Corporations Act. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have long been known for having 

one of the highest rates of savings in Canada. Even now, 

Saskatchewan residents have the distinction of being the most 

prolific savers with a saving rate of 6.9 per cent — the highest 

rate in the country according to The Conference Board of 

Canada. 

 

This would seem to contradict the results from a recent 

Conference Board of Canada survey that shows the index on 

consumer attitude at its highest point in 10 years. An 

encouraging outlook. 

 

Even as our rate of savings is the highest in this country, we’ve 

also seen a rise in the average personal income among our 

residents. Obviously people are fearful of spending money 

when they have no assurance that they may even have a job 

next month. 

 

This only furthered the point that the Royal Bank has made 

recently. That point being that the Saskatchewan economy is 

the most volatile in the country. 

 

The volatility of the Saskatchewan economy also goes to 

strengthen the fact that the people of Saskatchewan are still the 

most prolific savers in Canada, simply because there’s little  

confidence in this government’s ability to encourage job 

growth. This essentially means people are not sure that the job 

that they do will last, and thus they continue to save at a high 

rate for a rainy day. And looking back on what this government 

has accomplished job-wise in this province over the past five 

years, when it rains, it pours. 

 

Obviously Saskatchewan has not been able to take advantage of 

the low interest rates like other provinces such as Alberta and 

Manitoba have — those low interest rates being an advantage 

that businesses and consumers can partly attribute to our Liberal 

government in Ottawa and their mandate to improve the 

Canadian economy. 

 

In reviewing this Act, I see that the new legislation is a big step 

in moving towards allowing the people of Saskatchewan to feel 

more secure about who they entrust their savings to. This is due 

to the new regulations for trust and loan companies operating in 

the province so that they will conform more closely to those of 

the federal government’s. I’m confident this will make 

regulating these corporations much easier from the viewpoint of 

the governments and from the view of the superintendent of 

financial institutions. 

 

I understand that this new legislation will hopefully ensure that 

the situation that occurred back in 1991, regarding the closure 

of the western Canada’s oldest trust company, Saskatchewan 

Trust . . . I think that many business people in the province 

would agree that doing business in Saskatchewan requires a lot 

of patience to deal with the high degree of regulation and 

duplication of services in this province, and I think that the 

people in the trust and loans business would reiterate those 

feelings. 

 

The government obviously agrees with the business community 

on this issue as they have stated on numerous occasions, 

including in their own publication, Partnership for Growth, the 

need for elimination of many of the regulations that hinder 

existing businesses as well as impeding new businesses. This is 

why I’m sure these stakeholders will be pleased to see some 

elimination of costly and unnecessary duplication of regulation. 

The province has realized that regulating the solvency of 

non-Saskatchewan trust and loan companies is unnecessary 

because of the overlapping regulation that is administered in 

their home province or by their provincial government. 

 

As I have already mentioned, the Act also lets many of 

Saskatchewan’s rules mirror those that are already in place at 

the federal level. This will ensure that the province’s laws 

conform to the standards across the country, while eliminating 

the chance of misinterpretation between the two. I am 

encouraged to see that this province adopt those changes which 

will again help to reduce any confusion between local and 

federal interpretations of this legislation. 

 

I assume the new legislation will also have a significant effect 

on not only the regulatories of the industry, but also the 

consumers of financial services. I suspect that this new 

legislation will go further than the preceding legislation in 

ensuring that consumers will be more thoroughly protected 

from dishonest loan brokers — those that in the past requested  

  



1260  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

significant advance fees paid for services or for loans that were 

never received. 

 

It is encouraging to see that the government is doing more to 

ensure that consumers are protected when engaging in loan 

transactions to institutions other than that of major banks. What 

I think the people of Saskatchewan would like to see though is 

the government encouraging western or provincially based 

financial institutions. While I am not implying that this is 

government’s job to set up these institutions, but I think it 

would be encouraging to see more western-based financial 

institutions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Many people already have negative feelings towards the major 

banks because of the billions of dollars in profits the major 

banks have made. And many people also suspect that the 

decisions that take place on who receives loans are made in the 

East rather than someone who is closer to home. 

 

This was probably one of the most appealing characteristics that 

made smaller trust companies more attractive to a number of 

consumers in the past. Unfortunately, bad decision making 

coupled with bad management brought many of these smaller 

trust companies to an end in the late ’80s and the early ’90s. Yet 

only a small amount of investors lost any substantial amount of 

money, thanks to the numerous bail-outs by the Canadian 

depositors insurance corporation. 

 

I am also pleased to see that the government, while improving 

its own regulations of trust and loan companies by eliminating 

much of the overlap that presently exists, this overlap between 

this provincial government, other provincial governments, and 

federal regulators should be eliminated. And from looking at 

this legislation, the government is even going further than this 

by requiring trust and loan companies to establish the practices 

and standards that would allow them to monitor the 

developments in their own industry while at the same time 

ensuring that their representatives follow these standards and 

practices in selling of their products and services. 

 

While I understand that the government has consulted 

extensively with industry experts, consumer groups, and other 

governments when formulating this new legislation, the 

minister states that there’s still some work to be completed with 

regard to the framework for market conduct regulations. 

 

I think it would be fair to ask at this time what kind of time 

frame the government expects for these consultations, and when 

can we expect the remaining portion of the Act to be coming 

before us? However, I suspect that we can put that off until 

another time when this Bill comes before us again and we have 

a chance to scrutinize it further. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

just like to make a few comments about the Bill that’s before us 

and recognize the attempts the government is attempting to 

address in bringing forward this piece of legislation. 

 

I understand that the government certainly has taken the time to 

consult with a number of groups. I can understand as well and 

appreciate the concern the public may have in what has  

happened in the past. And I believe that the legislation is trying 

to address some concerns that have happened in the past with 

regards to trust and loan corporations. 

 

I think, however though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be 

inappropriate just to move quickly through this piece of 

legislation. I think there are some very important matters that 

we need to take a close look at and review a little closer before 

we move further into committee. And at this time therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I would move we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

an amendment to this Act is necessary to permit the transfer of 

all responsibilities, assets, and liabilities associated with this 

Act to the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

With the passage of amendments to this Act, the community 

bond program will be administered by the Crown Investments 

Corporation rather than Economic and Cooperative 

Development. 

 

The transfer of these responsibilities follows the wind-down of 

a community bonds program in Saskatchewan. Loan loss 

provisions and loans receivable will be transferred to CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). As CIC 

manages the province’s financial holdings, its skill in 

negotiating settlements with bond projects will be reimbursed 

. . . to reimburse the province where the guarantee has been 

paid, will be invaluable. 

 

Although no further bond issues will be approved, there are still 

active community bond corporations and projects which require 

some administration and monitoring until the full-term maturity 

dates of community bonds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time the community bonds program started, 

the investment outlook in Saskatchewan was very different. 

People were not investing in their communities and few 

opportunities were open to those who did wish to explore the 

investment option. However, today there are many financing 

options open to business that were not available even five years 

ago. 

 

The major lending institutions have become much more 

proactive about providing funding to small rural business and 

the public will still have many excellent opportunities to invest 

in community businesses through programs like the community 

ventures offering through the Securities Commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to assure the public that the 

government will continue to honour its guarantees for all 

approved projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of An Act to amend 

The Community Bonds Act. 

 

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. The roots of the community bonds 

program originate in 1985 with the task force on rural 

development chaired by the late and highly respected Jake 

Brown, dean of agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan. 

The task force issued in 1985 a report entitled Strategy for the 

Development of Rural Saskatchewan. The strategy contained 92 

recommendations covering a wide spectrum of rural 

development socio-economic issues in 15 chapters. 

 

One of the chapters is entitled “Organization for Local 

Economic Development.” That chapter explores the problems, 

the issues, constraints, and opportunities surrounding local rural 

economic development. 

 

Many of the problems, issues, and constraints identified in 1985 

are as relevant today as they were back then. Among the 

findings of the task force were things like the province needing 

to create effective mechanisms to both initiate and respond to 

rural development opportunities at the local, sub-provincial 

level. 

 

There are numerous opportunities at the local level for 

enhanced social and economic development. Many of these 

opportunities, at least initially, are small scale with little impact 

or statistical visibility provincially. The development of such 

opportunities is important in the terms of economic, social, 

physical, and even psychological impact. 

 

The existing structure and powers of rural and small urban 

municipalities are not ideally suited to the pursuit of 

development opportunities. The geographic area of these 

municipalities is generally small, their staff and financial 

resources are limited, and their main orientation is towards 

administration, regulation, and the provision of basic municipal 

services. 

 

Additional institutions are required in rural Saskatchewan to 

supplement but not supplant existing local government efforts 

in the area of economic development. There is a lack of 

information in rural Saskatchewan regarding provincial, federal, 

and other resources and programs that are available to assist 

with the development at local and area levels. 

 

There is no identified individual or group with the mandate to 

search out and develop opportunities and then to relate them to 

the information and assistance available from senior 

governments and the private sector. We need more information 

to stress that farm and small urban areas are socially and 

economically interdependent and that there is even more secure 

future for all of them and greater voluntary cooperation and 

action on an area basis in an intermunicipal competition. 

 

The task force concluded that what was needed was a local or 

area structure and development approach that would encompass 

a geographic area that is composed of a number of urban and 

rural municipalities that is logical from the development point 

of view, and that retains the existing municipal structure. 

 

(1515) 

 

It should instil an attitude of opportunity identification and  

entrepreneurship into the area. It should ensure that a wide 

range of interests are involved in the development process, 

including the local private sector, and not just interests of local 

governments. 

 

It should provide for local initiative, control, and investment, 

and ensure that all relevant information is utilized in reviewing 

and implementing development opportunities; and finally, 

provide an ongoing educational process, stressing the economic 

and social interdependence of rural and urban municipalities in 

specific geographic areas. 

 

The end result of the task force findings, conclusions, and 

recommendations was the establishment of the rural 

development corporation program in 1986, to enable urban and 

rural municipalities, Indian bands, and cities to cooperate and 

pursue economic development on an intermunicipal basis. 

 

At one point there were 38 rural development corporations and 

more than 260 local governments involved in RDCs (rural 

development corporation). The community bonds program was 

launched in 1990 to complement the rural development 

corporation program. Between 1991 and 1993, 32 community 

bond projects were approved. Presently there are 28 community 

bond projects operating. 

 

With the phasing-out of the rural development corporation 

program and the community bonds program, two government 

tools in support of local rural development initiatives have been 

lost. In their place the REDA (regional economic development 

authority) program is being emphasized because it presumably 

addresses more comprehensively the service needs of the 

community economic development sector. 

 

According to a 1995-96 annual report of the Department of 

Economic Development, when the REDA initiative was 

established, the goal was to encourage and support the creation 

of between 20 and 25 community-owned and operated REDAs 

across this province. 

 

Saskatchewan is a far-flung province with widely divergent 

regional resources, development potential, and opportunities. 

We wonder what degree of coverage 20 to 25 REDAs will give 

the province in terms of population, municipalities, and 

geographic distribution. If there are gaps in coverage once the 

plan for our REDAs are in place, what plan does the 

government have to ensure that untapped development 

opportunities in areas without the benefit of REDAs are 

realized. 

 

Is it feasible to revitalize the RDC program and the community 

bonds program within the REDA? Granted that under the 

community bonds program the government has had to pay out 

$6.5 million in guarantee. By the same token, 6,500 rural 

residents express their faith and commitment to their 

communities by pouring $17.4 million into community bond 

projects during the life of this program — money that was 

invested in new and expanding businesses; investment in the 

future of the participating communities which created hundreds 

of jobs and optimism for the future and also helped provide 

reason and opportunity for the young people to stay and work. 

  



1262  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

 Without the young in our community there is not much future. 

 

One can look at the RDC and community bonds program as an 

investment in rural youth, and as such, could argue that this is 

one of the few cases this government has determined that 

paying of government guarantees is an acceptable price to pay 

for development in rural areas. 

 

The continued subsidization of money-losing STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) is the case in point. 

The subsidization is recognition that STC is an essential service 

and vital strand in the fabric of rural Saskatchewan. 

Discontinuing the bus service would deprive rural people of 

access to needed services giving further impetus to the rural and 

urban migration and depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I emphasize the paying of government guarantees must be 

within reason because certainly taxpayers’ money should be 

spent prudently and effectively where it can do the most good. 

Clearly if the RDC and the community bonds program have 

outlived their usefulness, they should be wound down. 

 

What I ask of the minister are assurances that development 

needs of rural Saskatchewan and access to investment funds are 

not jeopardized and not diminished. I would further ask the 

minister to outline the specific rural development programs in 

place besides REDA, and what other programs he might be 

working on in support of rural development. 

 

And finally, we would ask that the government outline the 

procedures and forward planning in place to deal with existing 

community bonds, existing guarantees, and existing monies 

already in the community bond system. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 8 — The 

Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. This Bill will be of benefit to 

the whole province, and is of particular interest to me because 

of my involvement in tourism in the Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency. 

 

I recently reviewed statistics which stated that visitors to our 

constituency spent an estimated $10.7 million directly in the 

area. This is a substantial amount of income to our area and has 

resulted in employment of 5.9 per cent or 480 employed 

residents in our constituency. Tourism is the fifth largest 

employer in the Kelvington-Wadena area, after agriculture, 

retail trade, health, and manufacturing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is impossible for the government to be aware of 

the needs of these very innovative business people who play a 

very valuable role in the economy of Saskatchewan. 

Recognizing that government alone cannot develop and 

promote this industry is a very positive and progressive step. 

 

The involvement of industry stakeholders in setting strategies 

for tourism in Saskatchewan will be beneficial for the province 

as well as for the taxpayers. Saskatchewan people are well 

aware of tourism within their own area, but they seldom realize 

the vast array of tourism opportunities throughout the whole 

province. If our own residents are unaware of Saskatchewan’s 

tourism potential, how will they promote it nationally or 

internationally? 

 

The merging of TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of 

Saskatchewan), the Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council, 

and the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority provided one body to 

promote tourism within the province, as well as nationally and 

internationally. The profile of this industry will be strengthened 

and members will benefit from having a single organization to 

represent their interest, support their activities, and focus their 

resources. We can all agree that such a role will be beneficial to 

the industry as well as to the province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill, to clarify the role in 

making up . . . and the powers of the Tourism Authority, is very 

positive. To develop one strong tourism body in this province, it 

is imperative that the mandate of the Tourism Authority allow 

all stakeholders in the industry an opportunity to obtain 

membership within the body. 

 

As this Act currently states, an organization which meets the 

criteria set out in the Bill’s regulations will be automatically 

welcomed. The Tourism Authority is being given the power to 

levy membership fees for its members. This legislation allows 

the amount of the fees to vary for various types of members. 

 

It is imperative that the Tourism Authority recognize that many 

of the organizations or tourism operators who may want to join 

are on a very tight budget. The development of a strong 

Tourism Authority must include stakeholders from every 

industry, and therefore the membership levy must be kept at a 

very affordable level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a strong and successful Saskatchewan Tourism 

Authority is very important and we encourage the continued 

development of that organization. It appears this Bill, which 

accelerates the role and structure of the Tourism Authority, will 

be beneficial to the industry as a whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 22 — The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

Loi sur les juges de paix be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 30 — The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 20  The Small Claims Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 

Ron Hewitt, the assistant deputy minister, registry services 

division; and Susan Amrud, the director of legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I hope we have 

no empty barrels echoing around in the back recesses of the 

chambers today. But I think that those who have intelligent, 

profound, and positive comments to make don’t require, you 

know, loud heckling from the back, back, back benches which 

will probably never, never reach the exotic heights of the 

ministerial benches. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to say to the minister that we are 

aware that there is, I think, consensus in the community that we 

should increase the jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court, not 

only financially but of course this Act would also facilitate 

expanding the jurisdiction in terms of the types of cases which 

can be brought in the Small Claims Court. 

 

However, my understanding is that the jurisdiction of the Small 

Claims Court has always been found in legislation, not in 

regulation, and that the effect of this new Act is that the 

jurisdiction of the court will be in regulation, and that is of 

concern to us. 

 

(1530) 

 

My concern is also deepened by virtue of the fact that the 

accompanying explanatory notes, which your department was 

good enough to supply us with, said that the jurisdiction of the 

court may vary from community to community and judicial 

centre to judicial centre. And that I find very troubling — the 

prospect that the regulations may not even be standard but that 

the cases which can be heard in one community may not be the 

same in another. 

 

So I would like the minister to kindly address us on three 

things, if he would be so good. First of all, I regret I was  

speaking to the Clerk when the officials were introduced, so I 

would appreciate him introducing the officials again. Secondly, 

why is it found necessary to remove jurisdiction from the Act 

into regulations? And three, is there a contemplation that the 

jurisdiction will in fact vary around the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, I’m pleased to introduce my 

officials again. And as long as I have your attention, this is Mr. 

Ron Hewitt, who’s assistant deputy minister, registry services 

division, and this is Susan Amrud, who is the director of 

legislative services. 

 

Well I think what I can do is give an explanation of why we are 

proceeding with the Act in this way. And I think what you will 

find from my explanation is that with proper consultation with 

the bar and with the judiciary and with members of the 

community, we’ve come up with a proposed legislation that 

meets many of the needs that people in Saskatchewan have. 

And the questions that you’re raised have been thoroughly 

discussed and advice provided. 

 

Now the Ministerial Advisory Committee on Dispute 

Resolution was set up by the Minister of Justice, and they report 

regularly. One of the things that they worked on specifically 

and provided to me in a written report in October 1996 was a 

resolution as to the Small Claims Court and how it should be 

dealt with. And the recommendation that they gave was as 

follows: 

 

That the monetary jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court 

be increased to $7,000 to account for inflation and 

(underlined) that consideration be given to adopting a 

higher rate in a particular part of the province on a pilot 

project basis. 

 

As you know, this perceived gap between the monetary 

jurisdiction of a Small Claims Court and the monetary limit at 

which it is economically sensible to bring an action in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench is really the issue. The dispute resolution 

committee, and I think others within the bar and the judiciary, 

was of the view that a solution that would best address this gap 

in Regina or Swift Current would not necessarily be the best 

solution for centres such as North Battleford, Lloydminster, 

Meadow Lake, or La Ronge. Their advice was that the Act 

should be flexible enough to accommodate the needs of 

individual communities. 

 

Now this is not a novel idea. Saskatchewan is not the first 

province to set the limits of its Small Claims Court by 

regulation. And it’s also not the first place that would maintain 

different limits around the province. 

 

Ontario already has different limits — in Toronto, $3,000 

versus the rest of the province from $1,000. And that was in 

place in Ontario from 1979 to 1992. The higher limit was set in 

Toronto to ease the backlog facing the district court in Toronto. 

And the validity of having two different limits was challenged 

in the court cases but the challenges were not successful. 

 

Small claims courts throughout the province do not all operate 

in the same way. They adopt different procedures to suit their  

  



1264  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

local practice. The procedure used in North Battleford is quite 

different from the procedure followed in Regina. And we’ve 

been responding to the local bars who have made suggestions 

about how this should happen, and we’re more than willing to 

try different solutions in different areas. 

 

One of the things that this legislation will do is to give us the 

flexibility to respond to the needs of local communities, and this 

is based on the consultation that we have. 

 

Now you’ve raised the question about the limit of the small 

claims jurisdiction being set in regulation. And I said before, 

this isn’t the . . . Saskatchewan’s not the first one to do this. It’s 

already done in Ontario and in Prince Edward Island, and the 

new Small Claims Act passed in New Brunswick in February of 

1997 also did set the limit of a Small Claims Court by 

regulation there as well. 

 

So I think that I’ve answered all your questions but I’m sure 

you’ll have some more, and I’ll be glad to respond. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, the minister is very perceptive. I do 

indeed have further questions on this point. 

 

Now I think the minister will agree with me that certain 

provisions can be legal without necessarily being sensible, and 

I’m frankly surprised that he holds out the two-tier system of 

Tory Ontario as something that socialist Saskatchewan ought to 

embrace. 

 

I realize that the NDP in this province is moving further and 

further and further to the right, but I’m a little bit surprised that 

the minister now considers that Mike Harris is his beacon, his 

guiding light. And if Mike Harris is now the prophet of the 

Saskatchewan NDP, I anticipate that we’re going to see a lot of 

other most interesting innovations come in from this 

government in the future. 

 

It may in fact be perfectly legal to have a different jurisdiction 

from one community to another around Saskatchewan, but that 

doesn’t answer the question of is it sensible? Is it wise? Is it 

fair? Is it compatible with our overall concept of justice, our 

overall concept of some meaningful and equal level of service 

throughout the province? And it’s the position of my colleagues 

and myself that it is not. 

 

And nor does it seem to me that there is any great need for this 

to go into regulation. My understanding is that we put in 

regulation, one, details that are too voluminous for legislation; 

and two, matters which may have to be changed on a frequent, 

frequent basis. 

 

Now I’d like to ask the minister, when was the last time we 

increased the jurisdiction of our Small Claims Court? I know it 

has been increased over the years, and I’d be embarrassed to tell 

you what the jurisdiction for Small Claims Court was when I 

first became a lawyer. But the fact is, it only has to be increased 

every few years depending on inflation. It’s not something that 

you’re going to have to do two and three times a year, so why 

the need to push this into regulation? Why the need to take 

away this historic power of the Legislative  

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I am not sure what the first sort of 

five minutes of your comments had to do with what we’re 

talking about here, but I know that there are some specialists in 

two-tier whatever over on your side of the House and I think 

you should probably leave them to do that themselves. 

 

But practically, the last time the limit was changed for The 

Small Claims Act was in 1988. But one of the things that we 

were looking at here . . . and I guess we have a profound 

disagreement on how one provides access to justice in the 

province. We think that providing access to justice includes 

consulting with the community, consulting with the people who 

are the users of the system, the people who are part of the 

system, and consulting with the public to figure out how we can 

provide the best service to the justice system in the province. 

 

After extensive consultation, we are coming forward with the 

provisions that we have suggested here to provide some 

flexibility so that we can provide services all over the province. 

And it’s for that reason that we’ve ended up putting some of the 

limits in the regulatory power rather than in the Act itself. 

 

I think also there’s a whole question about the Court of Queen’s 

Bench and what kind of jurisdiction they have. We have been 

working carefully with the Court of Queen’s Bench, because we 

know that they are also proposing or bringing forward rules that 

relate to smaller dollar claims to allow for a simplified 

procedure in the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

And practically, we want to make sure that what we do in The 

Small Claims Act meshes with what they’re doing in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench, and by having the flexibility that we’ve 

designed in this legislation, that will allow us to respond to how 

the use arises from the Court of Queen’s Bench smaller claims 

rules. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, if the minister is 

saying that the jurisdiction may vary as to whether or not the 

community has had its Queen’s Bench ripped out the way 

Kerrobert and Melville have had, or whether it still has a 

Queen’s Bench, I guess I wonder really how that should link up 

with the provision of Small Claims, so that we’d have a 

different Small Claims in Melville than we would in Yorkton, a 

few miles down the road. 

 

I do want to ask the minister though, he says that there were 

public consultations. I’m not aware of any public hearings. In 

the matter of the Small Claims Court I’d like him to outline for 

me what public hearings, what public consultations did take 

place on the issue of the Small Claims Court. 

 

And while he’s at it, if he cares to comment on what public 

consultations he conducted before taking away the Queen’s 

Bench court from Melville, I’d certainly be interested in hearing 

that as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I know that the hon. member is a 

recent person, you know, a recent new member to this 

Assembly and wasn’t always that concerned about the policies  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

and practice that took place in this legislature. But I think it’s 

quite well acknowledged throughout Saskatchewan that the 

Department of Justice does extensive consultation especially as 

it relates to Bills that relate to the public and the courts and 

access to justice. 

 

And I guess what I can say is that there have been ongoing 

committees of the bar, the bench, and people within the 

Department of Justice as it relates to the Small Claims Court. 

And some of the proposals have gone forward. All of them 

include discussions with the community. 

 

Now as I said before, the Ministerial Advisory Committee on 

Dispute Resolution has a broad base of members and they 

represent quite a number of groups throughout the province. 

And just for your edification and for the edification of all of us, 

I’ll mention the various groups that are on this committee 

through representatives. 

 

There are two representatives of the Saskatchewan branch of 

the Canadian Bar Association; there is one bencher from The 

Law Society of Saskatchewan. There are two mediators who 

represent Mediation Saskatchewan; there are two 

arbitrator-mediators from the Arbitration and Mediation 

Institution of Saskatchewan. There are two consumers 

representing the Consumers’ Association of Canada 

(Saskatchewan Branch). 

 

There’s a person representing Saskatchewan Community 

Mediation. There’s a representative of the John Howard 

Society; and there’s a representative of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce. There’s a representative from the Metis 

Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s a union representative representing the labour interests. 

There’s a member or professor of law from the law school in 

Saskatoon representing an academic perspective on dispute 

resolution. There are three people from the Department of 

Justice who are representing the Government of Saskatchewan 

in this committee. And as well there are one judge of the Court 

of Queen’s Bench and one judge from the Provincial Court of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

And this group works carefully and diligently and has done a lot 

of very good work. And part of what . . . well what we’re 

coming forward with now is very much a product of the 

discussion that they’ve had. They come together as 

representatives of their various areas, and I know that they end 

up discussing these issues within their organizations before they 

come and discuss them as part of the Ministerial Advisory 

Committee on Dispute Resolution. So that aspect is quite 

broadly covered. 

 

Some of their recommendations as well are discussed publicly 

now and again, and I know that often you end up with 

conversations that I have with people, where they have specific 

questions or comments on some of the discussion that’s gone on 

in this committee. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, I am aware that the legal community is of the view 

that the time has come to increase the jurisdiction of the Small 

Claims Court. And as you’ve indicated, it was last done nearly 

10 years ago. So apparently in terms of reviewing the 

jurisdiction of the Small Claims Court we’re talking about 

something we may have to do once in a decade. So I still just 

don’t see how once in a decade justifies taking it away from the 

legislature for the first time in Saskatchewan history and putting 

it into regulations. 

 

This doesn’t sound like an onerous task for this Assembly, and 

it doesn’t sound like a task that we’re going to go through two 

or three times a year. We last did it nine years ago. 

 

So while I’m aware that the legal community was certainly of 

the view that it was timely to increase the jurisdiction of the 

Small Claims Court, frankly I am unaware of any loud public 

outcry, either from our profession or from the public at large, on 

the issue that I am raising; namely, to put jurisdiction in regs. 

And that specifically is to say, I just don’t know that we have 

out there in Saskatchewan an agitated public that is demanding 

that the jurisdiction of the court be set by regulation. 

 

And what I am suggesting and will be moving, Mr. Minister, 

and I encourage our government to accept it — I believe you 

have it already — is that we do in fact increase the jurisdiction 

of Small Claims to 10,000. And I submit that if that amendment 

is allowed we probably have handled the situation for another 

10 years. 

 

We’ve brought the legislation up to current financial standards. 

Would that not better address the situation than to say that we 

will do it by regs, and it will be different from one community 

to another, leading to all sorts of confusion that’s going to be 

caused if we have different jurisdictions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’ve had a chance to see your 

suggested change to this Bill and I’d say that I do not agree with 

it and will be opposing it. 

 

And I’ll reiterate some of what I’ve said before. I think the key 

thing for us is access to justice for all the people in 

Saskatchewan. And practically, what that does mean is to 

respond to the people who use the system. And we have set up 

some mechanisms whereby we can do that. 

 

The whole situation as it relates to the Small Claims Court is 

that the people want the ability to have some of these smaller 

claims dealt with in a way that’s affordable. And that’s not just 

a concern in the Provincial Court, it’s also a concern in the 

Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Now we have an interesting situation in Saskatchewan, and 

practically across the country, where we have federally 

appointed judges who sit on the Court of Queen’s Bench and 

the Court of Appeal, provincially appointed judges who sit in 

the Provincial Court. The federally appointed judges have the 

power to make rules, the Queen’s Bench rules, and in that 

power, they can set some of the limits on the financial amounts  

  



1266  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

that are in dispute in their court. 

 

What we are trying to do — and that gives them a fair bit of 

flexibility, because they can meet together as judges and set 

some new rules — what we are trying to do is recognize that in 

the Provincial Court we need some of the same kind of 

flexibility so that the public can have access to the courts in a 

seamless way, whether it’s Provincial Court or Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

The recommendations that we’re coming forward with are as a 

result of extensive discussion among the people who are very 

concerned about that; it appears maybe you haven’t had a 

chance to participate in some of those discussions. 

 

But practically, we want to stick with the program that we have, 

which includes this flexibility which will allow for greater 

access to justice. And for those reasons we would not be 

interested in the suggestions that you make. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if I understand the minister 

correctly, I thought he was saying that Queen’s Bench 

jurisdiction differs from one judicial centre to the next. And 

that’s certainly not my understanding, and yet that seems to be 

what is being proposed for our Provincial Court here this 

afternoon. 

 

And I guess even with the explanations that the minister has 

been kind enough to supply, I really just don’t understand the 

reason why we have to take away from this legislature a process 

that we apparently do about once in a decade. 

 

I want to ask the minister though, how do we deal with the 

situation where a summons is issued in one judicial centre, 

returnable in another judicial centre, and they have different 

jurisdictions? How are we ever going to get around that 

problem? 

 

If the jurisdiction is going to be different from community to 

community, then I see massive confusion resulting. When you 

get a Small Claims summons issued in one town for the sum 

that applies to that town, when in point of fact it’s returnable in 

another town that has another set of rules, isn’t this going to 

create a lot of confusion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I don’t think so. I think practically, 

where the matter would be held, where the court proceeding 

would be held, the monetary amount of jurisdiction in that area 

would apply. And if there was some problem with that, well 

then, you know, people could know that before they started 

their proceeding. I don’t think it’s an insurmountable problem 

at all. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I do have an amendment to move here, 

both versions. I would like to move that we: 

Amend clause 3 of the printed Bill by deleting all the 

words after the words “to which relief may be sought” 

where they occur in subclause (7) and by substituting 

the words “is ten thousand dollars.” 

 

I move this, seconded by the hon. member for Melville. And I 

also have the French version, the version Français. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Trés bien. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Merci. 

 

The Chair:  I simply point out to the hon. member you do 

not require a seconder on amendments to the clause. There is an 

amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill. Will committee 

members take the amendment as read? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just in speaking 

briefly to the amendment if I may. We’re talking about making 

the whole process of justice available and more accessible, and 

probably easier to deal with for the people that have access to 

this type of a process. 

 

I’m curious. When we talk about accessibility — now that in 

some areas jurisdictions have changed to the point where 

people, for example, an individual from Melville has to go to 

Lanigan, travel to Lanigan to participate in a small claims 

action — if we’re talking about accessibility and availability 

and something that’s going to improve the process, I would just 

like to support the amendment that my hon. colleague from 

North Battleford has just proposed. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I see that the hearing point 

can be done by agreement. Does that mean that when we move 

the hearing point we have also moved the jurisdiction? Do you 

see the confusion that’s going to be caused by this two-tier 

justice system you are foisting on the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

When we’ve got different jurisdictions in different 

communities, and the only reason that the minister can tell me 

for it is because Mike Harris in Ontario thinks it’s a good idea 

and whatever Mike Harris says, this government wants to 

follow. Where Ontario goes we have to follow. 

 

But here we have, here we have a situation where we’re going 

to have different jurisdictions in different communities. We’re 

going to have transfers of cases for hearing from one 

community to another. But when we transfer a case from one 

community to another, do we also change the jurisdiction of this 

case? Can you try and clarify the confusion that the principle of 

this Bill leaves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m not sure whether  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

this Act has come to the attention of the member before, but the 

clause that he seems to be very excited about is the existing 

clause, or section 12 of the existing Act. And so I think his 

question relates to the legislation as it presently exists which 

says that all parties may consent to the jurisdiction of an action. 

The present Act already has that. 

 

So if that’s his question, then it relates to the existing Act. 

 

But the new part to this section 9 is 9(1)(b) and then (2) and (3) 

where a judge after reviewing all of the information decides that 

there should be a different jurisdiction. But if the objection is to 

9(1)(a), well that’s the present law right now. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I think though that the point is though, Mr. 

Deputy Chair, that now when we change from one community 

to another, both communities are operating under the same set 

of rules. The problem is now that when you change 

communities, you’re going to a community that has a different 

set of rules. So while you’re correct that this is only what’s in 

the present legislation, on the other hand Melville and Yorkton, 

at present, have the same set of rules. 

 

And you’re telling me that under the new legislation, Melville 

and Yorkton may have different sets of rules. So which set 

applies when the parties agree to transfer their action? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I’m not quite certain what the 

argument is here but if the question is that there might be a 

$5,000 limit in Melville and a $7,000 limit in Yorkton, then 

that, I mean, that’s a question that can be asked. But I think that 

people will know when they commence their action whether 

that’s there. 

 

And as you see, the parties can consent to which jurisdiction 

that there is. This may actually provide . . . I mean if there was 

that flexibility — I doubt that there will be — but if there was 

that much of a difference, the parties who had a claim for 

$5,500 might get the defendant to agree that we should have the 

matter heard in Yorkton so they can do it in Small Claims rather 

than have to go to the higher court. 

 

But I think practically, we have very reasonable people who 

work as judges in our system. They have a fair say in how these 

matters are dealt with. We also have very able lawyers, both 

plaintiffs and defence lawyers, throughout the province who 

will make good use of these rules. 

 

We think that the suggestions that we’ve brought forward here 

are practical ones and that they will be used in a positive way to 

increase access to justice throughout the whole province. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, increase access, but 

what you seem to be saying is that you anticipate that litigants 

may be driving to another point in order to take advantage of a 

higher jurisdiction. 

 

Is that how we’re going to have access? By saying that, well if 

we have a pilot project with 7,000 and you have a claim for  

7,000 and your home community has a limit of 5,000 by law, 

you’re going to drive to the pilot project? And that’s the way 

we’re going to increase access rather than have a standard 

jurisdiction throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that there is some possibility 

here of what people often call “law schoolitis.” You think about 

the most crazy idea you can and then ask questions about it and 

try to get students to write answers. But I quite enjoy this kind 

of discussion so I’m happy to be here to respond. 

 

But practically, what your suggestion is here is that we can deal 

with the fact that people may choose to take a case another 

place. 

 

Right now we know we have a mediation project going in 

Saskatoon . . . I mean in Regina and Swift Current. And 

because people have an ability to start a case where they wish in 

Saskatchewan, we know that some people who want to make 

use of some of the mediation facilities that are part of that 

project come and start actions in Regina or in Swift Current. 

 

That may happen here. But I think practically our goal would be 

to provide equal service throughout the province. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  The Chair asks for leave of committee members 

to go page by page up until clause 51 which appears on page 

33. We’re currently on page 10 of the printed Bill. Does the 

Chair have leave to go page by page? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Clauses 11 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger:  With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Chair, to you and through you to the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce a former colleague of ours: was 

Hon. Carol Carson from Melfort; is now Carol Carson from 

Melfort. Please welcome her. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Still honourable. 

 

Ms. Stanger:  And still honourable. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 20 

(continued) 

  



1268  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

Clauses 51 to 57 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedule agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d first like to thank the officials who 

have been with me, and all of the others who have provided 

many years of consultation in bringing forth this legislation. 

And I therefore move that we report this Bill without 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I would also like to join the minister in 

thanking the officials for their attendance today and for their 

assistance in committee. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Small Claims Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With us today for 

the deliberations are, seated right beside me, Mr. Michael Shaw, 

who is the Chair of the Public Service Commission. To his 

right, Mr. Ron Wight, executive director of staffing. Behind us, 

Sharon Roulston, who is our director of administration and 

information services. Directly behind myself, Mr. Rick 

McKillop, who is the executive director of employee relations. 

And seated in the back today, Mr. Chair, is Mr. Warren 

Nicholson, who is the director of employee relations. 

 

(1615) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and a 

welcome to the minister’s officials here this afternoon. 

 

When I’m looking at the total of expenses under the estimates 

here for Public Service Commission this afternoon I see a total 

figure of 7.714 million on the year. Would the minister be able 

to elaborate for us if that particular estimate is net of revenues 

for the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, that would be our total 

expenditures. That does not include any revenues, but any 

revenues would be very minimal to the Public Service  

Commission. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I just felt 

obliged to ask that question seeing as it has been a source of 

concern, I think, that the auditor has raised in previous years, 

where revenues were I think rather substantial, something in the 

order of a half of million dollars and they were netted off of 

your expenses. I note for . . . oh this was in the auditor’s spring 

report of 1996 where that was so reported. 

 

And I was just wondering for . . . I’ve got a copy of your annual 

report for 1995-96 in here, and would the minister or your 

officials be able to refer me within this document as to where I 

might find what were the revenues of the Public Service 

Commission for the ’95-96 fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, I think we need to clarify 

the issue of revenues to the Public Service Commission. There 

will be very minimal revenues to the commission itself, but 

because the commission takes responsibility for the placement 

of career ads on behalf of the departments of executive of 

government . . . the various departments fund those ads, but 

because the Public Service Commission does the actual work 

and the placements and so on, it shows as money coming 

through the Public Service Commission. 

 

Now we were very careful to follow the auditor’s advice and so 

in this year’s reporting you will see those amounts separately 

identified. But those amounts — which are, I’m told, $357,000 

— will be the amounts of money expended by the Public 

Service Commission to place the career ads on behalf of all the 

departments of executive government. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, the total amount is 357,000 for 

the ’96-97 fiscal year then; is that what we’re saying? And then 

what would you be anticipating those sources of revenues for 

your department for the fiscal year that we’re speaking of here 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we expect it’ll be about the 

same. Now it’s difficult to be absolutely precise because 

departments will have various staffing needs in the course of a 

year. And again I repeat, these are not revenues to the Public 

Service Commission; they are payments made for the 

placement of the career ads that we all see in our local papers 

around the province. 

 

The commission expects that because we expect the need to do 

the career advertising to be about the same this year as it was 

last year, it should be very close to the same amount. And I 

think we’re essentially working on about the same advertising 

rates in the industry. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  So, Mr. Minister, you’re saying these aren’t 

revenues; therefore they’re expenses of the Public Service 

Commission. So are they included within this $7.714 million 

that we see before us today? Or are your expenses for the Public 

Service Commission actually more in the order of $8.2 million 

for this fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the expenses for the career  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

ads will be shown by the departments who request the ad 

placement. We simply provide the coordinating role. So the 

expenses, that 357, will be accounted for in the budgets of the 

departments that placed the ads. It’s not within the $7.1 million 

that’s shown as expense of the Public Service Commission. So 

it will be shown as expenses of the various departments who 

will be requesting the ads. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, I’m going to continue to look 

at your annual report from ’95-96 here; and on page 18, I see 

quite a neat statistical profile here and it shows the number of 

employees by location as of March of 1996 and the total 

employees being 10,303. And I wonder if you might have 

something similar in the way of a profile available for us this 

afternoon as of March of this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, yes, we have it here in about 

the same kind of graphic form. And so I’d be happy to provide 

it to the member. This is as of March 31, 1997. 

 

The Chair:  Before . . . order. Before recognizing the 

member for Thunder Creek, I just want to remind, particularly 

the minister, about the use of exhibits in the Legislative 

Assembly. It is certainly proper to share information, but it 

should not be held up in a way that it might be deemed an 

exhibit. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just before the 

exhibit was whisked away to be photocopied, I didn’t make 

note of the number of employees. What was the difference 

there? How many less employees were there from March ’96 to 

March ’97. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, this is a little embarrassing. 

This is a little embarrassing. I sent over our only copy of that 

most recent information so we have to wait for it to be whisked 

back. But I can say, Mr. Chair, and I want to be accurate — but 

the information that I brought into the House today is not as 

current as the officials’ information — the information that I 

have, as of February 26, 1997, the total employees were 9,854. 

So perhaps my critic could stand up and fill us in on the correct 

information for the end of March, 1997. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. 

Minister. And yes, as of March 31 of ’97 the total employees 

are now 9,925. 

 

I want to just make some comment here in terms of, I guess you 

could call it a form of employment equity, in that I notice a 

number of areas in the province, particularly the south-west 

region, are not all that well represented here. I guess you could 

call it a form of regional employment equity in some ways. And 

I know our Tory representatives here have in the past had their 

own share . . . their own idea of what that entailed. 

 

But I was just wondering, in terms of your overall strategic plan 

here that I note you undertook in I believe 1995 to cover the 

period from ’95 through to the end of this century, did you take 

anything into consideration in terms of regional employment 

opportunities within the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think the member will 

recognize by the placement of this kind of information in our 

annual report, we certainly are conscious and track where 

government employees are serving the people of Saskatchewan. 

But our principal goal is to provide services to the people of 

Saskatchewan where those services are best provided and in the 

means in which they can be best provided. 

 

Understandably I think, with Regina being the capital, it is and 

has always been . . . and I suspect so long as Regina is the 

capital of the province, Regina will see the bulk of the public 

service. 

 

And then as we travel around the province, we will see in some 

communities — for instance, my own — where we have 

something like a Valley View Centre, there will be a large 

number of employees, you know, that would be associated with 

that particular institution. And so it goes around the province. 

 

We’ll see changes over the course of the year. In the North, for 

instance, if we’re into a season of forest fighting, you’ll see a 

significant bump up of employees there. 

 

So our placement of employees in the province is where the 

services are being delivered and where they need to be 

delivered and we hope in the best possible way. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem that some 

of the comments that we’ve just heard from you aren’t in 

keeping with the spirit of employment equity in the province. I 

hear from your comments that delivery of services will always 

take precedence over hiring practices, and it doesn’t seem that 

that would be consistent with your own employment equity 

undertakings as I see in this report before me. 

 

I’d like to know, in terms of where the Public Service 

Commission is at today, are you anywhere approaching your 

objectives in terms of how many opportunities open up for 

aboriginals, for women, for disabled individuals in the province 

within the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just to be clear, so the 

member’s not in any way confused, we have not set as one of 

our strategic goals or objectives of the Public Service 

Commission to achieve geographical equity. That is not seen as 

a goal of equity within the Public Service Commission. As I 

said, we try and provide the services where they’re best 

provided and where they’re needed. But we have not set out a 

goal of geographic equity. 

 

Our goals in terms of equity will include, as the member has 

just indicated, persons of aboriginal ancestry, persons with 

disabilities, members of other visible minority groups, women 

— particularly women in management, women in 

non-traditional positions, and women totally in government. 

And so I can report to the member today that we are making 

progress towards our goals in each of those categories. I think 

any member of the Public Service Commission, including the 

minister responsible, would say we’re always hoping that we 

can achieve these goals as soon as possible. We haven’t 

achieved all of our goals but we have been making progress. 

  



1270  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

I will give the member some examples and then we can easily 

provide this information to him. For instance, if we look at 

those persons of aboriginal ancestry, in March 1992, they 

represented 3.1 per cent of the public service of Saskatchewan 

in March ’92. By March ’96, they now represent 6.5 per cent of 

the public service, which is significant improvement. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Chair, we’ve not moved as quickly in terms of persons with 

disabilities. In March ’92, 2.4 per cent of the public service 

represented persons with disabilities. In March ’96 that had 

grown to 3.3 per cent — progress, but not as far as we might 

like. 

 

I can’t go back to March of ’92 with members of visible 

minority groups. That tracking didn’t really begin until March 

’94. But in March ’94, 1.9 per cent of the public service were 

members of visible minority groups; that, by March ’96, had 

grown to 2.3. 

 

If we look at the percentage of women in management in 

government as an equity issue, in ’92, March, that represented 

26.8 per cent of the total management in government; by March 

’96 that had risen to 32.7. 

 

And so we have seen over these years improvement in those 

areas of equity that we are concerned about. But I say again 

we’re attempting to achieve to move it even closer to our goals. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, I would like to know when was the employment 

equity unit within the Public Service Commission developed? 

Do we take that back to 1992 or is that a development of 1995? 

Would you be able to just clarify that for me this afternoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the equity program, the 

employment equity program actually began in 1988, and there 

are two individuals in the unit which the member refers to 

within the Public Service Commission. But — of course it is the 

role of the Public Service Commission to coordinate — but we 

call on our various departments of government as they’re 

approaching their own staffing needs to be very conscious of 

building towards our equity goals. 

 

The Public Service Commission tries through this very small 

unit, tries to provide the coordination of that effort. But we do 

see the responsibility falling to our various departments of 

government. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, one other thing too before we 

go on. And you’re mentioning how perhaps I wasn’t 

understanding the employment equity aspect of the Public 

Service Commission, and that it doesn’t in fact have any 

bearing with respect to geography or regional representation. 

 

And I guess I am fully aware of that, given the number of losses 

of jobs in the public service that we have experienced in the 

south and the south-west, some of those being in your own 

community, within the various departments that you would be 

aware of. We’ve had numerous closures of depots of highways,  

we’ve had other closures of offices related to SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, all of these sorts of things that have occurred. A 

number of jobs lost in Swift Current as of last year. So I am 

quite aware that there isn’t any aspect of geographic or regional 

employment equity in the province, even though a number of 

those jobs were providing some very valuable services to 

people of those communities from which they were removed. 

 

So if we could get back to employment equity as you’re 

outlining here this afternoon, you’ve mentioned that in fact you 

aren’t reaching your desired objectives. Within your plan, 

would you be able to quantify, in terms of numbers of jobs of 

the groups that we’ve been speaking of this afternoon for the 

period from 1995 through to the turn of the century, how many 

people of these visible minorities, with disabilities, of 

aboriginal descent, are you hoping to employ in the Public 

Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I can give to the hon. member 

the percentage goals that we’ve set for the various categories. 

And these goals will be set on that portion of the population, the 

demographics of Saskatchewan, which that particular group 

would represent. That more or less reflects the goals we’ve set. 

 

And so our desired representation for persons of aboriginal 

ancestry would ultimately be 12.2 per cent in the public service; 

for persons with disabilities, 9.7 per cent; for members of 

visible minority groups, 5.1 per cent; women in management, 

45 per cent; women in non-traditional occupations, 45 per cent. 

 

So those are the goals, and if the member applies those 

percentages to the total number of public servants in our 

province which is around 10,000 — has been around 10,000, a 

little lower now — you would see the numbers that we would 

hope to achieve in actual positions. 

 

And I want to just reflect back a moment on the member’s 

earlier comments about the geographical representation. He will 

be aware, and certainly the people of Saskatchewan are aware 

that over the last number of years we’ve had to reduce the 

actual size of government. We believe that we have done that in 

as compassionate a fashion as is possible in dealing with those 

employees whose jobs have been removed from the public 

service. 

 

But I want to assure the member that in terms of any 

proportional withdrawal of public sector employment, for 

certain in absolute numbers, the capital city has seen the largest 

decrease of public service positions. And so it’s not been an 

easy exercise, but we believe we’ve reached now a level of the 

public service that is appropriate both to our fiscal capacities 

and our program capacities. In fact I think in this most current 

budget year, we’re showing a small increase in the number of 

public service. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, the objectives that you’re 

outlining for employment equity are certainly ones that we 

would be in agreement with. In fact I would suggest perhaps it 

would be more appropriate to not only just factor for the 

demographics of the populations of these groups within the 

province, because certainly some of these groups that we’re  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

talking of are at a disadvantage in terms of obtaining 

employment opportunities. 

 

So if you’re strictly just applying in terms of numbers — of 

total population within the province therefore this is what we 

want to accomplish in terms of a percentage of our public 

service that we want to have of the various groups that we’re 

discussing — it would seem to me that it’s not doing the best 

service to those individuals in that some of them do, we all 

recognize, have some disadvantages in terms of gaining 

employment opportunities in the province. And it would seem 

to me that there should be something a little bit more than just a 

cold formula applied in this regard. And I would just be 

interested in hearing your comments in that regard, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I rather appreciate the 

member’s comments. I want to say that point number one, in 

terms of our goals that we’ve set, these have been established in 

partnership with the Human Rights Commission. It’s not 

something we’ve just done, but they are set with us, before us, 

by the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. That’s 

important to note. Point number two, we do see these as 

benchmarks. You need some benchmarks to which to move 

towards and to try and achieve. 

 

I would suggest that in terms of the equity issues, there may in 

fact be some areas of service delivery the government provides 

where you may in fact want to see . . . best example perhaps is 

more aboriginal representation, particularly in the North, in our 

departments and services in the North, where the demographics 

of the North of course would have a much higher percentage of 

aboriginal population. 

 

But these are set as benchmarks. They’re set in consultation and 

by the Human Rights Commission. And within government 

itself we are endeavouring to as best we can support the 

diversity, to support equity, to open opportunities within 

government itself for some of the minority groups to find 

advancement within government. 

 

The minister for SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis 

Affairs Secretariat) and I just yesterday had a very productive 

meeting with a group of individuals that use the acronym 

AGEN, aboriginal government employees’ network. They are a 

sort of a self-formed group of the aboriginal public servants 

within the Saskatchewan public service. They now have a 

membership of about 600. 

 

They’ve been holding some annual conferences to look at the 

issues that face aboriginal people at work within the public 

service. And we’ve got, I think, a very good working 

relationship through the Public Service Commission, through 

SIMAS, and through the Crowns, with that organization. So 

there are some good things happening. Again I repeat, we’re not 

to our desired benchmarks but we’re working in that direction. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hear in your reply 

consultations with the Human Rights Commission and with the 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat. I didn’t hear any comment  

about the Women’s Secretariat in amongst that, and I’m 

wondering how often you’re consulting with them with respect 

to employment equity opportunities. 

 

And also, I know you were somewhat heartened last year with 

the establishment of the provincial interagency network of the 

disabled. And you had indicated when this group was 

established that you would be interested in meeting with groups 

of these individuals and talking about access to training and 

employment opportunities. And I’m wondering if you’ve done 

so and if there have been any initiatives springing forward from 

that. And if so, how much monies that we see before us today in 

these estimates might be allotted for such initiatives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. On the member’s latter question, 

yes. In fact I have met with a representative of PIND (provincial 

interagency network of the disabled), both formally and 

informally. Members of the commission have been meeting 

with PIND and we are looking at the very issues that you raised. 

And in terms of the Women’s Secretariat of course — I used 

the aboriginal government employees’ network as just one 

example and SIMAS as one example — we’re very often in 

touch with the Women’s Secretariat. 

 

I now happen to occupy the bench beside the minister 

responsible for both, and she is consistently raising, consistently 

raising the issues of women in government, women in the 

public service, particularly women in the management of the 

public service, as well as the role of the aboriginal community 

within the public service. 

 

And I would just like to report to the House that the 

establishment of the provincial interagency network of the 

disabled I think has been a very progressive step in bringing 

together the similar but sometimes varied interests of all the 

disabled community as an umbrella organization that we can 

meet with and work with. And I’m looking forward to some 

very positive results as a result of that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  One further question concerning employment 

equity, and it surrounds the week of awareness on the whole 

issue, the Employment Equity Week. When will that be taking 

place this year and how many staff of the Public Service 

Commission of the employment equity unit may be involved in 

any initiatives undertaken that week? And are you expanding 

your activities in that regard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we don’t have the exact dates 

here, but the minister for SIMAS and the Women’s Secretariat 

indicates to me that she in fact will be speaking at some of the 

events this year in Employment Equity Week. And it’s not 

something that’s just narrowly focused in the Public Service 

Commission. I mean we expect many areas of government to be 

involved in that week, celebrating the diversity that is within 

our public service, which is to celebrate the diversity of people 

within our province. 

 

We can get the actual dates for the member if he would like 

them. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  I’d certainly appreciate that. And I’ll just  

  



1272  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

take my place now and let some other colleagues ask some 

questions here this afternoon, but I’d like to thank the minister 

and his officials here. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. Mr. Minister, before I get started on some of my 

questions, I’d just like to inquire as to our global questions that 

we had presented to you. Do you have those prepared? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m aware that the global 

questions were provided to the Department of Social Services, 

but the Public Service Commission say they have not received 

the request of . . . sort of the global package of questions this 

year from the third party. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. They 

had been passed on to the Deputy Premier to be distributed to 

all departments, so we’ll have to inquire with him why he 

hasn’t done his duties. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to carry on where my colleague from 

Thunder Creek was discussing, and that is pay equity. I wonder 

if you could please give me your definition of pay equity. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just on the question of the 

global estimates, we’re more than happy to provide all the 

information; there’s been a little glitch somewhere. So we’ll be 

more than happy to provide the information. 

 

I think my most succinct definition — and it’s, in my view, is 

an accurate definition — that pay equity be defined as equal pay 

for work of equal value. Equal pay for work of equal value. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, because I 

think there’s some confusion in the general public as to exactly 

what that means, and they confuse it with equal work for equal 

pay. And they use those terms interchangeably at times, Mr. 

Minister. And they actually are very, very different in 

application. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, where does Saskatchewan presently rate in 

the area of women’s salaries compared to men’s salaries in the 

same jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, are we here talking about the 

public service of Saskatchewan or the Saskatchewan economy 

generally? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, within the public service. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, because we have only begun 

the efforts to achieve equal pay for work of equal value within 

the Public Service, we have not tracked that precisely. 

 

Generally in the economy in the province of Saskatchewan, it 

would likely represent 73 to 75 cents on the dollar. Now that 

would be in the broad, but we do not have the precise number 

for Public Service. 

 

However, we know there are inequities, we know there are 

inequities and have begun within government a framework and 

now implementation of that framework. I’d be very, very 

pleased to provide for the member a document that’s very 

current, printed in March of this year, which describes our 

policy framework around equal pay for working for equal value 

and the pay equity issues. We would be very pleased to provide 

for the member this document which fully describes where the 

government’s going, what we’re doing, our framework, and our 

plans for implementation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. My question 

wasn’t about work of equal value. It was about equal work. Are 

there any areas within the Government of Saskatchewan that 

women employees are discriminated against in the same jobs as 

their male counterparts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The answer, Mr. Chair, is no, there are 

not. We have a job evaluation process. The answer is a clear 

and consistent no. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How do you 

propose to determine what jobs are worth? What their value 

are? Who will make this determination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, these are . . . I appreciate the 

questions the member is raising because we are just in that 

process now. We are developing, within the Public Service 

Commission, a universal job evaluation process so that we can 

evaluate each and every position within the public service. And 

they will be evaluated on the four categories: responsibility — 

can’t read my own writing — skill, effort, and working 

conditions. 

 

Skill, effort, responsibility, and working conditions — those 

will become the four measurements and that will be applied to 

universal job evaluation for the Public Service. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 

then, what studies have you done to determine that there are 

actually inequities in the system; that there are jobs of equal 

value out there that are not receiving the same pay scales? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We have not conducted particular studies 

in the public service. What indicates this is when we’re working 

on this universal evaluation, it will point out the areas of 

difficulty and areas of difference. And through that then, we 

level them out. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So you’re carrying out this study that 

you don’t even know if there’s a problem there, is that correct? 

You say you don’t have a study that determines that there are 

inequities in an equal value circumstance, and yet you’re going 

to go ahead and evaluate every position to determine what its 

value is when you don’t even know if there’s a problem there, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

What are you basing the need to have this study done on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think it’s fairly plain there’s 

a significant wage gap. I think that the member knows that.  

  



April 30, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

And that would indicate that we need to be at this task. It’s been 

pointed out to us by others. We know it ourselves. There’s a 

wage gap and therefore we need to be looking at all of the 

positions in the public service to ensure that we have this 

universal evaluation based on the four points that I indicated. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I will admit that there is a wage 

difference, Mr. Speaker, on average between what females earn 

and what males earn. But that doesn’t say that there is an 

inequity in equal value though, which is what your study is 

supposedly trying to determine. 

 

Now where is the study, Mr. Minister, that says that there is 

inequity in the values of the work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  If the member was listening to some of 

the earlier conversations we were having on the issue of equity, 

I pointed out that one of the areas we’re trying to achieve more 

equity is, for instance, in the area of women in management. 

We have not reached the goals of having women in 

management. That’s an indication. 

 

I said before that there’s an indication in the pay difference, in 

the equal pay for . . . that’s one factor. 

 

When we look at the education and the training that’s provided 

to public service and the educational levels, we know there’s 

some variances there. And when we look at sort of 

non-traditional responsibilities in the public service, we see 

differences there. 

 

As we create the universal evaluation based on the four 

categories, we will discover precisely where the needs are and 

that process itself will identify, and at the same time, begin to 

change the circumstance. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, your example of 

women in management has nothing to do with equal value for 

work. It simply has to do with the number of people employed 

in that particular sector and what their gender is. It’s got 

nothing to do with the pay scales in those areas, Mr. Minister. 

Unless you’re planning on hiring all new people into the 

management level and paying them deputy minister wages even 

though they’re at the bottom because they’re female, Mr. 

Minister, they’re in management and you can pay them a 

deputy minister’s wage and say now it’s all equal. 

 

But your example has nothing to do with equal value, Mr. 

Minister; it has to do with the number of people in the position 

— nothing to do with value. 

 

Now what do you have that has to do with value, Mr. Minister? 

What studies do you have that determines that there is an 

inequity in the value of the work and the pay scales related to 

those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, here are the criteria. 

I’ll read them one more time: skill, effort, responsibility, and 

working conditions. That’s what defines the career, the job 

within the public service. On the basis of those four, we believe 

that the appropriate remuneration should be paid. That’s what  

we’re trying to achieve. 

 

We also know that within government we have less 

representation of women in management than we should. We 

know that we have less representation of women in 

non-traditional positions than we should. 

 

But it is, I repeat again, the process of finding this universal 

evaluation that will at the same time define precisely where the 

problems are and begin to level the problem. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I have to disagree 

with you, because what you’re talking about is a quota system 

and not about equal pay for work of equal value . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh I understand perfectly clear the minister 

responsible for Women’s Secretariat, and I disagree with it. 

And I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh the minister for 

Women’s Secretariat says you just don’t want women to have 

any jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Or get paid. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Or get paid. I totally disagree, Madam 

Minister, with your comments. Madam Minister, I am more 

than pleased to have an equal number of women in this 

Assembly or any other job. I would be more than pleased to 

have equal numbers of women in cabinet. I wonder why that’s 

not the case? There are women sitting in your caucus, Madam 

Minister, who are not in cabinet and you do not have an equity 

position in cabinet. Why aren’t you practising your own 

policies? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Think about what you’re saying. Take a 

look around. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I won’t comment on what my 

colleagues in the Liberal caucus had to say. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you’re talking apples and oranges. In one 

word you say equal pay for work of equal value and the next 

breath you use quotas within a structure, and those are two 

totally different items, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I have to assume, because you won’t answer the question, 

that you do not have any studies that show that there is inequity 

in the system within the public service that is not paying people 

for work of equal value. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Chair . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . One of my colleagues observes that it would be 

difficult for the third party caucus to have equity in their front 

bench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure . . . The member has suggested he’s 

not getting an answer to the question. I’m not sure that he’s, 

one, either not hearing the answer or listening to the answer; or 

two, doesn’t like the answer or comes to this debate with some 

other point of view. 

 

The point of view that we come to this debate about is that 

those who provide the service within the public sector should  

  



1274  Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 1997 

receive equal pay for work of equal value — that’s the 

principle. Now how do we achieve this principle? 

 

What we know in our society generally is that women have 

been provided less in remuneration. We know that. How are we 

dealing with this in government? Well the first thing we’re 

doing is through a classification plan — a job evaluation plan 

— where we evaluate on a universal basis every position within 

the public service based on the four criteria which I’ve said 

before — skill, effort, responsibility, and working conditions. 

 

Then, with that assessment done, we set the value — the 

remuneration — for that particular position within the public 

sector. In that process we identify where the problems are and at 

the very same time we begin to move to a much more equitable 

system. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1245 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1245 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1245 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1245 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1245 

  Johnson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1245 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1246 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Maintenance Payments Improve 

  Pringle ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

 Street Proofing Our Kids 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

 Vancouver Port Corporation Conference 

  Jess ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1247 

 Accomplishments of Battlefords Athletes 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1247 

 Preservation of Swainson’s Hawk 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1247 

 Prairie West Terminal in Dodsland-Plenty Area 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

 Moose Jaw Dance Festival May 2 to 10 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Cellular Phone Service Fraud 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

 Income Tax Surcharges 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1249 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1250 

 Shand Accident Lawsuit 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1250 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1250 

 Income Tax Surcharges 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1250 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1250 

 Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1251 

 Disaster Assistance for Manitoba 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1251 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1252 

 Health Care Reform 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1252 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1252 

 Out-of-province Medical Expenses 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1253 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1253 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1253 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 



 

 Bill No. 50  The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1253 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1254 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1255 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1257 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1258 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1259 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1260 

 Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1260 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1261 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1262 

 Bill No. 22 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les juges de paix.......... 1262 

 Bill No. 30 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 1997 .................................................................................. 1263 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 20  The Small Claims Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1263 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1266 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 20 — The Small Claims Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1268 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Public Service Commission — Vote 33 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1268 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1268 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1272 

 


