



















































Hansard: April 07, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 635 

 April 7, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Beside me is 

Glenda Yeates, who is the senior associate deputy minister of 

Health. And beside her is Cathy Langlois, who is the director of 

finance and management services in the Department of Health. 

And immediately behind Ms. Yeates is Steve Petz, who is the 

associate deputy minister of Health. And also with us this 

evening, in the back, are Maureen Yeske, who is the executive 

director of policy and planning; Jim Simmons, the executive 

director of community care; Carol Klassen, the executive 

director of acute and emergency; and Dale Bloom, who is an 

assistant to the deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

officials, welcome here this evening. It’s been about a year I 

guess, since we last talked in this forum, and we still see health 

care in this province under some duress. We still see people on 

massive waiting-lists. We still see people suffering; letters 

continue to come in daily. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this just a small example of what has come in 

today to our office, and people are wondering where we’re at in 

health. So it seems to me that the government has learned little 

over the course of the last year and I’m wondering where to 

start tonight. 

 

I think, however, I would just like to clarify a few things in the 

budget, Mr. Minister, if I could. And I’ll ask you a couple of 

questions in that regard. 

 

The first one is, could you please tell us the actual increase in 

spending in Health this year over last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for the question. And I’ll certainly be interested in 

answering the question in a bit more detail. I can tell the 

member that specifically — and I’ll elaborate on this in a few 

moments — the increase to the health care budget in 

Saskatchewan this year is $70.8 million. That’s $70.8 million or 

4.5 per cent over last year. 

 

I’m going to say a few words about that figure in a few minutes. 

I don’t want to belabour this but the member of course prefaces 

his question by saying that the system is under duress and there 

are long waiting-lists and so on. I want to say to the member 

and the House, Mr. Chairman, that any health system will be 

under duress at any given time. And if you went back 20 years 

or 30 years in the legislative records and read Hansard 

you’d have people — usually Liberals — saying that there’s a 

problem with our health care system. 

 

Of course in any system there will be problems. But I want to 

say to the member and to the House, and to anyone who 

happens to be watching tonight, that we should be very careful 

to listen to whether the member will answer this question. And 

the question I would pose to the member is this: since the 

member and other members of the Liberal Party, not to mention 

the Conservative Party, like to get up and run down our 

medicare system here in Saskatchewan, I’d like to challenge 

both of those parties, and that member in particular, to name a 

place in the world where they have a better health care system 

than the province of Saskatchewan. And my prediction, Mr. 

Chair, is that that’s not going to happen because there is none 

and the member isn’t going to take me up on that challenge. 

The member’s going to get up and say this and that about our 

medicare system, which of course the Liberal Party has been 

opposed to since its inception unfortunately. 

 

I want to say, in terms of the waiting-lists, the waiting-lists in 

Saskatchewan are no longer than in any other province. They’re 

well within the national average. We’re doing more surgeries 

than we’ve done in the past and providing more services. That’s 

something that the Liberals won’t tell people, but that’s the 

truth and that’s what I’m duty-bound to share with the public, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

To get back to the specific question, as I said to the member 

earlier, the increase to our Health budget is $70.8 million, 

which is a far, far cry, Mr. Chairman, from what we see out of 

Ottawa and the Liberal Party. The Liberal Party likes to talk 

about how much we’re spending on health care. We constantly 

have to remind ourselves that the federal Liberals have cut, last 

year, $47 million out of our health care budget. I don’t know if 

I’ve ever mentioned that to the opposition in the past but it is 

the truth, Mr. Chair. The Liberals last year cut $47 million out 

of health care; this year $53 million. 

 

And our response is not to complain about what the Liberals are 

doing, Mr. Chair. Our response is to put the money back in — 

that’s what New Democrats customarily do. We build the 

medicare system; we sustain the medicare system over Liberal 

opposition, over Conservative opposition. That’s what we’re 

going to do. 

 

But I want to say to the member in answer to his question that 

the $70.8 million increase from the New Democrats, on behalf 

of the taxpayers and the people of the province into our health 

care budget this year, is actually a net increase, Mr. Chair, of 

$56 million. Because $14 million of the $70.8 million increase 

to health care from the provincial government this year, $14 

million dollars of that, is to replace the 2 mill levy which, as the 

member knows, we’ve taken off the municipalities. They no 

longer have to put $14 million into the health care system from 

the municipal taxpayers. 

 

So we’re replacing that and adding an additional $56 million. 

And I know that all members opposite support us in our efforts 

to put more money into our health care system and to sustain it   



636  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

for the next generation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, you covered a fair bit of 

ground there, and still health care in this province isn’t any 

better just because you say it is. Your Premier continually talks 

about the Saskatchewan way -- we’ll do things in Saskatchewan 

by Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I don’t care whether we have less beds or more beds in this 

province compared to Alberta or compared to North Dakota or 

compared to anywhere. This is Saskatchewan; we have unique 

needs in Saskatchewan and we have unique ways of doing 

things here. So let’s not compare ourselves to everybody else 

and say hey, we’re doing such a wonderful job because we’re 

better than province A or province B. 

 

Now the figures on the budget, Mr. Minister, I just wanted to 

ask you about those, and you did touch a bit on it in the 14 

million that you added to offset the removal of the hospital 

revenue tax. However, I don’t know where you find that you 

increase the budget this year $56 million in that, the emergency 

money that you pumped into the system last July was actually 

part of last year’s budget. So according to my figures the 

budget’s increased about 18 million and if you take out the 14 

million you’re down to 4. Maybe you’d care to comment on 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I regret to tell the House, Mr. Chair, that 

the member does not have those figures correct. There was 

$70.8 million new money put in by the provincial government 

in the face of quite massive federal cuts this year. Of the 70.8, 

$14 million represents money that replaces what the 

municipalities used to put in. That amounts to $56 million new 

money. 

 

Now the member subtracts the figure $40 million from 56 and 

comes up with 4, which everyone watching will know is simply 

incorrect arithmetic on the member’s part. The reality is — I’ll 

repeat for the member — the provincial government in the face 

of a $53 million cut-back from the federal government, from the 

Liberals in Ottawa, has put $70.8 million new money into the 

Saskatchewan health care system this year. Of that $70 million, 

$14 million replaces the municipal 2 mill levy. That amounts to 

$56 million, new provincial dollars, net new dollars into the 

system. 

 

From the $56 million the member subtracts $40 million and 

says that leaves $2 million. Actually it’s $56 million new 

money. The member refers to a $40 million figure that was put 

in last year. I want to tell the member, as I think he understands, 

$3 million of the $40 million was put into a new air ambulance 

plane for the province; $4 million was put in to pay off debt. 

The amount of money that went into the health districts as new 

money last year was $34 million. The amount of new money 

that goes to the health districts this year will end up being about 

$5.6 million at the end of the day . . . I’m sorry, $56 million at 

the end of the day. The difference between $34 million and $56 

million is $22 million new money that will go to the districts. 

 

In specific terms I want to say to the member, in anticipation of 

other questions because I know the member is interested to 

know where all of the new money is going, $38.8 million new 

money is going to hospitals and nursing homes, $3 million new 

money to improve emergency services like ambulance in the 

province, $8.5 million new money to strengthen rural and 

northern health services, and $6.3 million new money to 

enhance home care and community services. 

 

I noticed, Mr. Chair, incidentally, before I sit down, that I had 

in my first question asked the member who likes to — along 

with his Liberal colleagues and Conservative colleagues . . . 

indicate to the House where there was a place in the world that 

had a better health care system than the province of 

Saskatchewan. We certainly are not without our problems, but I 

maintain that we have among the best systems in the world. 

And I challenge the member to get up and name the place that 

has a better health care system than the province of 

Saskatchewan. The member did not do so after my first 

challenge. We will see if the member does so presently. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Almost makes me think that we’re at the 

Agridome tonight, and the fights are going to be coming on. But 

that’s not the purpose that we’re here. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please tell us then what the total Health 

budget for 1997-98 estimated is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the total Health budget this year will 

be $1.63 billion, which is the largest single expenditure of our 

government and represents well over 30 per cent and I think 

close to about 35 per cent of provincial operating spending. 

Health care is the single most important, number one priority of 

the New Democratic government, as it always has been for our 

party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  And, Mr. Minister, could you tell us then 

what the actual health budget for ’96-97 was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The estimated budget for last year was 

$1.56 billion. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I didn’t ask you 

what the estimate was. I asked you what the actual Health 

budget was for that year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The member asked, Mr. Chair, for the 

actual budget. The budgeted figure was, last year, as I said, 

$1.56 billion. This year the budget is $1.63 billion. Spending on 

last year actual was $1.61 billion. As the member knows, an 

additional $40 million was injected into the system last August. 

The member has already referred to that. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Yes, I realize that you injected that money, 

and that was a point I was getting at. And that money was 

injected because . . . from the pressure from the people of 

Saskatchewan. You were pressured into putting that money . . . 

and recognizing that your health district legislation isn’t 

working, and certainly your wellness model isn’t working. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

So I would ask you then, Mr. Minister, if the budget for this 

year is 1.63 billion and last year you actually spent 1.61 in your 

own figures, what’s the difference of those two numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As the member indicates, Mr. Chair, last 

year we put extra money into the health care system. The 

federal Liberals cut back our health budget by $47 million. We 

actually put $87 million new money in, and this year we are 

doing even more. And I’ve given the member the numbers 

already. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, not quite — you didn’t answer 

the question I asked. I ask you what the difference was in 

dollars from this year’s budget to what you actually spent last 

year in health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’ve given those figures to the member 

already, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, could you please 

repeat those -- I seem to have not heard you or misunderstood 

you -- the difference between this year’s budgeted plus last 

year’s expenditures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, this year’s budget, as I’ve said, Mr. 

Chair, is $1.63 billion. Last year the budget was $1.56 billion, 

and in addition $40 million was spent. In addition, there were 

other supplementary estimates and a total of $1.61 billion were 

spent. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So, Mr. Minister, could you tell us the 

difference then of this year’s budgeted and what you spent last 

year then, please . . . dollars . . . (inaudible) . . . difference. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Last year, Mr. Chair, we put in $40 million 

additional money to the $1.56 billion that was budgeted for 

health care. This year we are putting $70.8 million in addition 

to the 1.56. I think what the member is getting at is that last 

year we put in $40 million extra as well. 

 

The member’s point is well taken that we did put extra money 

in last year. We’re putting extra money in this year. We’re 

back-filling all of the Liberal cuts to health care; plus we’re 

attempting to put additional money in as well because of the 

fact that the economy of the province is doing quite well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Mr. Minister, what you’re back-filling 

is a mistake that your government made in the wellness model, 

is what you’re back-filling. And if you’re misleading the people 

of this province and saying you’ve put in an extra $70.8 million 

into health care this year, you’re misleading the folks. It’s not 

that. It’s the difference between 1.63 and 1.61 of what you 

spent last year. Be upfront and tell the people of the province 

you only put 18 million in, and if you take away the 14 that you 

took to replace the municipalities, you’ve got 4 million extra. 

That’s all you’ve increased it, $4 million, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I don’t agree with the member’s 

numbers. As I said earlier, in last year the Liberals took out $47 

million out of the health care budget. We had to put in 47 

million last year plus we put in an additional 40 for a total of 87 

million new provincial money. This year, as of April 1, the 

Liberals took out another $53 million from health care in 

Saskatchewan contrary to the advice of their own National 

Forum on Health chaired by the Prime Minister. 

 

So last year we put in $87 million new money when the Liberal 

cuts are considered. This year the Liberals are taking out $53 

million from our province and of course they’re cutting every 

province in health care. And in addition to the $53 million 

we’re putting in, we also are putting in $70.8 million new 

money. 

 

I think that most people listening to this would realize — and 

most people across the province, Mr. Chair, and I’ve been 

around the province and talked to a lot of people — realize that 

the provincial government is pouring a lot of new money into 

health care contrary to what the federal Liberals are doing. And 

I think most people agree that we’re doing a good job of 

funding health care, contrary to the Liberals. 

 

The member can continue on his line of questioning but if the 

member is going to expect me to say that somehow the New 

Democrats are doing a bad job funding health care, and that 

somehow the Liberals are funding health care, I have to advise 

the member that I’m going to have to take issue with that 

because the facts simply do not bear that out. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, Minister, if you’d simply answer the 

question, you wouldn’t have a problem. And the questions that 

I’m raising here tonight are . . . the people out there that are 

watching tonight are asking these same questions. They’re the 

ones that are calling me. They’re the ones that are writing me. 

They’re the ones that are coming to see us. They’re not fooled. 

You’re not fooling them. They recognize that you’ve put in $4 

million extra into the budget this year into health care, and 

maybe you could elaborate on that. 

 

What do you think you’re going to do with the $4 million of 

new money that you put into the Health budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I indicated to the member, Mr. Chair, in 

light of the Liberal cut-back to health care, we put in $87 

million new money last year. In light of the federal Liberal 

cut-backs to health care this year, with the back-fill of $53 

million that the Liberals are taking out plus the additional $70 

million we’re putting in in this budget, we’re putting more than 

a hundred million dollars new provincial money into health care 

this year. 

 

The member does not have to take my word for it, Mr. Chair. I 

would advise him to have a look at what the Liberal’s own 

committee said. The Liberals set up a committee a few years 

ago called the National Forum on Health, which was chaired by 

the Prime Minister. And what did the National Forum on Health 

say? The National Forum on Health said that the federal 

government, the Liberals, should stop taking money out of 

health care and freeze the level of funding from the federal 

government to the provinces for health care at 1996-97 levels. 

 

The federal government, Mr. Chair, has refused to take that 

advice. That advice would mean that the Liberals would have to   



638  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

put $53 million back into our province this year, and they’d 

have to put money back into the health care system in every 

province in the country. 

 

The Prime Minister and the Liberal government are ignoring the 

advice of their own committee. But I have to say to the 

member, who wants to somehow say that the Liberals want to 

properly fund health care system, that its own committee, the 

National Forum on Health chaired by the Prime Minister, has 

said in effect that the Liberals owe Saskatchewan $53 million 

this year, and they owe money to every province in the country 

for health care. Notwithstanding what the Liberals have done, 

notwithstanding the actions of the federal government, we are 

going to put that money back into the health care system. We 

did that last year, $87 million more provincial money; we’ll do 

it this year, over $100 million new money. 

 

Now the member is going to stand up and say it’s not enough. 

It’s not enough; we want more. The member is going to have to 

explain to the taxpayers what taxes he wants to increase for 

even more money to be put in to undo the damage the federal 

Liberals are doing. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, the minister keeps wanting to 

raise the issue of the health forum, the federal health forum. The 

issue that I would like to raise along with that — and it’s a topic 

for discussion for another evening; it’s not where we’re going 

to go tonight with it — is two or three years ago the Premier of 

the day and the minister’s predecessor decided that we needed a 

health council in this province. 

 

They went to great length and great pain to set up a health 

council to advise the government as to what the people in this 

province wanted. Oddly enough, that council was terminated 

last year by this government. I don’t have all the 

recommendations in front of me, but one of these nights when 

we’re here I will have them, and we’ll go through them -- a lot 

of recommendations to the Minister of Health and to this 

government on what the people of this province wanted. 

 

The minister and the government were not prepared to go that 

route, and so they disbanded the health council. So health 

forum, federal health council, provincial . . . I wouldn’t pat 

myself on the back too much, saying that the provincial 

government here has really done anything much better than the 

federal government. 

 

I just want to go back to the statement of expense in the budget 

again, Mr. Minister. Last year you did estimate $1.56 billion for 

that budget. As I said last summer, with a lot of pressure from 

the folks around the province and realizing that you’ve made a 

mistake in health reform in this province . . . you’ve gone the 

wrong way. You’re causing massive suffering, waiting-lists, 

and what have you all across the province. The pressure had to 

be immense for your cabinet to inject that type of money into it. 

 

However, the money was injected into last year and that brings 

your budget up to $1.6 billion. There’s only a very little 

difference between what you’re doing this year with Health 

dollars and what you put in last year. Why don’t you admit to 

the people of the province you’re not putting any new money in 

this year? You did it last year. And the budget is about the same 

this year as it was last year. 

 

So I ask you once again — I’ll give you credit for $4 million 

increase — what are you planning on doing with the $4 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The members figures are incorrect. I regret 

to advise, Mr. Chair, that they simply are not correct. I’ve 

already explained to the member that the federal Liberals have 

taken $100 million out of our health care budget in the last two 

years, which we’ve back-filled. In addition to that, last year we 

put in 40 million new dollars into the health care system; this 

year $70.8 million new money. 

 

I’ve explained to the member that this year we’re putting new 

money into hospitals and nursing homes to the tune of $38.8 

million. We‘re putting new money into emergency services, 

like ambulance service, to the tune of $3 million. We’re putting 

new money into rural and northern health services to the tune of 

$8.5 million, and new money into home care and community 

services to the tune of $6.3 million. 

 

I think it’s very sad actually, Mr. Chair, that in view of the fact 

that the Liberals’ own committee recommended that the federal 

government should give us in the province, in every province, 

more money — Saskatchewan’s share is $53 million — that the 

member continually gets up and denies that the Liberals are 

cutting money to health care and denies the simple fact that 

most people in the province understand that the provincial 

government has had to back-fill for the federal Liberal cuts, as 

every provincial government has had to do, Mr. Chair. 

 

The member raises the Provincial Health Council, which came 

up with about 80 recommendations. It was never the intent that 

that council would be a permanent council, nor was the national 

council on health to be a permanent council. 

 

But I want to say to the member that one of the members of the 

member’s own party, David Collenette, the federal MP — used 

to be in the cabinet as minister of Defence; had to step down — 

but at his own nomination in Toronto a few months ago, got up 

and said that really the federal Liberals have gone way, way too 

far in cutting back funding to health care. We certainly agree 

with that. And the Prime Minister’s own committee, the 

National Forum on Health, said to the Liberal government and 

the Liberal Party, stop your cuts to health care. 

 

We know that the Liberals have always been opposed to 

medicare. The member questioning me tonight came out in 

favour last year of privatizing medicare; the leader of the 

member’s party has come out in favour of privatizing medicare 

— that’s not the way our government operates, Mr. Chair. 

We’re going to keep putting money into medicare; we’re going 

to keep the system public. 

 

What the member really wants to do — what the Liberal Party 

wants to do -- is undermine faith in the public system, to bring 

in the two-tier, private system that that member has talked about 

and that the Leader of the Liberal Party, Dr. Melenchuk, 

continually talks about. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

I want to say to the member as well . . . You know, I’ve asked 

the member twice now this evening, to get up and tell us where 

in the world they have a better health care system than in the 

province of Saskatchewan; he won’t do that. But I want to ask 

him also, how come, the way he’s talking tonight, he said on 

. . . The Leader of the Liberal Party said on CBC to Costa 

Maragos shortly after he was elected Leader of the Liberal 

Party, that he wanted to cut out hundreds of millions of dollars 

from the health care budget. That’s what he said. I’ve got the 

transcript, Mr. Chair — not with me — but I’ve got the 

transcript in my office. 

 

And just last week, do you know what the Leader of the Liberal 

Party said about funding for health care and other things? He 

said that he didn’t like our provincial budget. He wanted a 

conservative budget. Those are his words quoted in the 

Star-Phoenix last week. He wants less money to be spent on 

health care because he wants a private system. That member 

spoke in favour of the private system last year, and I’ve got the 

quotes, and I’ve referred to them in the House. Now why is it 

that the Leader of the Liberal Party goes around saying we 

should have a private medicare system, scrap the system we’ve 

got, make people pay, and that member says we should make 

people pay? The leader says we should cut down on the amount 

of money in the health care system and yet the member comes 

in tonight and says we should spend more. It doesn’t add up, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

We’re going to do what this province has done for a long time. 

And that’s have a public medicare system and properly funded, 

whether or not we have support from the Liberal Party. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like to 

welcome your officials tonight, Mr. Minister. In one of your 

attempts at answering the member from Arm River’s question a 

few minutes ago, did I hear you say that you back-filled the 

$17.6 million . . . the 2 mill health levy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It’s actually $12 million plus there was a 

public health levy. There’s a total of $14 million I believe, that 

used to be paid from municipalities to health districts. 

Municipalities will no longer give that money to health districts 

but the Department of Health will provide the health districts 

with that sum of money. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, I can’t believe what you’re 

saying — the 2 mill health levy was the $14 million, my 

numbers are out, that was removed, and you back-filled. What 

you’re forgetting to say is, on the other hand, the Minister of 

Municipal Government took the $14 million out of the 

municipal government revenue-sharing pool. So who picked up 

the tab but the farmers and the urban taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. You back-filled absolutely nothing. Would you 

care to comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Unfortunately, Mr. Chair, the member 

does not have his facts correct. In so far as the health districts 

are concerned, the removal of the 2 mill levy was revenue 

neutral. In other words a total of $14 million, which is 2 mill 

levy and public health levy, is no longer paid from 

municipalities to the health districts. But that money is now 

paid by the Department of Health to the health districts. And 

every penny of that is replaced. If the member believes that that 

money is not being put into the health districts I can only say 

that the member is simply mistaken. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, that’s not at all what I said. 

What I said was the 2 mill health levy — which by the way was 

supposed to be temporary when it was first put on — was 

removed on one side from the municipalities. They didn’t have 

to put the 2 mills on. But on the other side they were cut $14 

million from the revenue-sharing pool. That money was 

returned to general revenue which in turn went around, and you 

say you’re back-filling the $14 million for health care. So you 

didn’t back-fill nothing. You took their money, took a circle, 

put it around, and put it right back in. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you agree that $14 million was cut from 

the municipal revenue-sharing pool? Let’s get that straight 

before we see where the money came from, where it went. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No I don’t agree, Mr. Chair. The 2 mill 

levy issue is revenue neutral to the health districts in the sense 

that the money isn’t paid to them by the districts but is paid to 

them by the province. They end up getting the 14 million. The 

member is confused and incorrect in so far as what he’s saying 

about the municipalities because the municipalities used to pay 

the 14 million. The effect of the removal of the 2 mill levy is 

they don’t pay it any more. So naturally revenue sharing to 

them may be decreased by 14 million, but on the other hand 

they’re not paying the money out. So in so far as the 2 mill levy 

and the public health levy goes, it’s revenue neutral to them as 

well. The member is simply incorrect in what he’s saying. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, all they were doing was 

collecting money for you in the first place; now they’ve lost it 

on the other side. So I don’t see how you can stand up and say 

you’re adding money to the health care budget when the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan were the ones that actually covered 

the loss. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, I’d like to go on a little bit different 

direction here. And my counterpart from Arm River had 

mentioned before the many problems in the health care system 

and a couple of them have come to my attention out in my 

constituency, and I’ve brought them to yours awhile ago, and 

that was to do with the dialysis machine and so on. 

 

There’s a number of areas, not just East Central Health District; 

I believe you mentioned there’s two or three others. Many of 

the places that I’m still getting calls . . . in fact more now 

because they’re quite curious to know if there is a chance of this 

dialysis machine being up and operating in the East Central 

Health District, and I believe Tisdale and some of the other 

areas. Could you give me a figure what it would cost to get a 

professional into the East Central Health District, which I 

believe is a funding from a different part than the normal health 

expenses, would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I cannot give the member an   



640  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

exact figure, or even a good approximation right at the moment, 

of what it would cost to have kidney dialysis centres in more 

regions than the . . . or centres than the four we do now. 

 

But I want to say to the member that I am not . . . I am quite 

sensitive to what the member is saying except I disagree with 

something he implied at least, when he was questioning me 

about this on another day. And that was, I think the member by 

now may agree that there are many people who can have home 

dialysis, and to the extent that people can have dialysis at home 

as opposed to travelling to Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert or 

Lloydminster, we should try to encourage that. And in fact in 

the last few years we’ve put in, I believe, an extra $1.7 million 

to increase home dialysis. 

 

But the member has a very valid question and that is, what 

about the people for whom home dialysis would not be 

appropriate? And I think that includes the people that the 

member brought to the legislature before. And instead of 

coming to Regina, they’d like to have dialysis at Yorkton, and I 

sympathize with that. 

 

And obviously what we need to do -- and we’re doing this 

presently and have been doing it for some months and hopefully 

pretty soon we’ll bring this to a close -- we need to analyse how 

many people there are in areas like Yorkton that are now 

travelling to Regina or elsewhere for dialysis and see if there’s a 

big enough group of people that we could have dialysis centres 

set up in Yorkton and perhaps other places. And I am actually 

. . . unfortunately I can’t give the member those numbers 

tonight because I haven’t been provided with them. But I want 

to say to the member that I am as anxious as he is to find out if 

we can get sort of critical masses of people that need dialysis 

identified that would make it sensible to take hospital dialysis 

out to more people and to do that. 

 

So although I don’t have the numbers, I’m sure we’ll be in 

estimates many times before the session is over and the member 

will be up asking me this again. And at some point obviously, I 

want to get this information clearly for the member. If I don’t 

verbally, then if I can do it earlier I’ll send some written 

information to the member to answer the question. 

 

But it’s a very good question because anybody that’s getting 

dialysis, and I know actually some people that are and I’ve met 

them at some of the dialysis centres in Saskatchewan, live a 

very difficult life in some ways. They have a lot of courage 

because they can’t live without dialysis, and I think we all 

really feel for them. And if there’s any way we can make their 

lives more comfortable, we want to. And I would like to join 

with the member in a very cooperative way to say we are 

examining that and I’ll encourage the department to get me 

some answers as soon as they can about improving dialysis. 

 

As I said, we put in extra money into dialysis services the last 

few years. Maybe we can even do more. And if there’s anything 

we can do to help kidney dialysis patients, we’re certainly in 

favour of doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I agree with you 

that some people can have the dialysis treatment at home, but 

there is many, many more out there that can’t and are making 

this two times . . . once, two time, three times a week to Regina 

or Saskatoon, if it happened to be closer. And it’s hard to justify 

to these people why they are spending upwards of $1,500 a 

month, like Mrs. Olm was from Churchbridge, to receive this 

treatment. And I would say that that’s about as close to being a 

two-tier health system as we are going to get to or ever would 

want to get to. 

 

So I guess my question, Mr. Minister, then is, in the near future 

can we see some of this $4 million of new money? At what 

point will we see places like Yorkton have this? Like are we 

looking at a long time span here or are we looking at two 

months, one month? A lot of people after that we had Mrs. Olm 

in here would call in that have the same problem and ask, how 

long will it be before maybe we can see Yorkton with a dialysis 

unit up and operating. So is there a time limit or a time on this 

that you may be able to give us an answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well certainly I would hope to give the 

member a more specific answer in a relatively short period of 

time as I said, Mr. Chair. But the matter is under review now. 

The member is incorrect in terms of referring to $4 million new 

money for health care this year. There’s $70.8 million new 

money for health care. 

 

But if the member has some problem with the figure of $4 

million, then I want to say this to the member, that in last 

week’s Star-Phoenix, Dr. Melenchuk, the leader of the 

member’s party, said that there should be $3 million new 

money put into the health care system over the next five years. 

That’s what he said. He said $.6 million new money each year. 

 

So however you cut and slice it, what we’re doing is a lot more 

than the Leader of the Liberal Party says we should do, and in 

fact he’s been critical of the amount of money we’re putting 

into health care. He’s done that more than once in the media. 

 

Now I want to say to the member also that the member likes to 

get up like other members of the Liberal Party, and I don’t like 

to be partisan, Mr. Chair, but he talks about problems in our 

health care system. And what I have to say to the member from 

Saltcoats, as I said to the member from Arm River, that if they 

want to get up day after day and run down the Saskatchewan 

medicare system, our model for delivering health care, would 

they please take me up on my challenge to name the places in 

the world that have a better health care system and take care of 

their people with more care and compassion than the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, the member’s not going to do that because 

there aren’t a lot of places in the world that have a better health 

care system than we do. I’ve put that challenge to the Liberals 

five times now. They don’t get up and answer it because they 

know there is no such place. 

 

Do we have some problems in our health care system? Yes, we 

do; we always will. There are problems in every system. Do we 

have a good health care system? Yes, we have a very good   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

health care system. We’re going to try to fund it to make it 

better. And once again I appeal to the Liberal Party to cooperate 

with us in that venture rather than advocating private medicine 

and rather than supporting the federal government in its social 

cut-backs in our country. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the folks at 

home are more interested in some facts and figures than 

continued rhetoric from the Health minister and criticizing 

people that aren’t in the House and don’t have a chance to 

defend themselves. The Minister is able to say things, take them 

out of context, and really the person that he is referring to is not 

here to defend himself and set the facts straight. And there will 

be a day; there will be a day, Mr. Minister, when that will 

happen and that will come in the course of two or three years in 

what is called a provincial election. That is when you’ll have 

your chance to criticize the Leader of the Liberal Party in an 

open fashion. At the same time he’ll have a chance for rebuttal 

and set the record straight and deal with facts instead of myths 

as well. 

 

I wanted to get back to the budget itself if we could. And I’m 

not sure we’ll be able to get any straight answers from you, Mr. 

Minister, but I’m going to ask you anyway. In the Estimates, 

under the grants to Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, 

this year you have about 15.4 estimated there and last year you 

estimated at 15.4 — exactly the same numbers. Can you tell us 

what you actually spent in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I can’t provide the member with that 

number right at the moment but I will undertake to send that 

number to the member tomorrow. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well assuming, Mr. Minister, that those 

figures are correct and what you estimated is actually what you 

spent, and it’s the same for this year, I’m wondering how you 

are planning on addressing people like the folks that called me 

today that are on oxygen, and now are going to have to pay. 

And they’re on a very fixed . . . low income group. How will 

this budget address their needs? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Two tier, two tier oxygen. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Yes, certainly we’re right back to your same 

game of two tier health, what you’ve gotten us into — your 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government — over the last 

number of years. 

 

And here’s another example of it. A person that can afford 

oxygen, fine he’s going to have to buy; the fellow that can’t, I 

guess he does without. And to quote another lady that writes us, 

she says: 

 

Needless to say, if they have many 67-year-old people 

waiting like this, mother nature will take care of them. 

 

Is that the NDP’s philosophy, is if we let them go, let them get 

old enough, then we don’t have to worry about them? They will 

pass on, unfortunately. The very people that founded this great 

country, this great province of ours, and now you’re willing to 

just let them go their own way because through no fault of their 

own they can’t afford the high cost of today’s living, and here’s 

another example. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, please tell us how people like these two 

gentlemen who are on oxygen will be able to cope because of 

your budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well it’s a bit ridiculous, Mr. Chair. The 

member gets up and says that because of the way we run the 

health care system we just want people to die. Well I want to 

tell the member, if he doesn’t know, Saskatchewan has the 

longest life expectancy in the country. 

 

So if the member’s test of whether we run health care correctly 

or not is how long people live, then we must be doing a pretty 

good job, because people live longer in Saskatchewan than they 

do anywhere else. 

 

So obviously the member is just completely wrong in that line 

of argument. We have the longest life expectancy in the country 

because we have one of the best health care systems in the 

country. 

 

I want to say to the member . . . the member also tries to 

mislead the public by saying that people are paying more for 

oxygen than they used to. Actually as a result of changes made 

to the oxygen plan under SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to 

Independent Living) last year, most people pay less for oxygen 

than they used to. And I’m advised by people in the industry 

that most people are quite happy with the oxygen supply they 

get and with the cost. 

 

Now is everybody happy? No. Everybody isn’t happy under the 

new system; everybody wasn’t happy under the old system. But 

I want to tell the member (a) that we have the longest life 

expectancy in the country; (b) that most people pay less for 

oxygen than they used to. 

 

And if the member wants to talk about two tier medicine, I have 

to remind the member that it is that member and the Leader of 

the Liberal Party that advocate a private health care system. I 

want to make it clear to the member that our party and our 

government support the public medicare system. 

 

And I think if the member really looks at the information 

available — there have been studies done in terms of the U.S. 

(United States) system — that when you really analyse it, if 

you’re fair-minded and reasonable, you will conclude that the 

Saskatchewan medicare system, with any problems we may 

have, is much better than U.S. style medicare. 

 

And you ought not, with all due respect, to get up in the House 

and make statements in the media that we’d be better off with 

some other type of system, namely U.S. style Medicare, 

because we really wouldn’t be. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that. I’ll try and 

get you back onto the question if I can, and it’s regarding 

oxygen. And certainly some people are paying less for oxygen   



642  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

now, because it’s probably those . . . because of your two-tier 

health policy that has prevented them from having the drugs 

that they need, and they probably unfortunately passed on. So 

yes, their costs are less. And that’s pretty poor reasoning that 

you use, and the people listening tonight aren’t going to fall for 

that argument — it makes no sense at all. 

 

So I’ll ask you again: what does your budget do for these 

people that now are going to have to pay for oxygen and, 

through no fault of their own, are on a fixed income and cannot 

afford it. How will you address that problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  There is no change to the oxygen program 

as a result of this year’s budget. There were changes made last 

year which for most people mean that they pay less for oxygen 

than they did before. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well certainly there is a result of this year’s 

budget because if it’s flat and the same as last year . . . and 

these people evidently have a problem. They’re having to pay 

for their oxygen. They now have to pay, and I’ll quote you. 

They say, “never have we had to pay before. Never have we had 

to pay before until your government came into power.” 

 

Now because of your backward health reform policy, your 

wellness model — stay well or farewell — these people are 

suffering. You can’t get the services that they need or the drugs, 

in this case oxygen. So tell us. How are you going to address 

the problem for these folks that can’t afford to buy the oxygen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Most people, Mr. Chair, pay less for 

oxygen than they did before as a result of changes we made last 

year. And Saskatchewan has the highest life expectancy in the 

country. We have very long life expectancy. We have a very 

good oxygen program. Not everyone likes it. There are always 

critics of any system, but people pay less for oxygen, most 

people, than they did before. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, let’s get on 

record here. What should we tell these folks? Do you want me 

to quote from Hansard tonight of what you said, that they’re 

paying . . . yes, he’s probably going to pay less because he can’t 

afford to buy it, so he won’t have it. And this person most likely 

won’t survive. And I hope that if this does indeed happen that 

we will get a letter from this gentleman’s family saying hey, our 

dad or our grandfather or our brother or our uncle passed on 

because he couldn’t afford to buy oxygen. 

 

So let’s go on record, Mr. Minister. You tell us tonight what 

you want me to tell this gentleman who can’t afford to buy 

oxygen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It’s very difficult for me to answer these 

questions in this sense, Mr. Chair. The member is standing up 

saying that people are dying because they can’t have oxygen. 

Mr. Chair, that is simply incorrect. That is fearmongering on the 

part of the member. The member is saying that people are dying 

at younger ages when we have the longest life expectancy. 

 

I’ve explained to the member that changes made to the oxygen 

program have meant that for most people oxygen is cheaper 

than it used to be. I don’t know how I can put it more simply for 

the member than that. 

 

The member is a member of the Liberal Party, an opponent of 

medicare, is going to want to get up and tell people that 

somehow people are dying because they can’t get oxygen and 

so on and so on. And it’s the sort of thing that unfortunately the 

opposition Liberals will do. I can only say, Mr. Chair, that what 

the member is saying is simply not true. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, well in this case 

it’s not true yet because this gentleman is still alive. What are 

you going to do to prevent him from dying if he doesn’t get the 

oxygen that he needs. How in the world is he supposed to 

survive if he can’t get the oxygen? He says he can’t pay for it. 

You’re asking him to pay because of your change in policy last 

year. There’s no increase in spending in this area. 

 

So what do we tell this gentleman? Of course he’s still alive — 

this one is. Maybe there’s others that aren’t. I don’t know. 

 

Let’s give him an answer that he wants to hear. What is there in 

your policy that will help a gentleman like this out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, if the member has the name of 

an individual that cannot have oxygen, which frankly I have a 

great deal of difficulty accepting — I do not believe it — I 

would ask the member not to give that name publicly because I 

don’t think that would be fair to that individual. But the 

member knows that he can certainly give me that name of that 

person that can’t have oxygen and can’t afford it, and I would 

look into it. 

 

But the member has not given me such a name, has not 

approached me about this matter. And if the member is sincere 

and wants to actually help the person instead of just being 

political, then the member should give me the name of that 

person in private and we will follow it up. 

 

But I can assure the House, Mr. Chair, that the member’s 

allegation that people are going to die because they can’t have 

oxygen and that they won’t be provided with oxygen when they 

need it, is simply false. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, you bet your boots I’m sincere 

about this, and you can count on it that people, because of your 

two-tier health system, are going to die, are suffering and are 

dying now. 

 

Surely you can’t stand here tonight and tell us that you’re going 

to deal with every individual case across the province. Isn’t 

there a plan in place? Doesn’t your Health department have a 

plan in place to deal with people like this that are on low 

income, that can’t afford this type of a drug — oxygen — so 

that you don’t have to deal with everyone individually? Surely 

you must have policy, and if you have, tell us about it tonight 

and I’ll relate this on to this gentleman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  There is a plan, Mr. Chair, under the 

Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living. Every person is   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

dealt with individually; every person is dealt with as an 

individual. 

 

There are people that work for the Department of Health, and 

also the Saskatchewan Lung Association cooperates with the 

department to meet the needs of those who need oxygen. Those 

who need oxygen get oxygen. And if the member was sincere, 

instead of trying to play politics, and the member truly had the 

name of a person who can’t have oxygen, the member would 

give me that name in private, Mr. Chair, and have that matter 

checked out, because that’s what properly should be done. 

 

And I say to the member that if it was true that he had the name 

of a person denied oxygen, he should meet with me after this 

question session is done and give me that name, Mr. Chair, and 

we would certainly look into it. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess just to 

summarize some of the comments made throughout the past 

couple of minutes in reference to the health care system, there’s 

no question about it that the health care system is under attack 

in Saskatchewan. If you look at 40 per cent of the rural 

hospitals closing in the province as a whole; look at some of the 

bed closures that began before the federal cuts -- the assumed 

federal cuts that terrorize the hospital situation and the health 

care situation in this province -- was apparent. There was other 

cuts made by the province before the federal government came 

along with their own perceived plans to reduce their federal 

deficit. 

 

However, Mr. Chairman, several days ago we spoke about all 

the fine issues associated with the budget. We looked at some 

of the retail sales going through the roof. We looked at some of 

the natural gas exploration. We looked at some of the, you 

know, some of the home sales. Everything was positive in the 

budget. We seen millions upon millions of dollars generated. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, you look at some of the costs that the 

minister speaks about — and let’s assume that his figures are 

correct — 4 to $6 million extra spent on health care. Well, Mr. 

Chairman, after all the different dollars that came into the 

provincial government coffers, including $110 million in VLTs 

(video lottery terminal), how is it that we still can talk about all 

the fine things that we’ve done as a provincial government, that 

we have 40 per cent of rural Saskatchewan hospitals closing? 

Why are we making all the money yet all the closures are 

happening? Simply because the commitment is not there. 

 

And several days ago, we questioned the Minister of Health in 

this very House about the La Loche hospital, and his comments 

were simple, that there is an announcement forthcoming. Well, 

Mr. Minister, in spite of all the rhetoric, people of the North are 

still waiting for a new facility. St. Martin’s Hospital is in very, 

very poor shape. 

 

And the reason why I’m bringing up all the million of dollars 

that were made over the past several years is that, while I sat in 

this House and I spoke about all the positive things that the 

budget . . . your members were applauding every positive effort 

that was made with the provincial budget. Every positive thing 

we said, you guys applauded. So in saying all those positive 

things and all the applause, why are we still continuing to have 

cut-backs at the provincial level? And why isn’t there a definite 

day on the reconstruction or new construction of St. Martin’s 

Hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I said to the member the other day 

actually, that in terms of a new hospital in La Loche, an 

announcement will be made in the very near future and the 

member and the people from northern Saskatchewan should 

have every reason to be optimistic about an announcement in 

that regard. 

 

But I want to say to the member that our provincial government 

has never cut health care spending. We have maintained health 

care spending in the face of Liberal cuts. I also want to say to 

the member, who talks about closing or actually converting 

rural hospitals in the southern part of the province, 

Saskatchewan has twice as many hospitals per capita in 

southern Saskatchewan as any other province in the country, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

(2000) 

 

I would agree with the member about this: that in the North we 

don’t have very many hospitals or health centres at all and 

we’re trying to do something about that. We’ve built a new 

health centre in La Ronge. We’re starting construction in 

cooperation with the first nations and the federal government on 

a new health centre near Stony Rapids on the Chicken Reserve 

and we’re in the planning phase on the west side. 

 

And the member has spent more time in this House since he 

was elected — and I say this with all due respect — talking 

about southern hospitals and rural hospitals than he ever has 

talking about the hospital situation in the North. And we’ve 

been looking at that situation and we’ve got a committee 

looking at it. I’m glad that the member has decided that this is 

an issue for him too because he is the member for Athabasca. 

 

But I want to say to the member that he should join with us in 

wanting to replace some of the facilities in the North instead of 

going along with the usual Liberal line, which is that you 

shouldn’t make any changes in southern Saskatchewan. I want 

to say to the member that most of the changes to our hospital 

system in southern Saskatchewan are actually done. I don’t 

think you’re going to see a great deal of change in the future. 

Does that mean that there will never be any change? No. There 

will always be some change but most of those changes have 

been done. 

 

I don’t apologize for the fact that we’ve built a new health 

centre in the North, we’re building another one on the Chicken 

Reserve, or that we’re looking at replacing the facilities in 

northern Saskatchewan because those facilities should be 

looked at. There should be some changes made up there. I only 

say to the member that if we could get cooperation from the 

Liberal Party in terms of funding health care it would make it a 

lot easier to proceed with those needed changes in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess the   



644  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

biggest point that we want to make here is in reference to a lot 

of the problems . . . you talk about health care and some of the 

reasons. And I hear the minister’s challenge to the Liberal 

caucus in terms of saying, okay, name me one area that has 

better health care than Saskatchewan. And we can sit here all 

day without answering the question, as he has done on 

numerous occasions when we’ve asked questions about certain 

health-related issues. 

 

But I’ll say one thing and challenge the minister back. You 

name me one health area, one provincial government or 

territorial government, that has a hospital like St. Martin’s. 

Name me one jurisdiction in this country of Canada, that when 

you walk down the main hallway of a hospital they have seven 

or eight buckets collecting water. That, Mr. Minister, is the 

challenge back to you. If you can name me a jurisdiction that 

has that type of facility, then I’ll name you a jurisdiction that 

has a better health care than Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I could name many places in the 

world that have a worse facility than St. Martin’s. But I want to 

say to the member that our plan, as the member knows, is 

actually to build a new facility in La Loche to replace St. 

Martin’s. And I’ve already said to the member last week and 

again tonight that we’re going to be making an announcement 

in the very near future. The member has every reason to be 

optimistic about that announcement. 

 

We’ll be proceeding to do the right thing, and I know that when 

that happens, we can count on the member for his support and 

encouragement in that regard. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the other point 

I want to make very clear is that in terms of the cuts that he 

supposedly has been speaking about, the $51 million in cuts 

from the federal government, almost every day we get up here 

and ask questions in reference to health care, and the typical 

answer is, had your federal Liberal cousins not cut back, we 

would not be in this predicament. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan know very 

well, know very well that answer is not good enough. After the 

first few weeks, maybe they’ll accept it, but two years and 

counting, Mr. Chairman, we have to have a fresh, new 

approach. 

 

If there is a reason, if there is a reason for us to continue 

blaming the federal government, we can certainly do so. But, 

Mr. Speaker, after two years of non-action, then sooner or later 

we have to stop blaming Tory mismanagement and federal cuts, 

and simply start owning up to the fact that it takes the 

provincial government . . . has a provincial responsibility, a 

provincial department and a provincial minister that will make a 

provincial decision on whether they should replace St. Martin’s 

hospital or not. 

 

And I ask the Minister of Health once again, is there a date in 

which you’re going to announce the reconstruction of a new 

hospital or the construction of a new hospital named St. 

Martin’s? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I’ve indicated to the member, Mr. 

Chair, we’ll be making an announcement within the next very 

short while, within a matter of a very small number of weeks, 

about St. Martin’s. 

 

And I want to say to the member that we will take responsibility 

for what we do and the level of funding we provide to the health 

care system because we do a better job than any other province 

in the country. And we certainly do a better job than the federal 

Liberals. 

 

Now a few minutes ago the member from Arm River said I’m 

not supposed to ask questions about what Dr. Melenchuk says 

because Dr. Melenchuk isn’t in the House to defend himself. 

Well Dr. Melenchuk is the Leader of the Liberal Party and the 

Liberals have to be prepared to debate what Dr. Melenchuk 

says. And when he says that he’s going to privatize medicare, 

we’re entitled to raise that in the House. When he says he’s 

going to cut health care spending, we’re entitled to raise that in 

the House. 

 

Now the member from Athabasca says we’re not entitled to talk 

about what the federal Liberals are doing. Well if I was a 

Liberal I’d be embarrassed about what they’re doing too, Mr. 

Chair. But the unfortunate reality is that the federal Liberals — 

as Canadians from coast to coast know — are cutting health 

care and in some ways gutting health care. And their own 

committee recommended that they should stop doing it. And I 

think that instead of criticizing us for questioning federal 

Liberal priorities, it would be useful if the member and the 

opposition joined with us in encouraging the federal 

government to properly support the provinces in health care. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple other 

questions we have in reference to the actual operation. I guess 

in essence we’re not here to defend nor are we here to promote 

what the federal Liberal government is trying to do with health 

care. I think the key thing we’re trying to ask is, what is the 

province going to do about the situation of health care. And 

again I go back to this very same point: that you talk about 

figures of 46 million, 47 million, or 51 million in which the 

federal government’s cut back in health care but one year alone 

you made $110 million in VLTs. Could you not use some of the 

monies you made from VLTs to recover some of the costs 

needed to improve the health care facilities in northern 

Saskatchewan? Isn’t that making common sense? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  This is smoke and mirrors and a shell game 

from the Liberal Party. The member from Melville was trying 

to make the same point before. I want to say, Mr. Chair, the 

amount of revenue the province gets from gaming is — I don’t 

know the exact figure — but it’s between $100 million and 

$150 million I believe. The amount of money the government 

spends on health care is $1.63 billion. The amount of money the 

government spends on education is about $1 billion. The 

members want to get up and say that the money from gaming 

doesn’t somehow go to health care and education. But where 

does it go? Where do the members think the $1.63 billion for 

health care comes from? It comes from money that it earned on 

gaming, the sales tax, some of the gas tax money -- which they 

object to by the way -- some provincial income tax and so on.   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

All of that money goes into the General Revenue Fund, and half 

of the money that comes into the province goes to health and 

education. When the Liberals get up and say that somehow 

there’s money there that isn’t being spent on health and 

education, that simply is not the case. The money goes into the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Our number one priority is health care, on which we spend 

$1.63 billion, the biggest expenditure of the government. The 

second highest expenditure is education. That’s where that 

money goes. It goes to health and it goes to education, and 

we’re going to keep it that way. We’re going to keep having 

health as the number one priority, education as the number two 

priority, and I disagree with the members when they say that 

there’s somehow some money being earned that isn’t going to 

those priorities. We’re doing more than any other provincial 

government, certainly more than the federal government, to 

support health and education, and we’re going to continue to do 

so. 

 

I want to say to the member that some of the things we’ve 

added to the health care system in the last number of years are: 

more home care services that serve thousands and thousands 

more people; more options for seniors needing long-term care; 

more palliative care at home and in the hospital; and the list 

goes on -- respite care for people; the new hospital in La Ronge; 

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) coming to Regina; CT 

(computerized tomography) scan going to Prince Albert; many, 

many things are being done in the health care system. 

 

I could go on at some length describing all of the new 

community initiatives, Mr. Chair. That money is supported by 

gaming . . . Those programs are supported by gaming revenue; 

they are supported by other tax revenue, and that’s as it should 

be, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, we will now proceed to 

Highways estimates, so I move that we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

staff who are with him tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Firstly, to 

my far left is Barry Martin. Barry is the executive director of 

engineering services division, Department of Highways. Next to 

me is Brian King, deputy minister of Highways and 

Transportation. Behind Brian is Lynn Tullock. Lynn is the 

executive director of corporate and information services. 

Behind myself is Mr. Bernie Churko, executive director of 

logistics, planning and compliance, and to my right is George 

Stamatinos, executive director of preserve and operate, southern 

region. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to 

the minister and to all of his officials here. Mr. Chair, and, Mr. 

Minister, if I could start out the evening by asking you, Mr. 

Minister, to provide us a list with all of the out-of-scope 

personnel in your department who are appointed by order in 

council and who are subject to the Crown contracts Act. And 

could you also provide us with a listing of their salaries as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member’s question, there is one 

. . . there are three actually, including the deputy minister, one 

on secondment. And we would send those names over to you if 

you would like that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, if 

you could send those names over and also with a listing of 

salaries as well, as I mentioned, I’d appreciate it. With respect 

to individuals who are employed through the orders in council 

and who are governed by the Crown employment contracts 

legislation, there are certain requirements in terms of when 

these individuals should report any salary increases or changes 

in position — promotion, things of this nature. 

 

Are you aware at this time of anybody in your department who 

may have not yet made any reporting in compliance with the 

legislation, the Crown corporation . . . or contracts Act, sorry. 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The only one I’m aware of would be my 

deputy this evening — to the member opposite — and I know 

that he has complied. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, I’ve just got a few of these formalities by this evening. 

I’m sure you thought I was going to get right into the pothole 

matters. And those are yet to come, you can be assured. 

 

I have taken the opportunity to do some rather extensive 

consultation with my constituents in the matter of the highways 

in my constituency and the number of potholes, and it’s been 

quite an interesting exercise, and certainly I’ve enjoyed the 

level of participation of my constituents to date. And certainly 

brings awareness to the dire need for some highway 

maintenance in my constituency, and I’m sure indicative of 

province wide . . . I know I’ve had some interesting comments 

made to me by constituents. And if I would be able to, I 

wouldn’t mind just mentioning a few of these. 

 

I see one constituent who quoted to me here, “I don’t have 

anything specific to report about the roads, but I can tell you 

I’ve needed major repairs to the suspension of my car a couple 

of times in the last three years.” And I’m wondering if the 

minister might make some comment in this regard. Have you 

logged the number of complaints that your department may 

have received concerning damages to vehicles of any nature on 

this province’s highways as a result of their deterioration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question. And certainly the department take calls all the time, 

some certainly when a person hits a pothole and damages their 

vehicle. We have a policy to deal with that, and the policy of 

course includes the signing of the particular area that there is a 

problem with the road. 

  



646  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

And I know that the member opposite understands that we live 

in Saskatchewan. We live in a province that has more roads 

than any other jurisdiction likely in the world, certainly more 

roads than Manitoba or Alberta put together. We have more 

roads in this province, and yet we have a population of a million 

people. And we’ve done very, very well I think with our road 

structure. 

 

We have a weather situation in the province of Saskatchewan. If 

the member would look out today, out the window, and see 

exactly what the weather is like, I mean it’s minus 17 or 18 

degrees. A few days ago it probably was plus 8 or 9, and it 

continues to vary especially in the spring and fall . . . and very, 

very hard on our road infrastructure so there are going to be 

potholes. 

 

Our job is to try and manage that with the resources we have as 

best we can, and I think we do a pretty good job, and most 

people in Saskatchewan would agree. Certainly I complain 

when I hit a pothole, as does the member opposite, and I’m sure 

some of his constituents. Some of my constituents also 

complain and rightly so. But they are very understanding, and 

they know that this government is doing its utmost to have a 

good transportation system. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I appreciate the 

comment that we have a rather extensive road system in the 

province, and certainly it’s subject to a lot of environmental 

factors that many people across this country would consider 

extreme. But some in my constituency would suggest that 

perhaps some of the approaches that have been taken by this 

government have not been as far-sighted as perhaps they could 

have been. And I have another quote from a constituent who 

will say, and I do quote: 

 

Mr. Romanow whines that we have more roads per capita 

than any other province. So does that mean we should do 

nothing? Doesn’t it rather suggest our highways should be 

more of a priority than they are? To let things deteriorate to 

the present state is an indication of poor management. To 

leave them that way is an evidence of poor judgement, and 

promising to do something someday is not enough. We all 

know the road that’s paved with good intentions. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, would you care to make any comments 

about what many constituents across the province I’m sure are 

saying, that perhaps the policies of the Highways department 

with respect to reconstruction of roads is not as far-sighted as 

what the people in this province would have it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for the 

question. I know it’s very easy, and I notice that the Liberal 

government is doing this quite often lately, is saying we should 

spend more in health care; we should spend more in education; 

we should spend more in whatever you can imagine — we 

should spend more, including highways. We’d like to spend 

more in all those areas, but you can only spend what you have. 

 

And I know that about 6 or 7 or 8 years ago, we had a 

government that promoted the ideas you’re promoting, which is 

we’ll borrow some when we need some and we’ll just spend it, 

and we’ll just borrow a little more and we’ll spend it, and we’ll 

borrow a little more and we’ll spend it. And you know what 

happened? We got this huge debt. And now we have to pay 

$800 million of interest each and every year, on that debt. 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan say yes, we would like more 

into health care and education and highways, and they see by 

this budget that we’re trying to do the best we can. But still 

considering fiscal reality, because they don’t want us to go out 

and borrow to spend money that we, you know, spend money 

that we don’t have, so they’re very reluctant to listen to people 

that suggest we spend more here and more here and more here 

when we haven’t got those dollars. 

 

So I think the people of Saskatchewan are very realistic. And 

they’re very understanding of the circumstances that the 

province is in. And yes, they would like to see better roads. But 

they’re willing to wait, and they’re willing to allow us to spend 

as we can afford. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, 

the process you’ve just described to us sounds a lot like how 

you’re treating the highways right now in this province. You 

borrow a little and you spend it, and the debt keeps 

accumulating. Because a lot of the constituents that I talk to 

these days are saying that there is a debt accumulating in the 

failing infrastructure of the road system in our province. Every 

time a road is not properly kept up, it leads to further needs for 

more monies to be invested in them in the future in order to 

bring them back up to standard. And in so doing you’re 

increasing what is in effect an accumulated debt. 

 

Fine, it’s not on your books currently, but nonetheless it is a 

debt and it has to be dealt with. And I think that’s what some of 

my constituents are getting at when they make reference as they 

have here. 

 

Another good example here. A constituent of mine says, and I 

quote: 

 

Our highways are an essential means of contact and 

communication between the people of our great province. 

With the reduction of railway usage they have become 

primary commercial links as well. They also bring tourists 

to our province. And make no mistake, visitors who 

damage their vehicles plunging into our potholes will have 

long memories about it. It’ll be some time before we can 

coax them back. 

 

So I’d ask the minister in this regard as well: could you let us 

know how many people they may have complaints from in the 

way of tourists who enter our province, who encounter the 

abysmal road conditions, and in turn launch complaints to the 

Department of Highways? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I don’t have a number of 

complaints from tourists. I do know that we get complaints 

from the general public. We get complaints from tourists — 

people that are touring the province — when they hit a bad 

road, and that’s very understandable, as do I’m sure other 

provinces. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the one good 

thing is that tourism numbers in the province of Saskatchewan 

are way up the last two years. And the province, as it increases 

in economic activity in the oil sector, as it increases in 

economic activity in the forest sector, as it increases in the 

tourism industry, the province does better and certainly can . . . 

then we can pay down the debt and then we can have a little 

extra money for things like roads. 

 

And of course you’ve seen that in this year’s budget where we 

committed an extra $30 million to roads this year, and 

committed — can you imagine? — $2.5 billion to roads over 

the next 10 years. Now that is a commitment that no other 

province that I can recall has done in recent budgets. And it’s 

because we were able to -- as the people of Saskatchewan all 

tighten our belts a little, sacrifice certainly over the last five or 

six years -- get our debt under control, have balanced budgets 

so that we can have a little extra money for the important 

infrastructure. And I agree with the fellow that you talk about in 

regards to the importance of transportation. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me 

that two and a half billion dollars over 10 years sounds like a 

heck of a lot of money. But then when it comes to the annual 

budget for Highways in this province it doesn’t quite compare 

as well. Would you be able to stand before us this evening and 

say with every degree of confidence that that two and a half 

billion dollars expended over the course of the next 10 years is 

going to be enough to meet the needs for rebuilding the 

highways system in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to mention to the member 

opposite that there is a commitment, I guess . . . or we need or 

we should have a commitment from the federal Liberals in 

Ottawa in regards to some of the actions that’s happening in 

transportation. You talk about the stresses on our roads, and 

certainly there are major stresses on the roads. 

 

One of the things that the federal Liberal government did 

recently was pass a new transportation Act. And the new 

transportation Act, what it did was allow railways to abandon 

its branch lines a lot quicker than what they were able to do in 

the past. And what that has done, to the member from Thunder 

Creek, is move the transportation from rail to road — the 

transportation of bulk commodities like wheat and barley and 

canola. And so what happens when you do this, of course it has 

a major, major effect on roads. 

 

What also happens is the elevator companies then consolidate 

their elevator structures. And so when that happens, farmers 

have to haul for further distances on roads. And many of those 

roads were built in the ’50s and ’60s. They were a road that had 

very little surface, a thin membrane surface what we call a thin 

layer of pavement over a non-structured road. And it was not 

built for those heavy loads. 

 

(2030) 

 

But did the federal government consult with us or try to stretch 

that over a length of time so that municipalities and provincial 

road authorities could deal with that? No, they did not. They 

went ahead and were very friendly to the railways, suggesting 

that it was the railways’ turn to now make a profit, and that they 

were going to have some railroad-friendly legislation. And 

certainly it is. But does it consider producers? Does it consider 

road authorities? No. So there is a large responsibility by the 

federal government here. 

 

Another area is the national highways program. I know that I 

met with the other provinces and territories in 1994 and we 

talked to then minister of Transport, Mr. Young, and tried to 

convince him how important it was to have a national highways 

program where we would cost-share in the national highways 

network. If we could do that, that would give each province a 

little extra to spend on other roads in the province, in each 

province. And certainly there was a responsibility, we felt, by 

the federal government to participate in at least the national 

highways network. 

 

Because you see, in other industrialized countries they do; in 

Canada they refuse. In 1994 they refused as well, so we still 

struggle with that. We’re still trying to convince them that they 

should participate with us. The commitment of $2.5 billion over 

10 years certainly means that our money is on the table, and we 

just await theirs. 

 

So if we could get that little bit of help from your cousins in 

Ottawa, and maybe with your help, it sure would be beneficial 

to the people of Saskatchewan and I would encourage that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we can 

assure you that we have put our concerns to the federal 

government, and we will continue to do so, in terms of how 

much money is needed to be reinvested into the transportation 

system in this province. And you do have our commitment that 

we’ll continue to do that. 

 

If I could ask for a little bit of a clarification. I’m looking at a 

document here now, “Provincial Highway Upgrading 

Benefit/Cost Analysis.” Could you give me somewhat of an 

overview of this schedule and explain to me the various 

columns here in terms of how you go about establishing the 

benefit/cost in the process of arriving at the ranking here that I 

see over on the extreme right-hand corner from 1 through 148. 

This was a document dated August 7 of 1996. 

 

Could you also let me know in terms of where we’re at in 

highway projects at this point in time? Where we may be on 

this particular list or ranking? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member from Thunder Creek, if 

you would notice on the BCA (benefit/cost analysis) project 

ranking, there’s of course the length — it’s got the kilometres. 

We’ll just take number one for instance, which is Highway 361, 

Lampman to the junction no. 47. It’s 13.29 kilometres long. 

Today’s daily traffic is 616 vehicles per day. The maintenance 

cost per kilometre is about $5,000 currently. The capital cost to 

upgrade is $1.5 million. The value of the asset is $3.743 

million. And then the capital cost, it’s the NPV (net present 

value) divided by the million dollars, and that gives you that   



648  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

figure. And that gives you a per cent rating on investment, 

which is 23 per cent, so that moves it to number one priority. 

 

It’s a formula that’s there which includes daily traffic; it 

includes maintenance costs; it includes safety. And it takes a 

look at the infrastructure cost, or the asset, and the worth of the 

asset, and makes a judgement on that. 

 

Certainly I could send you that formula in writing so that you 

would better understand it. And then you rate it. But the rating 

of the roads also changes often, because what happens maybe is 

a grain company may put a new terminal up in a particular area 

and there would be more maintenance costs and more traffic 

and so everything shifts then. 

 

So the BCA project ranking is, you know, continually evolving 

and so . . . but it’s good for us to sort of have a road map or a 

plan, to basically have a strategy. This year there are 5 projects 

in the top . . . let’s see, in the top 12 that will be done this year. 

So it gives us that direction. It gives us that plan to work 

toward. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 

were mentioning that this type of an analysis is I guess a 

continuum, if you would have it. It’s constantly being 

re-evaluated. And would you be able to advise us, is there a 

document such as this that now supersedes this one that was 

dated as August 7, 1996, and would we be able to have a copy 

of such a document so that we could get a little bit more up to 

date perhaps too in terms of where you’re at in ranking these 

projects. So I just ask if that sort of a document is available at 

this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, there is one that’s dated March 19 

and I will make sure that you get a copy. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, it certainly is of 

great concern that while the document I’m looking at right now 

anyway, that only 5 out of the top 12 ranking projects are ones 

that will be able to be undertaken during the ’97-98 fiscal year. 

Since the whole process has been re-jigged, so to speak, are 

there more projects in the top rankings that will now be 

undertaken during the course of the year, or has that number 

stayed constant, five projects and that’s it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’ll send you a list. I think there are . . . 

you may have received even a list of the projects that we’re 

contemplating doing this year. But what I want to say to the 

member opposite is that if we had all kinds of money, we could 

do them all. But we don’t have that luxury. And I know the 

Liberal government would spend and borrow I suppose, to 

spend more on this or that or whatever. But we are not going to 

do that. We are going to only spend what we have and we’re 

not going to go into debt ever again. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Chair, I think it has to be of great 

concern to someone who represents a constituency whose 

highways are so low on the list of priorities here. And I’m 

looking in terms of a number of highways here — 43 we’re 

speaking of, 363, that are rather far down the list, I guess if you 

might say. 

In terms of what we hear from people out there when they’re 

returning some of my pothole memorandums here, with respect 

to Highway 363 from Shamrock to Hodgeville, this is a bus 

driver who tells me, I drive a 48-passenger school bus and 

always seem to be dodging potholes; 363 from Moose Jaw and 

on out — narrow driving lanes with bad, bad, unpaved broken 

shoulders plus broken holes too numerous to count. Highway 

363 from Coderre to Moose Jaw, this particular constituent 

mentions over that 90 kilometres of highway, there’s too many 

potholes to count. I can go on here. From Old Wives to Moose 

Jaw, over that 60 kilometres, 103 potholes. 

 

So there’s certainly no end of concern on these particular 

stretches of road. And I do see that perhaps certain portions of 

Highway 363, as an example, are going to be resurfaced during 

the course of this fiscal year. 

 

Would you just outline for us this evening which particular 

stretches and how many kilometres we’re speaking of out of the 

total kilometres on Highway 363 that may be undergoing a 

certain amount of repair during the course of this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question. I remember last year the member from Wood River 

said you know, we should fix the Highway 4, everything in the 

Wood River constituency. And now the member from Thunder 

Creek says we should fix all the highways in Thunder Creek. 

I’m wondering when we’re going to get to Carrot River Valley. 

It would be nice to be able to fix all the roads right away and I 

understand that, but of course we can’t do that, and I think the 

member knows that. 

 

The 30 extra million dollars that we’re getting this year, and I 

would expect that somebody from that side of the House would 

get up and commend us for putting more money into highways, 

but the $30 million that we’re going to be receiving this year, 

the majority will be going into preservation work to try and 

preserve the existing infrastructure. As we save money from 

preserving the existing infrastructure, we will be able to put 

more money into new projects. 

 

And I have some good news for the member opposite, that 363, 

there’s some kilometres, I believe seven kilometres from Moose 

Jaw west will be resurfaced this year, and I believe the total cost 

is $850,000. 

 

So there is also in his constituency Highway 19, Hodgeville to 

Highway No. 1, surfacing, $1.691 million; and north to 

Hodgeville to south of Highway No. 1, surfacing, $997,400. 

 

There’s also preservation work on No. 2 junction. On No. 43 to 

20 kilometres north-east of Mossbank, $223,000. Highway 334, 

section 6 kilometres to 15 kilometres west of Corinne, surface 

improvements $80,000. Highway 334, sections north of 

Kayville to Avonlea, surface improvements, $80,000. And on 

363, as I mentioned earlier . . . or no, there’s also some 

resurfacing at $610,000. 

 

So total capital $3.5 million in the constituency of Thunder 

Creek. Total preservation, 993,000, for a total of $4.5 million in 

that constituency. 

  



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

Now I know that the member from Arm River is not happy with 

that because he isn’t getting probably as much in his 

constituency. But I haven’t heard a thank you yet. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chairman and to the minister, if you do 

insist that we get up and ask you about every stretch of highway 

in the province traversing every one of the constituencies, I 

guess we could oblige you. But I don’t think that you’d have the 

stomach for it nor your officials. 

 

I notice that a couple of these surfacing projects that you 

mention here are in fact courtesy to a good extent to the federal 

government. They’re under Canada-agri infrastructure program. 

So certainly I think we’ll all be more than happy to 

acknowledge the assistance of the federal government in those 

projects too. 

 

When I’m looking at these construction projects for the fiscal 

year ’96-97, as an example, versus the ’97-98 that I have here, 

would you be able to outline for us . . . Are all of these projects 

ones which were actually completed in the ’96-97 fiscal year, or 

are some of these hangovers that are going to carry on into this 

current fiscal year? I notice at the bottom of these lists there is a 

number of projects that are only tendered depending on the 

season and a number of other factors that might come to bear. 

So would you be able to just at this point let us know how many 

of these projects might still be hanging on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, each year, if 

you will note, our construction projects at the very end will 

have a list of projects that will be completed only if there is 

money available. So if, for instance, one of the projects can’t be 

done on the list because of weather or because of some reason, 

we would move to that list and do some work there. 

 

I haven’t got the amount from last year, if any of those jobs in 

fact were done, but what I will do is I will get that information 

to the member opposite. 

 

So each year we have the list of construction work that we’re 

going to tender. We also have a secondary list that we will get 

to if weather permits and money permits. Okay? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chair, and to the minister, it’s just that I 

don’t see in terms of . . . Like the projects that we talk about 

here that are perhaps carry-overs, I don’t see them transferring 

over. You’d think they would end up from this portion of this 

list into a more priority position in terms of the ’97-98 projects. 

 

So it was just a little bit concerning to me that it seems like 

perhaps a good portion of these lists that are subject to all the 

undetermined factors could in fact end up being nothing more 

than just a means of trying to placate certain individuals who 

may make the request of the department: well can we see what 

you’re doing to fix highways in the province? 

 

I guess people in the province would like to have some degree 

of comfort that that isn’t the case and that in fact it is a genuine 

attempt in terms of priorizing and repriorizing the programs as 

we go on. 

 

I also notice a number of projects that are in the Thunder Creek 

constituency for the ’97-98 fiscal year, but they are in fact in 

that portion of this document that is suggesting they might only 

be additional projects, you know, if they’re able to get to them, 

I guess. I would just like to, at this time, because I know that the 

. . . well for example the Kalium access acceleration lane on No. 

1 Highway is a source of a lot of concerns in terms of safety, 

where there’s a good deal of traffic at peak flow times when 

there’s shift changes from the plants. And we’d like to know, 

well is this a project that is with a high degree of likelihood 

going to occur during this fiscal year, above and beyond what 

little bit of comfort we may get from this document I’m looking 

at here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite there, we have 

a safety improvement program and a list of safety projects that 

are on the list. They are also priorized, and as we get to them 

we will do those projects. 

 

Certainly the Kalium access lane is on the project list, but it 

hasn’t been able to be done yet. Certainly when we have the 

dollars to do that work, we will certainly do it. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

guess earlier you were dealing with some of the pothole patrol 

questions, and I know how anxious you are to get into some of 

that with me. In fact I would think that we’ve got probably a 

couple of hundred that we’ll, in some form or fashion here 

whether it’s tonight or at a future trip back here, that we’ll have 

to go over it and have you explain why in fact you either don’t 

feel you should upgrade the highway or fix it or rebuild or pave 

or service it or whatever, because I’m sure you’re well aware of 

the situation throughout this province.  

 

And in fact I know you are, Mr. Minister, because when I 

invited you to come along on a bit of a road trip with myself 

into the south-west to look at some of the terrible condition of 

the highways there, and your response back, by way of letter, 

was that you’re very familiar with the situation throughout the 

province in highways. 

 

So of course then I think it’s only fair, if you’re so fully aware 

of the situation of the highways in the province, you’ll be able 

to answer some of the questions that of course some of these 

people would like answered. And I’ll go through a few of these, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Now the one response we have back deals with Highway No. 

18 from Claydon to . . . (inaudible) . . . And I just happened to 

pick one that’s in the south-west. They’ve got 25 kilometres and 

it says there’s thousands of potholes. And you and I both know 

that that stretch of highway is in terrible shape. In fact the RM 

(rural municipality) of . . . oh, where is it? It’s in your riding. 

It’s in Frontier . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s in 

Frontier — the RM of Frontier. That RM, in fact, were going to 

disallow any heavy truck traffic or oil truck traffic to travel 

some of that road. 

 

And I was wondering from your point of view, Mr. Minister,   



650  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

and if you’ve travelled it as well as I have and the member from 

Cypress Hills constituency, what you think of that road. And do 

you actually feel that that road is safe? Is it safe to travel on? 

And given the condition of the road, do you think you have 

enough warning signs? Do you have enough flags up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well it’s quite interesting. I don’t know 

where the member was, Mr. Chairman, when the member from 

Thunder Creek was asking similar questions, when he wanted 

all the highways in Thunder Creek to be fixed. And now we’re 

getting all the highways in Wood River. 

 

But I want to tell the member opposite that I have Mr. 

Stamatinos here, who is the executive director of preserve and 

operate, southern region. We have the province divided in three 

regions, Mr. Chairman — the southern region, the centre 

region, and a northern region. And we have a system of feeding 

in the information to the directors of each region. Certainly the 

directors stay in touch with the minister through the deputy 

minister, and so we are fed the information on road conditions 

across the province on a continuing basis. That’s why we were 

able to be ahead and in control and able to advise people in 

regards to the flooding in the south-west where you’re from. 

And certainly I appreciate that. 

 

So it’s almost virtually impossible to travel on every highway 

every week. But certainly with the way we have the department 

structured, certainly beneficial to keeping on top of the road 

information across the province. 

 

I guess it’s a matter of how much money the province has to put 

into roads. And I do know that the Liberal opposition would 

like us to spend more on roads as they would like to spend more 

on everything else. But where would you get it from? And I was 

thinking, well Mr. Melenchuk, I think, was suggesting we take 

it from health care, but I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan would like to take it from health care. 

 

We’re putting $30 million more this year. We’re spending as 

we can afford. We’ve committed $2.5 billion over the next 10 

years. And we’re going to have, along with a new transportation 

strategy, I think the best roads in the Prairies. And I’m looking 

forward to that date. Certainly I think it’s just around the corner. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You touched on 

so many things I barely know where to begin. I sense we’re 

going to be doing this for days. 

 

However I will make mention that you didn’t answer my 

question. But you opened up so many more questions we’ll 

have to come back to Highway 18 in a little while because I’ll 

want your opinion as to whether or not that’s safe. 

 

But you did mention about how you . . . and I’m going to say 

you, as in your department, because, you know, you’re at the 

head of the department and the buck stops with you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

But you made mention that in fact you were kept abreast and 

able to supply the people of this province early warning as far 

as any of the water or flood damage that were coming about. 

Yet in the House — what, a week ago? — not even . . . well 

about a week ago, I raised some concerns about a bridge that 

was out in the community of Ponteix where in fact there was an 

ambulance with two attendants that got rather roughed up in the 

vehicle, and there was also another vehicle that was almost 

totalled off by hitting this bridge, and there were no warning 

signs. 

 

Now if you are so up to speed on the condition of the highways 

and bridges in the province . . . and of course you knew there 

was flooding, I mean Sask Water had to have told you that we 

had 200, 250 per cent more snowfall than average. It’s not like 

the government didn’t know there was a problem coming, yet 

no flags, no warning, and no one out there to keep an eye to see 

what was going to happen. 

 

Now can you tell me by what means, because perhaps I’m just 

missing that point you’re making, by what means did you warn 

the people in Ponteix to look out for that bridge? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. First I 

want to answer some of the question on Highway 18 since I 

overlooked it in my response earlier. Highway 18 is a very 

important road to the people of Saskatchewan; there’s no 

question about it. 

 

But you have a priority list, and a lot of it deals with traffic 

count. And I know that the traffic count on Highway 18 is 80 

vehicles per day, and I know that those 80 vehicles per day need 

a decent road, and there’s no question about it. But we have 

highways in this province, Mr. Chairman, that has 8,000 

vehicles a day, and so you have to sort of judge with your 

limited finances which one will come first. And so we 

understand the concerns with Highway 18, but you know you 

just have to priorize the need as best you can. 

 

In regards to the bridge at Ponteix, certainly we lost the bridge 

there. Signs were put up as soon we were able to get there. A 

flood can happen very quickly, and certainly as soon as the 

crew were able to, certainly looked after it, and the bridge was 

put back into service within a week, I believe, Mr. Chairman. 

So the crew did a very, very good job in reacting to the 

problem. 

 

But people in the province understand, I mean, that if there is a 

flood, if there is an act of God that happens very, very quickly, 

a bridge goes out or something like that, you can, you know, 

react as quick as you can, but you can’t prevent the bridge from 

going out. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I’ll allow you to finish what 

I think you should have answered because in your earlier 

response you had said, to me, that in fact the people were well 

aware of the road conditions prior to the flood and you had 

aided them in, I guess knowing the highway conditions prior to 

the flood. 

 

What my question was: can you tell us what preventative   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

measures you took — or you and your department took — to 

ensure that no damage would happen when people were 

crossing these bridges? You of course knew very well — and I 

sensed that by what was in your letter to me regarding the 

situation of highways — you knew what the condition was like 

so what did you do? How do you warn the people about this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well to the member opposite, you know 

to let people know prior to a flood that a bridge is going to be 

washed out is a little bit difficult. I haven’t any experience with 

the spiritual world yet so I’m not sure if I could do that. But 

certainly I had lots of opportunity during question period to 

allow people to know highway hot line numbers, for an 

example, so people could phone in about information regarding 

the flood. But that was during and not prior because we had no 

knowledge of some of the flooding that would occur prior to it 

happening. 

 

We did not know that the flood would take the bridge out. And 

so when we reacted to the bridge going out we did that very 

quickly, and with dispatch, and I was very pleased with how the 

crews reacted to the situation. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, did you have some sense 

that the bridges in Moose Jaw, for an example, were going to be 

taken out by the ice and such, or some of the other bridges or 

other communities that were affected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The Department of Highways has a 

contingency plan. We’d certainly be prepared to share that with 

you if you have any spare time. The contingency plan is set 

with concern about flooding; however if the temperature shoots 

up immediately or there is, you know, some . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  An ice jam. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Ice jams might be an example. Thank 

you to the member of the third party. Those things will play a 

role in a flood situation. It may even play a role in the 

destruction of a bridge. 

 

So I believe that we have a good contingency plan. We’re ready 

for the circumstances. We can’t be ready for all circumstances 

— I wished we could. And I think the crew handled it quite 

well. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the question had to do with 

did you know of other bridges in other communities that were 

going to be taken out by flood waters? It’s a simple yes or no. 

Either you knew or you didn’t. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly we’d never know if there’s 

another bridge that’s going to be washed out. I mean you 

prepare for road detours in case of flooding here or whatever, 

but you don’t know if a bridge is going to go out. The 

department has . . . You anticipate possible flooding conditions, 

but you can’t be prepared for everything. I mean you just don’t 

know if it’s going to happen or not. 

 

We have a Crown corporation that looks at the water situation, 

and I’m going to give you the Internet number for Sask Water 

so that if you run into this situation again, you could probably 

just contact this: www.saskwater com — dot com, I guess it is, 

sorry — www.saskwater.com. 

 

But Sask Water also has a strategy in regards to flooding, and 

so we try and work together in a coordinated approach to 

protect the people of Saskatchewan as best we can. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well just a few comments I guess, from 

your answer. Firstly, is there something better than perhaps an 

Internet address where people could get warned whether bridges 

or highways are washed out? I don’t think everyone’s up and 

running on the Internet yet. 

 

But also the phone number that you gave to this House in 

questions a week ago, I had people phone that number and 

couldn’t get through on that. So I’ll warn you your phone line 

isn’t much more use than your Internet address. 

 

But getting back to the bridges, Mr. Minister, and obviously 

you’re not going to answer the question, and the reason I ask it 

is not to try and put you or your department on the spot. And 

clearly I’m not putting the crews out there in a spot either, 

because everyone knows in this province the cut-backs that 

have occurred in rural Saskatchewan in your department and 

service depots out there. In fact the . . . well I think it was two 

years ago it became quite a problem for you when the crews had 

quite a tough time getting rid of the snow and ice in this 

province because you had cut back, and I would hate to guess 

how many it was, a dozen or perhaps 20 depots — which leads 

me to another question which I’ll put quickly so your officials 

can perhaps pull out whatever paper they need. 

 

But I would like to see the number of depots that we have today 

versus last year and the year prior to that; so I can see sort of 

what’s happened over the last three years as for service depots, 

number of employees at each depot, whether it’s up or down, 

and kilometres that they’re having to travel. But of course we’re 

getting way off the track of where I wanted to go. 

 

The question is, Mr. Minister, on the bridges and as far as their 

getting washed out or not, do you feel you have enough money 

allocated to take care of these kind of disasters and problems? 

And are you comfortable that it’s not the response time that 

people are worried about. You were talking about how well 

your department took care of the situation after the bridge is 

gone. Well that’s like saying we hurried over to the barn and 

closed that door, and we almost saved a horse. 

 

What we want to know is what can you do to help prevent . . . 

even if it’s a barricade across a road, having your department 

people there before the bridge is gone. What happened is that 

there was a lady that had a very young boy, taking her son to 

school in Ponteix. And there could have been a serious accident 

here, Mr. Minister, so really that’s all I’m getting at. Do you 

feel you have enough money to ensure the safety of these 

people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well here we go again. More money. 

More money for this. More money for that. I think the Liberals 

think it grows on trees. I’m not sure, but I think they think   



652  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

money grows on trees. I think what they’re saying, Mr. 

Chairman, is that really it would be fine for us to go into a 

deficit position and in doing so increase the debt of the province 

and in doing so increase the amount of interest we have to pay 

on the debts. We have less money for bridges in the end result. 

 

Well we’re not prepared to do that, Mr. Chairman. Whether we 

have enough for bridges or not I don’t know. We have a budget. 

Hopefully it will be enough. That’s all we can do, is hope. If it 

isn’t enough, we’ll have to take some from some other place 

and put it into bridges. That’s what we do when we manage the 

Department of Highways, and I wish the member opposite 

could understand that but he . . . 

 

I get a charge out of his concern over is there enough money for 

bridges when he didn’t say a word about his Liberals in Ottawa 

when they decided that the railways could abandon rail lines — 

not one word. And that’s millions of dollars to producers in the 

province, millions of dollars of road damage to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Not one word. 

 

But is there enough for the Ponteix bridge? Yes there will be 

enough for Ponteix bridge, if we have to take it from 

somewhere else. Hopefully it’s not from the road that the 

member from Thunder Creek wants us to build, but if we have 

to take money from somewhere to put into the Ponteix bridge, 

we will. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I think you and I are backing 

up further rather than making any progress here tonight. So I 

guess to get to the point that you’re trying to make . . . And 

you’re being more than political here tonight, Mr. Minister, and 

if you continue, I’ll enjoy it. But you’re going to spend a long 

time here. 

 

So you talk about getting a charge out of, you know, whether 

we’re spending enough money or not, and I guess you find this 

humorous. Frankly I don’t, because my concern is whether or 

not you view the debt or the need for more money for highways 

and bridges in the province . . . is that more of a concern to you 

than the life of a young child? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It’s getting pretty low, Mr. Chairman, 

when we get those kinds of questions, you know. He knows the 

answer to that. I don’t have to answer him. He knows the 

answer to that. 

 

What I’m wondering about the member opposite is about his 

lack of pressing the Liberal government in Ottawa for a little bit 

extra for the province of Saskatchewan. That would allow us to 

certainly do a lot more to roads and bridges elsewhere in the 

province. If the federal government would help us with the 

national highways program — all provinces, not just 

Saskatchewan — just to share with us like they do in the United 

States, like they do in other industrialized countries, certainly 

would free up some other money that we could use on other 

roads and bridges. So I would like the member to certainly 

participate with us in that request. And I do know that I believe 

he did write in fact to his federal member, which I appreciate, 

and I wish that other members from his side of the House 

would do the same. It certainly would help us. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, just so I guess we both get it 

out on the record, you’re hoping that there’s a national 

transportation plan, highway plan. So do I. So do we. 

 

But now that that’s behind us and we’re all on the same page — 

we all agree we need some national money to help with 

highways — that doesn’t take you off the hook, Mr. Minister, 

because with your department, you over the next 10 years will 

have a three and a half, perhaps a four and a half billion dollar 

surplus that’s over and above what you spend on highways in 

this province, highways and bridges, compared to what you 

bring in from fuel tax and motor vehicle licensing fees. So we 

can talk . . . and I know tomorrow you have a motion coming 

forward dealing with national transportation plan. I think it’s 

great. I’m going to be here to speak to it and support it, let me 

tell you up front. Well let’s put that federal issue behind us 

because I think you’re going to find that we’re all on the same 

page here. 

 

But what I have to know from you is do you feel that the 

highways that are under your control are safe for the travelling 

public? And we can take it either bridge by bridge and highway 

by highway, or we can talk in more general terms. Now do you 

feel, Mr. Minister, that the highways in Saskatchewan are safe? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to tell the member opposite 

that the $30 million extra that this government committed to 

roads this year, the $2.5 billion over the next 10 years, is a real 

commitment to roads in this province, and that includes safety, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

But on the other hand, we have a federal government that does 

not share — a federal Liberal government — that doesn’t share 

in a national highways network program and a national 

highways program. They receive a lot of money in fuel tax, and 

I know that they can’t dedicate taxes because dedicating taxes 

just does not work, but they could certainly spend a lot more. 

The member says we should dedicate our fuel tax to roads, so 

that would be spending another $100 million on roads. Great, I 

like that idea. But where would we get that $100 million, Mr. 

Chairman? I don’t think he will tell us. The Liberal government 

has a real . . . how do I say that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Lack of commitment. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Is it a lack of commitment? Is that the 

word? I’m not sure if that’s the word, but they have all these 

wonderful ideas that need all this money. But they never can 

tell us exactly where that money is going to come from. Is it 

going to come from health care like Mr. Melenchuk says or is it 

going to come from somewhere else? Where is the $100 million 

going to come from to put into roads? I don’t know. 

 

We’re doing it in the balanced approach. Whatever little extra 

cash we have, we’re paying down the debt. We’re giving some 

tax breaks — and you notice that the sales tax dropped from 9 

per cent to 7 per cent. And we’re also adding into service   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

enhancements like roads — $30 million this year and $2.5 

billion over the next 10 years. That’s a real commitment. And 

we will see, certainly, safety improvements to our roads. We’ll 

see better roads in the province over time. And it’s not going to 

happen overnight. I may as well be very clear with you now. 

It’s a first step, and it will happen, but it will take time. The 

damages were not caused overnight; they took time to happen. 

 

Certainly with the Liberals in Ottawa, their decisions to allow 

the railways to abandon line — grain-dependent branch lines — 

is certainly going to have an effect. But nevertheless it’s a start 

and it’s a good start. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I guess we’ll have to stay on 

that federal issue for a little while longer. I was hoping you 

would sort of put that to rest since I thought we were on the 

same page. But in fact . . . now this is a document I have, 

December 31, 1996, the provincial taxes 15 cents a litre; federal 

taxes 14 cents a litre. So just to further your point — hey, we 

agree. They pull in a fair amount of money out of this province 

in fuel tax. But, Mr. Minister, you do also. In fact you pull in 

more than the federal government in fuel taxes according to this 

Petroleum Communication Foundation report. 

 

So let’s talk about your share. I agree that once, Mr. Minister, 

the federal government gets their financial house in order the 

way that Saskatchewan now has their financial house in order 

— and I believe that will take another two, three years and 

perhaps we’ll hit some balanced budgets — I will be at the head 

of the line. And I’ll ask you to be with me to ask the federal 

government to put in a good deal more of the fuel taxes they 

collect from Saskatchewan motorists back into our highway 

system. 

 

Now I think we’ve went over that plenty, Mr. Minister. I want 

to talk about the money that you collect. Now you’re collecting 

. . . well let’s have a look here. Canadian Automobile 

Association research study that was, I guess last July — you’re 

collecting in the neighbourhood, I think it’s 400, $430 million 

in this fiscal year. And you’re going to spend $168 million 

back. 

 

Now you can say, well where are we going to get the money 

from? Well I see $262 million that you’re going to have a 

surplus this year alone on fuel taxes. Now I wish we could get 

that extra money from the federal government now. But the 

people of this province were more than willing to allow your 

government time to get your fiscal house in order before they 

started asking for things that perhaps could be put down a year 

or two. They’ve done that. Now we have to allow that for the 

federal government as well, I think. That’s only fair. Do you not 

think that, Mr. Minister, that it would be only fair to give them 

exactly what you people asked for and received? 

 

So what are we going to do then with the surplus money, the 

262 million that you have in one year? You talk about some $30 

million increase. That’s 10 per cent of your surplus. How can 

you sit there and say that you can’t go ahead on your own as a 

government, and fix any of the highways — fix, put in proper 

bridges and such — unless there’s a national transportation 

plan, a national highway plan. 

Hey, we’re all going to agree there’s got to be one at some 

point. But what about all those hundreds of millions of dollars 

that you have, that you and your department should have. We’re 

not saying take it out of Health — take it out of the fuel taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m sure glad the member opposite 

isn’t the Finance minister, Mr. Chairman, because we would 

certainly be in big trouble. 

 

First of all I think that — and I’ll disagree with the numbers that 

the Canadian Automobile Association has set before you — and 

I think if you checked with the Department of Finance you 

would find that we collect a little more than $300 million, and 

we’re spending this year $198 million on roads. But that’s 

neither here nor there. The federal government collects, I 

believe in the neighbourhood of $4 billion in fuel tax, spends 

little to none on roads, and that’s the problem, Mr. Chairman. 

That’s a major problem. 

 

Canada spends probably about 6 per cent of the cost of the 

highways network across Canada or puts that kind of money 

into roads. The next industrialized country that puts, I guess as 

little dollars, or few dollars in is the United States, but that’s 

about 40 per cent. They cover 40 per cent of their national 

highways network. And it would certainly be nice if we had 

some kind of an arrangement like that. 

 

But I want to tell the member opposite, with or without the 

federal government, we are going to have good highways in the 

province of Saskatchewan. All we’re saying is that if the federal 

government did participate in a national highways program, that 

it would speed up the process. We committed $2.5 billion in 

this last budget and we’re going to use that $2.5 billion over the 

next 10 years to have good roads in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But it would certainly be helpful and it would be 

responsible for the federal government to participate with us. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I guess we’re probably 

going to finish out this evening on just the federal financing 

argument. And it’s one you’re not going to win because, Mr. 

Minister, other provinces are able to keep their highways in, I 

guess, near to excellent condition. And why? Because they 

spend . . . well I think in Manitoba it’s up around 90 per cent of 

their fuel taxes and motor vehicle licence fees back into their 

highway system. And you’re sitting somewhere around 32 to 34 

per cent. And Alberta, we all know if you go across the border 

into Alberta the highway systems are so much better, so much 

better. 

 

Well you can give me the argument about how many more 

miles we have, but, Mr. Minister, you don’t have any highways 

to brag about — not one. I mean if you had one or two 

highways, we could say yes, you got thousands of miles of 

highway and sure we can’t have them all nice. But can’t you 

have one highway proper? I can show you all kinds of pothole 

patrol calls that we’ve had from people that travel No. 1 

Highway. Ambulance drivers — we’ve probably had a half a 

dozen calls from ambulance drivers in regards to Highway No. 

1. 

 

  



654  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

You have nothing that you can be proud of. And Mr. Minister, 

it’s only because while you are making some federal argument 

that they don’t put enough money into it, what happened to the 

other provinces? They are in debt. In fact Saskatchewan was 

leading the way as far as having balanced budgets. The others 

aren’t up to speed yet. I mean your Finance minister makes that 

argument continuously. So they should be the ones at 32 per 

cent of their fuel taxes into their highways, and you should be at 

90 per cent. So what’s the problem, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, that’s exactly right; somebody 

mentioned, well where do you answer that question, and I’m 

not sure. 

 

I do want to mention, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

mentioned the pothole patrol; that’s a phone number that 

they’ve set up for people to call in. And I had asked the member 

opposite if he could forward any calls that he would receive so 

that we as a department could look at some of the concerns that 

people had. I’ve received five, Mr. Chairman. I’ve received five 

from the members opposite. Now I’m not sure if that’s all the 

calls they have; I would presume so. But that’s what I received, 

five. 

 

So if they’re not interested in . . . If they’re just playing politics 

with this hot line, well they should tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that. If they’re going to in fact be helpful, send us 

over the information; that would be very helpful. Then we could 

answer those letters if in fact there’s an address, and carry on 

like that. So we would appreciate to get those names. 

 

I notice that the member opposite criticizes us. You know, we 

never do enough. That’s exactly the Liberal lines. We never do 

enough. It doesn’t matter if it’s health care or education or 

social programs or highways — we never do enough. 

 

But he, on the other hand, has a federal government that is 

allowing the CN (Canadian National) and CP (Canadian 

Pacific) to close down branch lines in the province as they wish. 

Don’t hear a word; don’t hear a word, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

That’s going to cause more damage to the roads than anything 

else we’ve seen in the near past. But we don’t hear a word, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s going to cost millions and millions of dollars for 

producers — extra costs in getting their product to market. It’s 

going to cost municipalities millions of dollars on damages to 

municipal roads. It’s going to cause millions of dollars to thin 

membrane surfaced highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 

That’s okay because it’s a Liberal government in Ottawa that’s 

doing it. 

 

Well we would like the member opposite to work with us, use 

this 30 million extra dollars that we have this year as wisely as 

we can; the $2.5 billion that we have over the next 10 years to 

upgrade our roads; to work with area transportation committees; 

to work with our short-line advisory unit so we can set up 

short-lines or help the communities set up short-lines where 

appropriate — where they’re economically viable — to work 

with us to find solutions to the problem instead of complaining 

that there’s not enough for this and not enough for 

that; join with us. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well we’re 

trying to join with you as best we can but every time I ask a 

highways question you want to answer it with a federal 

government answer, and turn it into short-line rail. I don’t know 

how you moved from, all the way from the number of potholes 

on Highway 18 all the way into short-line rail and the federal 

government. 

 

As far as the calls that we have gotten from the pothole patrol 

hot line, while you were speaking I’ve asked a page to 

photocopy . . . there would probably be a couple hundred. And 

we have more. I mean I have several letters here that I have yet 

to open and read. But I think a couple hundred will keep you 

busy for a few days. But I guess . . . which falls into another 

question. 

 

I raised in the House about a week ago, some highways on three 

or four of the callers that had phoned into the pothole patrol hot 

line, and I want to know if you’ve responded, if you went and 

had your department look at those highways, or are you just 

wanting to have me send over a bunch of documents and you’re 

never going to follow up on them anyways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for that last 

statement, because I did look at the five that I received, but 

there was no return address, just a name. And so I would 

appreciate the member opposite’s help in determining where the 

people are from. And I certainly would be pleased to answer 

those people’s concerns. So I may want to send these back and 

then you could maybe fill me in with the address, and then 

certainly we’d be happy to answer them. 

 

But I wonder, when did you get these 200 complaints? I mean 

you started the highway hot line when? — probably early 

March, and we’re now into April. I would have thought that we 

would have been able receive them much earlier so we could 

have looked at the concerns quicker in case some of those 

concerns were a matter that needed immediate attention. 

 

But we will certainly take a look at them, yes. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I’m starting to enjoy your 

answers. I tell you, it doesn’t look good. Because you’re saying, 

well if you just had more you would look into the problem 

more. And yet when I asked you a little while ago about the 

safety of a young boy going to school in the community of 

Ponteix and having a bridge washed out, you can’t even take 

care of a bridge, let alone, you know, dealing with individual 

callers. 

 

And why is it . . . you know many of those pages that you’re 

going to get later this evening aren’t going to have names, 

addresses, and phone numbers on there. I’m not asking you to 

phone the people back. Their messages are on the sheet. You 

will see what their comments are. 

 

It’s not that you’re going to give comfort to the people of the   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

province because the Highways minister phoned them up and 

says, don’t worry, I know the highway is bad but, you know, I 

gave you a call. It’s not the call they want — it’s the highway. 

 

Now it’s not important whether you had their name. Did you or 

did you not know which highway they were talking about and 

how many kilometres? Isn’t that what’s important to you, Mr. 

Minister? Not just an individual’s concern but, you know, all of 

Saskatchewan people that travel that road? Isn’t that what’s 

important? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, Mr. Chairman, one thing that the 

people of Saskatchewan don’t want is another deficit and 

another debt and high interest bills. And I know that they are 

watching tonight and they’re seeing the Liberal government say 

we want more for this road and we want more for the roads in 

Thunder Creek and we want more for the roads in Wood River. 

 

And I’m not sure which other MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) is going to get up next. Maybe — I’m not sure — 

maybe it’s the member from Melville that’s going to get up and 

ask for more roads or maybe the member from Melfort is going 

to ask for all new roads in his constituency. 

 

But the people that are watching know that that’s impossible. 

They know that the government has to be frugal in their 

spending and they have to do as best they can. And that’s 

exactly what this government on this side of the House is doing, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you know I don’t think 

you’ve given the opposition due credit in being somewhat 

sympathetic to your problems if in fact cabinet and the Premier 

won’t give you what I hope you’re asking for, is more money 

for your department. 

 

Now I think we’ve been more than tolerant because we’ve 

actually been asking not that you go out immediately and fix all 

the roads. We know. We’re realistic. The people of 

Saskatchewan are realistic. They’re not saying go out and fix 

Highway 18 and re-pave it and, you know, go overboard, but 

they are wondering if your department is as broke as you claim 

we are. Do you or do you not have enough money for warning 

flags? Do you have enough for that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Chairman, I want to remind the 

member opposite that it happened that the Department of 

Highways got the largest increase this year of any of the 

departments — $30 million for our department. Certainly we 

would have liked more. I mean it would always be nice. But 

we’re realistic and the $30 million is certainly going to be good 

because we’re going to be — it’s step one — we’re going to be 

able to put that money into preserving the existing 

infrastructure; so that in years to come we will have savings 

because the highway will now be in a preserved situation that 

we can spend money on new construction and in other places. 

 

And so it’s step one. Combine that with a new strategy, looking 

at area transportation committees, looking at transportation 

partnerships with the private sector, looking at the possibility of 

designated roads and a lot of other things, spending the dollars 

as wisely as we can, we will get somewhere. If we had the 

federal government to participate with us with a national 

highways program, it would just maybe put us over the edge 

and it would be a great benefit. We haven’t got that at this point 

in time. We’ll continue to fight for that but we’ll also continue 

to improve the roads as best we can under the circumstances. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, let’s deal with that 30 

million that you keep referring to. Are you able — and I’m sure 

you are, so this isn’t a political question for you at all —are you 

able to supply us with the document as to what exact projects 

the 30 million is going to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We can certainly send you over a list, if 

that’s what you would like, on the projects that are going to be 

done. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, is this list that you’re 

talking about that’s over and above the list of highways and 

priority projects that you would have had ongoing without the 

extra 30 million? Correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  If you look at the summary of expense, 

administration is $4.8 million; accommodation and central 

services, $6.6 million; preservation and operation of the 

transportation system — and I should explain preservation a bit 

to the member opposite; it also includes recapping of roads for 

an example, that’s included in preservation — 125 million; 

construction of the transportation system — this is in new 

capital — $56 million; logistics, planning and compliance, $5.9 

million, for a total of $198.811 million. And that’s our budget 

for this year, including the extra $30 million that we’re 

receiving. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well I’m glad you set that out, Mr. 

Minister, because you know I think the people watching this 

evening were under the assumption that you were working with 

a certain budget, and then you added an extra 30 million for 

specific highway projects. But when you look at it really, 

what’s going to go into the preservation of highways is a much 

smaller number. Correct? Well it’s about 16 million. 

 

So then if you made that decision at the last moment, do you 

have any list of projects that you added on for this upcoming 

year that you didn’t have before, you know? And I can only 

say, we’re working off a priority list. So which projects did you 

think you had to add on at the last moment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The additional $17 million in 

preservation actually goes across the province. It helps roads 

everywhere, not just in Thunder Creek or in Wood River but all 

across the province. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, do you feel that your . . . 

and I guess it was your own words. You’d called this a 

preservation budget. I happened to see that newscast one night, 

and I was wondering, does that then mean that all the highways 

that are in need of being preserved before they fall completely 

apart . . . 

  



656  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

Will that cover all the highways? Or are we still working on just 

a priorized list and forget about all those other highways that a 

moment ago you said had to be preserved so that some point in 

the future you can build some new ones? Or are you accepting 

the fact that if you let most of these other highways go, that that 

in itself is a debt, as the member from Thunder Creek raised a 

while ago. It’s no different than having a debt at the bank if in 

fact you’re going to have to pick up that amount of money later. 

Or you wouldn’t have to I guess, if you’re of the view that you 

don’t have to worry about the safety of Saskatchewan motorists 

and are not going to do anything with those highways. So which 

is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Chairman, here we go again. You 

know, we need more money yet. We’ve got to fix all the roads 

at once. Well the people of Saskatchewan know that that’s not 

possible. We have a priorized list. The preservation money is 

spent to preserve roads so they do not deteriorate into a state 

that’s going to be very costly to fix in the future. When we have 

enough roads in the preserved state we certainly will be saving 

money. We’ll be able to put into new construction and to other 

projects. But it’s a matter of planning and using the money as 

wisely as possible. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So then, Mr. Minister, I’m going to 

assume by your answers that once a highway reaches a certain 

state of disrepair you have to fix it, am I right? Your 

department’s going to take some action, correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  If you were here a little while ago — 

and I’m not sure if you were — but the province is broken 

down into three areas: the north, the central, and the south. And 

the priorization of the roads that need repair are set by the 

department staff in those regions and then a comprehensive list 

is developed. Certainly we can’t fix all the roads immediately, 

because you know you have to understand that the federal 

government’s decision to allow the railways to abandon lines 

just happened not too long ago; so the lines are just being 

abandoned and the effect on the roads are just happening now. 

So we can’t do that. 

 

But I guess my question would be to the member opposite, how 

much would you spend on roads — 200 million, 250 million, 

400 million, 10 million? I don’t know. You know I mean 30 

million is certainly a good start; $2.5 billion over 10 years is an 

excellent commitment. 

 

But I don’t know what the member opposite would spend and 

where he would get the money to spend the amount he would 

like to spend. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I think I could answer that 

even though you’re the one who’s to answer the questions 

tonight. But I think, as Highways minister, I would have some 

feeling that you would spend the required amount to ensure that 

there’s safety on Saskatchewan highways for Saskatchewan 

school kids, for our sick and our elderly that are now having to 

go further for their health care needs. Don’t you think that it’s 

hard to put a number on there? You just get at the job at hand. 

 

Now you’re going to say, well where do you get the money 

from. Well that’s up to your Finance minister, to let us know 

which account she wants to pull it out of, which rainy-day 

account or election-day account. Because she’s got hundreds of 

millions of dollars by the sounds of it stuck away in Liquor 

Board accounts, and who knows. 

 

But don’t you feel it’s more important, Mr. Minister, that we 

stop sort of the priorization in the sense that you do it where 

you’re looking at this highway has 800 cars a day versus what 

was it, Mr. Member from Cypress Hills — 80? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Eighty. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Eighty cars a day on Highway No. 18, and 

that’s one of the stretches . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Hey, 

I’ll follow up on your theme. That’s one of the stretches where 

it’s just been announced that there’s going to be a branch line 

pulled. 

 

So don’t you think that should jump up to number one position 

on your priorized list? Or do we then say, well our priorization 

is more on or just on the population for the people using the 

highway. And it has nothing to do with if you’re in a remote, 

rural area you don’t deserve the same level of safety as if you 

are, well driving the Ring Road. Is that how you do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well that was quite an interesting 

statement. First of all he says you shouldn’t have a budget for 

roads. You shouldn’t have a budget for roads. Just go and do it. 

Well that’s pretty interesting. No priority. Don’t priorize 

anything. Just go and spend whatever road needs fixing. Just go 

and do it. So I would ask the member opposite, would he spend 

200 million or 400 million or 800 million this year? And if so, 

where would he get it? 

 

He suggests Highway No. 18. I wonder if the member opposite 

would . . . maybe he would twin No. 18. It does have 80 

vehicles a day. Maybe he would twin that highway. I’m not 

sure. That’s why we’ve invested in area planning committees. 

And the south-west has an area planning committee to priorize 

their road needs: to take a look at the possibility of short-lines, 

to take a look at the possibility of elevator consolidation and the 

effect, to take a look at the federal Liberals’ decision to allow 

the railways to abandon branch lines and what effect is that 

going to have on the south-west. 

 

That’s why we’re investing in grass roots decision-making at 

the local level; so that they can say and help us priorize the 

needs in that particular area because money does not grow on 

trees, and the people of Saskatchewan know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well by your answer then, Mr. Minister, I 

can only assume that safety isn’t the number one issue for you 

as Highways minister. Otherwise, well you wouldn’t be trying 

to belittle those people that live in the Frontier-Claydon area by 

talking about twinning their highway. No one is asking you to 

go extremes. 



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

What we’re asking you is if you feel that you should be out 

there with your highway crews and making sure that the road is 

safe. And you know as well as I do it’s not safe today. The RMs 

in that area, the RMs and communities in that area were going 

to, I guess, block the highway. They’re trying to make sure that 

whatever they have to travel on is safe for their school kids and 

their mothers and fathers. And I can go on and on. 

 

But you’re not at that same level. You want to talk about strictly 

population and the safety of certain rural people. Well it just 

isn’t, it just isn’t up on your calendar, Mr. Minister. 

 

And there again, some of your colleagues are heckling, well 

what would we spend. It’s not wide open. But surely, Mr. 

Minister, you’re going into these cabinet meetings, and armed 

the way we are with some of the desperate people, the desperate 

situations that people deal with, and saying no, $30 million isn’t 

going to do it. And instead of having a little fund set away so 

that you can win an election in a couple of years or use it to try 

and buy an election, perhaps the safety of somebody . . . And 

I’m using Highway No. 18 because it’s not a well-travelled 

route, Mr. Minister. I’m using that highway because if you’re 

not prepared to stick up for the people there and make sure that 

they have safety, well where do you draw that line? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well it’s interesting. The member 

accuses us of buying an election. I mean when we . . . we told 

the people when we could afford a sales tax reduction, we 

would give it to them. And we did. And not on election year, 

Mr. Chairman. But we did it two years before an election, two 

and a half years — I don’t know, whenever the Premier decides 

to call the election. But we could afford it now and so we did it 

now. 

 

But it’s going to be interesting because the federal Liberals are 

going to call an election very shortly, maybe within the next 

few weeks here. And I’m wondering, maybe the member 

opposite would help me, because I think if we really pushed 

hard now, you know, maybe there’s a chance on a national 

highways program before the federal election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I will send across quite a 

stack of these pothole patrol calls, and like I say, we’re not 

asking for anything out of the ordinary. I don’t expect you 

personally to get on the phone and phone all these people but if 

. . . could we at least have your assurance that you will look and 

see what highways are affected? 

 

And we don’t have to try and belittle the people that phone in 

with their concerns, but take a look at the highways and see if in 

fact their concerns are legitimate. And I think you and I both 

could safely say, yes they are, because you and I both travel the 

province a fair amount and know the problems out there. But 

perhaps what’s needed are warning signs in some locations, 

flags in other locations, you know, maybe just a load of gravel 

here or there. 

 

One of these callers in fact told me of an incident where he was 

following a Department of Highways truck, a tandem unit filled 

with gravel, and they came across a pothole — it’ll be in here 

so you’ll read it yourself — came across a pothole that was the 

width of the road and it was long enough that when the tandem 

truck drove into it, the entire truck fit in the pothole. So he 

stopped his vehicle, he stopped his vehicle thinking that, well 

he’s going to dump the gravel and once this is level I’ll go 

through. But he went out the other end and went on. I mean I 

guess there was bigger ones to deal with. 

 

I’m going to send these across, and I guess if you want this kind 

of reporting from us, then I’m going to assume that what you 

will supply back is a report on the condition of these highways. 

I don’t think that’s out of, out of — in fact, I’ll give you more 

here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I still have to go 

through some of these myself but I’m just saying that he can 

start with a hundred or two and perhaps will get some reporting 

back, as you know as well as I, Mr. Minister, how concerned 

you are about reports. 

 

So could we get that say in a week? If these highways are in the 

disastrous condition that the people say they are, then I know 

you’re going to take immediate action. And is a week too short 

a period for you to reply? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to tell the member opposite 

I really appreciate that, because this information is certainly 

helpful. Whenever I go out in the country and talk to people, I 

ask them to please forward their concerns and ideas to me, and I 

really appreciate that. Too bad they couldn’t have forwarded 

them a lot sooner, but I will certainly do our best to answer to 

those concerns. So I want to thank the member opposite. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, and I know you would like 

to have the people believe that it’s just, you know, our 

opposition that’s got concerns about highways, and somehow 

we’re asking for something that’s unfair, that we would ask for 

highways in Saskatchewan to be repaired, even though some of 

those calls that you will go through you will notice the remarks 

are, my relatives don’t visit Saskatchewan any longer because 

they were afraid of, you know injury to the vehicle and motor. 

 

Well the members laugh, but it’s not us writing that down. So 

perhaps the member who is doing the heckling would like to 

help the Highways minister go through the list and phone them 

back. I don’t know how they vote, nor do I care, but they are 

concerned people. So you pick up the phone and you see if you 

can’t answer some of their concerns. 

 

And you know what else is interesting? It’s not just the people 

out there, the non-partisan type that are concerned about your 

highway conditions, because I have a copy of an article that was 

in The Western Producer some time ago, “Delegate Blasts 

Snow Policy.” I’m going to quote from it here: 

 

The NDP government got it in the ear from one of their 

own party members for waiting too long to clear 

treacherous highways after snowstorms. 

 

And I could go on and on. It talks about who it is and how 

angry they were. And in fact it goes on to say that MLAs and 

cabinet ministers made sure that the debate did not reach the   



658  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

floor. 

 

Oh you can say, well it’s the Liberal opposition that’s raising 

these concerns. I don’t think you’re even dealing with it at the 

party level, Mr. Minister. And perhaps would you like a copy of 

this as a refresher? If you do, you raise your hand and I’ll get it 

copied for you. 

 

Back to an earlier question, Mr. Minister. Through freedom of 

information, the member from Thunder Creek received . . . oh 

where is it here. Well it’s just about 6,585 warning flags in the 

’95-96 fiscal year to cover, I guess, the problems that you’re 

having in your highways. So would you be able to give us — 

and then perhaps your officials have this at hand — how many 

warning flags are ordered for this year and upcoming years? 

 

And are they enough? Do you have enough? Do you feel that 

you have enough flags to cover the highways in this province 

that are in terrible shape? Because if you do have enough, then I 

don’t need the pothole patrol ones to tell you if the highways 

that I’ve been on recently, where it cost me a wheel alignment 

only last week . . . and there’s no flags on the highway let alone 

near that bump. So could you at least answer, do you have 

enough flags if you’re think you’re too broke for . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I think he’s anxious to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well our spring break-up is just around 

the corner, Mr. Chairman. We had a lot of flooding in the 

south-west. Certainly needed a lot of signs and we do every 

year in the province of Saskatchewan. Probably in every 

province, I haven’t checked. But we, I would suspect, have 

enough flags to mark the situations that are going to develop on 

our highways this spring. And it’s very important because the 

travelling public need to know exactly where the tough spots 

are. 

 

They realize that the highways are going to break up some in 

spring. They realize that the federal government’s allowed the 

railways to abandon branch lines and that’s going to have a lot 

of pressure on a lot of our thin membrane surface roads. 

They’re going to break up, Mr. Chairman, and we’re going to 

have to mark those spots until we can get at them to fix it. So 

we expect we have enough signs, and we know it’s very 

important to advise the general public to the best of our ability 

on the tough spots in the roads. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Is there, is there . . . Do you have like a 

guideline or a policy in your department that would say a 

pothole of a certain size warrants a flag? How do we know that 

. . . what we’re facing? If we see one of those little a . . . well 

they’re often mistaken for election, New Democrat election 

signs, much smaller, those little orange road signs for danger. 

What will the people expect if they see one coming up, 

especially when they’ve probably just come across 200 miles of 

highway where’re they’re hitting things that are 9 and 10 inches 

deep? So what would be the policy for putting up a flag? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I would say that they’re red flags, 

Mr. Chairman, because we’re following the “red book” — the 

federal Liberals’ “red book” — and maybe we’re just not . . . 

there is not really a pothole here, we’re just putting up a red 

sign. 

 

But we need to mark the tough spots in the roads in the 

province of Saskatchewan. They do break up in the springtime 

quite often and the travelling public need to know where those 

spots are. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, do you say that you 

then have enough flags to mark all of the bad spots on the 

highway? Would you be able to give me some indication as to 

how many of these red, or I think they’re orange, flags you 

would have say on Highway 18 if it’s in as bad of condition as 

those people that live in that area say it is? You will have some 

sense as to how well marked it is. So do you have flags up at 

all? Or do you have enough? Or roughly how many? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly the tough spots in the roads 

this spring will be marked, as they normally are for the safe 

travelling of the public in Saskatchewan. They know that in 

Saskatchewan our weather is pretty tough stuff and that roads 

are going to break up. They expect roads to be fixed, but unlike 

the member opposite, they don’t expect them to all be fixed at 

once and all new roads and all twinned for millions and millions 

of dollars. They don’t expect that, Mr. Chairman. They’re 

reasonable. They want them repaired as best as can be within 

the financial circumstances that the province sees itself. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So then do I take that as, the answer as, 

yes there are several flags up at each and every dangerous spot 

on Highway No. 18 . . . is well marked? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, Mr. Chairman, if we could take 

some off No. 1, if the federal government would contribute to a 

national highways program, we could have more for Highway 

18, I’m sure. But what I want to tell the member opposite, that 

we have enough signs, and certainly as soon as it thaws enough 

and we’re able to, we will be putting up the flags where 

necessary. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  You see, Mr. Minister, our concern is this: 

we haven’t really got into the bad highway situation of the 

spring. So our spring thaws and the truck traffic haven’t . . . I’d 

say give it another two, three weeks and then we’ll have some 

real problems. And then we’ll have some pothole patrol letters 

to bring to you, because they’ll come in by the hundreds at that 

point. 

 

But you see, Mr. Minister, the problems that have come about 

and the calls that we’ve received weren’t due to damage this 

spring. That’s how you had the people of Saskatchewan enter 

into their winter driving. So, Mr. Minister, if you can’t take care 

of a few holes in the winter, how on earth do you expect to keep 

up with it in the spring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Our crews are ready and waiting, and 

we’re all hoping for spring. We’re not sure it’s ever going to 

come, but we think it will eventually. And we’re ready. 

 

And we know that there’s going to be a lot of pressure. The 

grain didn’t move that well this year. It seemed that the grain 

companies . . . or pardon me, the railway companies maybe   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

didn’t do as best they could on getting our grain to market. 

 

So what we’re going to see this year is likely a lot of early 

traffic to get their grain to market; so we’re going to see 

additional pressure on our roads. But we’re ready for that as 

best we can. And certainly I know that if there is a problem in 

the member’s area he will be notifying us — the department or 

myself — and we will get right on it. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, to prepare for the 

anticipated problems that you are going to receive in the next 

few weeks, can you give us some indication as to how many 

more staff you’re bringing on stream at the service depots for 

say the next few weeks for a period of time until the highways 

are in better shape? 

 

And can you give us some indication the extra amount of, you 

know, asphalt and things that . . . Well give us a, give us a sort 

of an idea what your plan is and how you’ve beefed up the 

entire system to handle what you anticipate is a real problem 

here coming up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the member asked how many 

additional employees we’ll have. Probably with the extra $30 

million in the department’s budget this year, likely there will be 

an additional 50 FTEs (full-time equivalents). We expect also, 

because of the added activity in the road building industry, that 

there will be as high as 240 full-time equivalents in the road 

building industry. So the announcement of the $30 million is 

going to be quite a boost to employment in the province as well. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, are you able to tell us the 

increase? How many more employees you will have? So we’ll 

know that with the increased truck traffic and all the things you 

talked of, that we’re going to be safe, that our highways are 

going to be taken care of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think that’s the same question as 

the other one. I’m not sure. But there will be 50 full-time 

equivalent employees within the department, an additional 50, 

and there will be about 240 full-time equivalents in the road 

building industry in the private sector for a total of nearly 300 

additional employees in roads and road building this year. And 

that’s quite a boost to employment in the province as well as 

great news for the roads. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I recognize you as 

well. 

 

Well, Minister, it’s nice to be able to have an opportunity to ask 

you some questions about the highways in our province. I was 

listening with some keen interest as you answered some of the 

questions to the member from the Liberal Party. Obviously our 

concerns are the same, but we may target some different areas. 

 

I did pick up from his last few questions a couple of things that 

I wondered about myself. In the conversation you were engaged 

in, with the numbers of people, have you any initiative to hire 

students with the new hiring programs that have been 

announced by the minister of secondary education? And I think 

he’s in charge anyway of the program for hiring students that 

will be coming out of school in the springtime — university 

students are coming out fairly quick now; high school students 

a little later — those programs for $400 rebate for those 

employers. Do Department of Highways get involved in those 

kind of programs at all or do you have a student hiring program 

that you will be engaging in this summer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Any students that the Department of 

Highways hire — and we do every year, a significant number 

— are over and above the 51 FTEs (full-time equivalent) that 

will be with the department because of the budget increases. 

And they’re hired through the Public Service Commission. So 

that students will apply to the Public Service Commission, and 

when the department needs employees they will ask Public 

Service Commission for names and hire accordingly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to hear 

that you have a program and that you are considering hiring 

some students. And obviously the next question that would 

come would be from young people that are saying, where do I 

get an application form and where do I put it in? Do you want 

to answer that for the record so we can pass it around? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Public Service Commission of 

Saskatchewan would have application forms that you would 

have access to, and/or if they wrote to or visit any MLA office, 

I’m sure they would be able to get Public Service Commission 

application forms. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister, for putting that on the 

record for us. 

 

Now it is important that we do what we can for our students in 

the summertime. And I’m glad that the Department of 

Highways will do their share, and I know you will. I know that 

for sure the highway crew down at Consul, Saskatchewan had 

asked for additional help last year. We were trying to get some 

extra help for them. What is the number of the crew down there 

at the present time? Has it increased since last year? And will 

you be increasing it this summer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The crew size now I believe is Consul, 

four; Shaunavon, six; and Maple Creek, six. And on certain 

projects they will work together. So I don’t see any increase in 

the size of any one of those crews this summer, but they will 

work together when needed. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad that you 

will have the crews working together, especially in times of 

crisis, if we happen to have a flash flood. And those kind of 

things can happen occasionally. 

 

But the reality is that you’ve increased your budget by $30 

million. Last year already we clearly identified one of the more 

prominent problems, which of course was that we have people 

wanting to take their holidays in the summertime. I don’t fault 

people for that. If they took them in the wintertime, certainly 

the road would plug with snow, and you’d be criticized for 



660  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

taking the crews off and letting them have holidays when they 

should be ploughing snow. However, you have to be prepared 

for those people that are going off on their holidays. 

 

We clearly identified in the last session of this legislature that 

that was a problem. That was identified by the people out in the 

field, the people on the crews. They take their holidays. They 

get three weeks off or whatever they get, according to the 

amount of seniority they’ve had. And while they’re gone on 

their holidays, of course the crew runs with a man short. If you 

run into a problem . . . and the member from Wood River has 

clearly indicated that Highway 18 is a bad road and a good one 

to use as an example. Obviously the people from the Consul 

area would be taking care of that road, as well as the other ones, 

No. 13. They clearly identified that if they could have a student 

hired to take the place of the people that were going on a 

holiday and have that extra student on staff, that that would be a 

great help to them in order to be able to get these little jobs 

done — like hauling a load of asphalt out and filling in holes 

with a shovel. I mean these are back-breaking but employment 

type jobs. You can’t really run around with a front-end loader 

and a piece of machinery to do all this work; you’ve got to have 

some people to do it. 

 

So in view of the fact that that was identified as a problem, why 

haven’t you changed your policy and decided to hire students to 

go at least one to each depot in the province? You don’t have 

that many depots. It was identified earlier, is that you don’t 

have all that many left. But if you have one extra student hired 

for each depot what would it take you? A handful of people 

extra hired out of the universities. 

 

Give those people some work to do for the summer so they 

could pay for their education. They would cover up for the 

people that are on holidays so that you would have full crews 

when you need them. And let’s face it, you can’t put asphalt on 

highways right now; it’s in the cold and the freezing. It’s 

obvious to people that have had any experience with it that it 

just won’t hold. It will break up; it just falls apart. So you have 

to do this in the summer when the weather’s a little better, and 

the students are out of school at that time. 

 

You have a factor here that you can put together. There’s an 

equation here that makes two and two makes four. You put 

together the people with the Highways department; they get 

their education. They get the money they need and you get your 

potholes filled in and you’ve got everybody a little bit happier 

at least, even though the pothole still has a little bump in it but 

at least it’s filled up so that you’re not leaving a muffler behind. 

So why haven’t you changed that policy and decided to hire 

more people from the student employment base in order to fulfil 

that need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question about holidays and I guess the member is right. 

There’s no good time for holidays, but on the other hand people 

need holidays. I mean you have to have time with your families, 

and you have to have a break from work, and that’s 

understandable. 

 

I guess it’s an option to have students, but you have to 

remember that we still have 107 depots across the province. We 

have our crews working in teams now to try and be as efficient 

and effective as possible. And because we did a reorganization 

last year, we saved $6.3 million that we could put, rather into 

extra staff, into actual roads. 

 

And so there’s a fine line as to how many staff you have and 

how much money you can put into roads. So we believe we 

have a fair balance right now. We can get the road done by 

using the crews as teams. And certainly we will use summer 

students as we can, but to just say, well we’re going to put 107 

students in 107 locations, where there may be a need in some 

and maybe not a need in others, isn’t, I think, a proper way to 

manage. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, thank 

you. I’m amazed at that type of an answer because the fact that 

you can’t clearly identify which divisions might need help and 

which ones don’t need help, you don’t hire any. It doesn’t make 

a whole lot of logic here, Mr. Minister. Go out there and ask 

your division superintendents, or whatever they’re called, if 

they are one of those departments that will need help, and then 

back-fill that number. 

 

And the cheapest thing you can do in road fixing today is to hire 

people. And here’s why. You’ve already got the equipment. 

You’ve got $100,000 trucks; you got $150,000 tractors with 

front-end loaders and you’ve got those machines out there for 

eight hours a day because the union says people shouldn’t have 

to work more than eight hours a day. Fair or not fair, that’s the 

way it is, and that’s no more of an argument there for now. 

 

But there’s no reason why you can’t have two shifts, because in 

the summertime in Saskatchewan we do have 16 hours of 

sunlight. And so you could have those trucks and those 

front-end loaders working for two shifts, 16 hours a day. All 

you have to do is have double crews, and you can get double 

mileage out of that very expensive equipment with very cheap 

labour these days, because labour is about the cheapest thing 

you’ve got going in this province. It’s not maybe fair, but it’s 

true. It’s a reality. For 10 bucks an hour, you can hire every 

student in this province, I’m quite sure, to stay here instead of 

going to Alberta looking for a job. 

 

And you could put those machines to work and all of these 

roads fixed up — at least to the point of having the holes filled 

in. It isn’t an insurmountable problem, and it doesn’t cost you a 

whole bunch of money because you’ve already got the trucks. It 

takes a little bit of diesel fuel to run them, and that too is not a 

big cost factor. It’s your investment in machinery that is 

depreciating, sitting at the side of the road at night time not 

working; and an awful lot of daylight hours when they’re not 

working in the middle of the summer when we have the sun 

coming up a little further to the north and to the west. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I’m amazed at your answer, and I’m amazed 

at your logic. I want you to reconsider that. And in all fairness 

to you, I know that it would only be embarrassing for you to 

have to stand up and answer this question again. But put on 

your thinking cap and think about this next time you get a   



April 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

chance, when you’re in your office and your people are sitting 

around you. Because you can solve this problem and you can 

make yourself look like a bit of a hero without spending a 

whole bunch of extra money. And we go along with you not to 

have to spend a whole lot of extra money if you can save it. So 

think about doing what will make things work. 

 

I want to get on to a couple more questions, Minister, because 

obviously the night will drag by quickly. And there are so many 

very important things that need to be talked about in the 

Department of Highways. 

 

You alluded, some minutes back, to the national road system 

concept. And obviously the opposition here is a little bit testy 

about things that come up that involve the word “Liberal” 

whether it be federal or provincial. But that doesn’t bother me, 

so I can talk about it. 

 

And I agree with you, Mr. Minister, totally and completely, 

there should be a national road program. There should be a 

dedication from a federal government to build roads in this 

province and in this country. The interconnection between our 

borders from one side of this country to another by highways, 

and north and south and back and forth, is extremely important 

to the national interest. If our grain can’t get to elevators that in 

itself is of national interest; because when the federal 

government has farmers paying income tax, that money goes to 

the federal government to pay the bills and hire themselves and 

pay their own wages. There is a national interest in what 

happens in Saskatchewan. And roads are extremely important to 

that. So you are right. 

 

And in the United States of America of course, they do have the 

military as an excuse to do that, but they do it and there is good 

reason why. The reasons in the United States for having that 

kind of involvement federally, isn’t that also a good argument 

to use that same philosophy and same thinking in this big 

country of Canada. So I support you totally in that concept and I 

think we ought to push it as hard as we can — a national road 

system with federal government money helping to get it. In the 

meantime you haven’t got that; so you do have to apply 

yourself better. 

 

(2215) 

 

I was a little amazed that you would finally see the light and 

promise a long-term program. And I’m glad you did that in 

terms of the two and a half billion dollars over 10 years. A 

long-term plan in highways is extremely good. Every 

municipality does that sort of thing; however when 

municipalities do it they actually back it up with the dollars. 

You put 200 million into your highway program and you’re 

promising over 10 years to have 2.5 billion spent. Well 200 

times 10 does not come to 2.5, it comes to 2. And if you need 

some help with your mathematics, Minister, we’ll get a 

calculator out for you. 

 

And next year you’re going to end up behind already. You’re 

going to be $50 million short; so the next year you already have 

to put up $300 million. What happens if you only get a budget 

for 2 next year, that you can’t get enough squeezed out of your 

Minister of Finance to keep your promise? Are you planning on 

catching up a billion dollars all at once in the ninth year, or the 

eighth year, or would it be the sixth or the seventh year that 

we’re planning catch-up? Mr. Minister, these are idle promises 

that mean nothing to nobody if you don’t back it up with the 

dollars you promised. 

 

So go after the national program. Stop kidding the people. 

Don’t tell us you’re promising money that you aren’t backing 

up with dollars that are real, that are going to happen; because 

all you do is create false hope. And I trust the taxpayers of this 

province, and the voters of this province, to be bright enough to 

understand this kind of phoney boloney and they’ll put you to 

the test in the next election. 

 

Now I want to ask you some questions which relate, Minister, 

to this national highway program with regards also to short-line 

railroads, which come into that. And obviously the short-line 

railroads are going to be a very serious problem for you to 

tackle in the near future. 

 

I want you to have an opportunity to give your version of how 

that system can unfold, because I think it is necessary that you 

give the people your opinion about how we can get short-line 

railroads into the hands of people that can afford to run them 

and how they will be able to finance that and how they will be 

able to offset then the need for extra highways monies to bring 

their grain and produce from the country into the main lines. 

 

So I want to let you respond to that, to have an opportunity to 

be fair about this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thanks to the member opposite, 

Mr. Chairman. There were several, several questions there. I 

think one of the questions, if I can remember, were we should 

be hiring more people. And hiring more people is fine, but you 

have to understand that you can get yourself into some 

difficulties by hiring too many people and then spending a 

whole lot on hiring a lot of people and not having any money 

for roads. 

 

So the logic of that is . . . can get you into some problems with 

deficits and high interest bills. And I think the member will 

quite understand that, and so I really don’t know why he would 

ask that question. 

 

So we’re not going to get into increased deficits and increased 

debts and increased payments and put extra burden on our 

children. We’re going to spend only what we can afford. 

 

And I’m not sure — the member opposite now is suggesting we 

hire more but some days he wants us to privatize — so I’m not 

really sure where he’s coming from, whether we should 

privatize or whether we should hire more or what we should do. 

And I’m not sure the member knows neither. 

 

But he is right on his suggestion that the federal government has 

a responsibility to a national highways program, and I 

appreciate and would appreciate the member of the third party’s 

support, especially nearing a federal election. I think if all 

provinces request from the federal government now some help   



662  Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 1997 

with a national highways program, certainly I would hope that 

they would listen. We may not get much help from the official 

opposition in Saskatchewan — they’re Liberals — but maybe 

from the third party we would be able to get some help. 

 

The member also complimented us on the long-term $2.5 

billion expenditure on roads, and I appreciate that. And he was 

wondering what the public will say about that, and I can assure 

the member opposite that the public are very appreciative. They 

like the idea of long-term planning. Road builders for one. 

Specialty groups like road builders are certainly happy with 

that, and the public will judge whether this government has 

indeed spent the $2.5 billion over the next 10 years. Inflation 

. . . I think if we put more than that, we would need to know 

exactly whether we can afford more than that or not. The other 

thing is that we could create inflation in the industry; so that in 

fact costs would go up, and we wouldn’t get as much work done 

as we will with this commitment. 

 

In regards to short-line railways — and I’ll try and be very 

quick — we do have a commitment to short-line railways. We 

did, along with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), host a conference; 350 people 

attended the short-line conference. It was voted at that time that 

Saskatchewan was a short-line-friendly province. It’s very 

difficult to create economically viable short-lines with the 

federal legislation, the federal transportation legislation. It’s not 

complementary to the formation of profitable short-lines. But 

we believe, if we work hard with short-line companies, with 

short-line proponents and local communities, that we will 

indeed have short-line railways in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:23 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Health Vote 32 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 635 

  McLane .............................................................................................................................................................................. 635, 641 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 639 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 643 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Highways and Transportation Vote 16 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 645 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 645 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 649 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

 


