



















































Hansard: May 08, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1477 

 May 8, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would once 

again like to present petitions of citizens to creation a regional 

telephone exchange. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities involved in this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Choiceland, Garrick, and White Fox. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such a task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Gerald, Saskatchewan, as well as Spy Hill. And 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Moved by myself, Mr. Speaker, and 

seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates by now concurred in. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 

following questions: 

 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation: what lands have been expropriated or are 

presently subject to notices of intended expropriation by 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation for the construction of 

the Condie-Queen Elizabeth line; and who are the 

registered owners of such lands? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I might while I’m on my feet, I have other 

questions as well. I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the 

government the following questions: 

 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation: what lands 

were expropriated by Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Holding Corporation and its subsidiaries during the year 

1991; and who were the registered owners of such lands? 

 

I if I might, Mr. Speaker, I also have questions for the years ’92, 

’93, ’94. To save time, I’ll do them at once. 

 

I also give notice that I shall on day 48 ask: 

 

The minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation: what lands were expropriated by SaskPower 

Corporation during the year 1991; and who were the 

registered owners of such lands? 

 

Similar questions for the years up to and including 1996. 

 

I also give notice that on day 48 I shall ask: 

 

The minister responsible for Sask Water Corporation: what 

lands were expropriated by Sask Water Corporation during 

the year 1991, and who were the registered owners of such 

lands? 

 

Similar questions for the years up to and including 1996. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask 

the government: 

 

Through the minister responsible for SaskEnergy 

Incorporated: what lands were expropriated by SaskEnergy 

Incorporated and its subsidiaries during the year 1991, and 

who were the registered owners of such lands? 

 

I also have questions for the years up to and including 1996, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



1478  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon Mr. Hagel:  If the members have no guests that they 

wish to introduce, I would like to introduce to the members 

some students who are guests of the Assembly, who are visiting 

from my own constituency. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 

afternoon are 66 grade 4 and 5 students from Sunningdale 

School in Moose Jaw as well as one of the students and 

chaperon who is seated on the floor, inside the door. 

 

These students today are accompanied by teachers, Mrs. 

Templeton, Mrs. Kerr, and Mrs. Sudom-Young, as well as 

chaperons, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Cleave, Mrs. Rininsland, and Mrs. 

Horner. 

 

They’ll be seated in the gallery until 2 o’clock, at which time 

they’ll be taking a tour of the Legislative Building. And with 

the assistance of the Deputy Speaker, I look forward to meeting 

with them for a visit and drinks and photos at 2:30. 

 

And I would point out Sunningdale School is a regular visitor 

over the years to the Legislative Assembly, and I’m happy to 

see them back again this year and I know that the hon. members 

of the Assembly are as well. I’ll ask that you will join in 

extending a welcome to these students from Sunningdale 

School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Month 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is MS (multiple 

sclerosis) Month and to recognize the importance and the 

significance of this declaration, people are encouraged to wear a 

carnation today. 

 

Multiple sclerosis is the most common disease of the central 

nervous system affecting young adults in Canada. There are an 

estimated 2,400 persons with MS living in Saskatchewan, one 

of whom is my wife, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The MS Society has a number of fund-raising activities planned 

for this month. From today to May 10, the MS Carnation 

Campaign will be held throughout the province, which 

officially kicks off May as MS Month. 

 

On May 12 and 13 there will be many volunteers out knocking 

on doors for the residential campaign for the MS Society. As 

well, 12 communities will be holding Super City Walks. Since 

1992 the walks for MS have raised over $562,000 with over 

6,700 people participating. This year the goal is to raise 

$175,000 province-wide with 1,800 registered walkers. 

 

All funds raised support ongoing research and sustain service 

programs that help people with multiple sclerosis. The MS 

Society also provides supportive counselling, educational 

materials, recreational activities, and referrals for individuals 

and their families who are coping with this disease. 

 

I ask everyone to support the MS Society in its effort to 

“Connect with a Cure” for MS. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 

our colleagues opposite in acknowledging that May, of course, 

is Multiple Sclerosis Month. The MS Society has asked the 

members in this Assembly to join in the fight against MS by not 

only wearing a carnation today, but by also making a donation. 

 

I’d like to begin my statement by applauding the MS Society 

for the real contribution they have made towards a search for a 

cure. I think it is fair today that we all anticipate the day where 

a cure will be found for MS. 

 

Until a cure is found, it is comforting to know that modern 

medicine has developed a medication, Betaseron, which will 

ease the pain for many. However, Betaseron is a very expensive 

drug and it is not covered under the Saskatchewan drug plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked the Minister of Health on a number 

of occasions to add this drug to the list of medications covered 

by their government. We have received many phone calls from 

individuals with MS telling us that this government has 

promised them for two years that something will be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not fair to make these people suffer any 

longer than they have to. These people are hoping that the 

government will use today as an opportunity to announce that 

Betaseron will be included in the drug plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind all the members that the 

MS Society has asked us to wear a carnation and make a 

donation. I applaud all those who have already made a donation 

and challenge those who have not. 

 

But most of all, I would like to implore the government, Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of all people who would benefit from 

Betaseron but cannot afford it, to make a meaningful donation 

and add Betaseron to the Saskatchewan drug plan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 

moment as well to join with all members in recognizing May as 

Multiple Sclerosis Month, a time in which we just sit back and 

reflect on some of the things that we take for granted and we 

can be so thankful for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may or may not be aware, the secretary — or 

my constituency assistant — has a brother who suffers with MS 

and fortunately he’s been able to get around quite well, as long 

as he judges how much he exerts himself. I also unfortunately 

have a brother-in-law who suffers with MS. 

 

So this disease is something that’s a real concern to us, and we 

certainly want to take the time to acknowledge the work and 

dedication of any volunteers who bring this to our attention, and 

we want to encourage people to certainly put forward their  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

funds and time and effort to support research into how we can 

get rid of this disease. 

 

I’d also like to take a moment as well to extend a hearty thank 

you to the Canadian National Institute for the Blind and the 

work that they do on behalf of blind individuals not only in this 

province, but across our country. Mr. Speaker, many good 

people, hard workers and volunteers give valuable time to stand 

up for those less fortunate than us and we should say thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Population Growing 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our Saskatchewan 

economy is back on track. There are signs throughout the 

province that jobs and economic development is occurring. 

Many times my colleagues on this side of the House have made 

announcements regarding this economic activity. And there has 

been the rare occasion when even the opposition members have 

done the same. I guess it’s hard to be pessimistic in 

Saskatchewan these days. The signs that our province is 

revitalized is everywhere, Mr. Speaker, but there is one 

indicator that I would like to focus on now, our steady 

population growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since this government assumed office in 1991, 

there has been five consecutive years of population growth in 

Saskatchewan. Last year there was a positive migration of 

people into this province. This may seem insignificant to many 

opposition members, but it demonstrates that people are coming 

back to this province for the job opportunities that are a result 

of a strong and growing economy. 

 

Lloydminster, for instance, Mr. Speaker, has a population 

growth of 9.6 per cent, and when compared to the last Tory 

government, this number is astounding. At the height of their 

government in 1989, Mr. Speaker, over 17,000 more people 

were leaving this province than were coming in. Our 

government is working better in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

it shows increased economic growth — and have a good trip, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battered Women’s Week 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this week 

is Battered Women’s Week. We have all heard the statistics 

about how many women are beaten by their partners every day. 

We have heard about women who flee in the dead of the night 

with their children. Sometimes they leave with little more than 

the clothes on their backs. And chances are we all know of 

someone or have heard personal stories about a woman still 

caught up in a desperate situation. 

 

And we have probably all asked the question or just thought to 

ourselves, why don’t you leave if it’s so bad? 

 

But these women have many obstacles to overcome. They are 

usually financially dependent on their husbands; they worry  

about how they will support and care for their children if they 

leave; they often lack the education and skills that they would 

need to find a job and make a new start. 

 

These are the two common elements of battered women’s 

stories. These are the stories told to the staff and volunteers at 

women’s shelters across the province. 

 

I would like to salute those people who work with battered 

women and their children. Without their caring and 

commitment, our province would be so much poorer — morally 

and socially. 

 

And to those women right now in abusive homes, and to those 

who do have the courage to leave, I commend you. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial 4-H Public Speaking Competition 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

ability to communicate in a clear and concise manner is a skill 

that is hard to come by. Many of us here at one time or another 

must have experienced some anxious moments during a public 

forum. 

 

A good speech must be informative, well-thought-out, 

organized, and be given with personal emotion. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, these types of speeches were at the centre of the 

annual provincial 4-H public speaking competition that took 

place a few weeks ago in Moose Jaw. 

 

There were 18 participants ranging from 9 to 21 years of age 

competing for top honours in their respective divisions. Each 

delivered a speech to an audience of over 100 people on a topic 

of their choice. Most of the topics were based on personal 

experience and insights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the participants gave tremendous speeches, but 

there’s one in particular that I would like to congratulate here 

today. 

 

Ms. Heidi Nordal of Bulyea won first place in the senior 

category. A member of the Longlaketon 4-H Club for a number 

of years, Heidi focused her speech on her experiences and 

memories of her involvement in the 4-H. 

 

I want to congratulate all the participants of this year’s forum, 

but especially to Heidi Nordal for her achievement, and wish 

her all the best in her future endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mental Health Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The key ingredient 

of healthy living is good mental health. Many Canadians 

however, have not acknowledged the importance of good 

mental health. We need greater public awareness. 

  



1480  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

That’s the purpose of Mental Health Week here in 

Saskatchewan which began on Monday, May 5. 

 

The emphasis this year is on mental health, not mental illness. 

And the theme, “Making Mental Health Matter,” is appropriate 

because mental health should and does matter. 

 

Poor mental health results in poor work performance, 

breakdown in family relations, bad decision making, and a sick 

society. Good mental health results in more positive 

workplaces, happier and more supportive families, and more 

healthy communities. 

 

As decision makers, members of this Assembly should take 

particularly seriously the need to promote good mental health. 

And that is why I’m very pleased to announce that earlier today 

the member for Saskatoon Eastview was presented the 

Canadian Mental Health Association’s Workplace Excellence 

Award in the category of individual excellence, at the mayor’s 

luncheon marking Mental Health Week in Saskatoon. 

 

It honours this Assembly and helps to restore public trust in 

government when a member of this House receives such 

well-deserved recognition. It is particularly an honour when the 

award is bestowed by an organization like the Canadian Mental 

Health Association. 

 

Today I ask all members to congratulate the mental health 

association and our member from Saskatoon Eastview. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Drug 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly are 

all wearing carnations today to recognize Multiple Sclerosis 

Month. However, MS sufferers are looking for more than 

recognition. They want to hear that this government will ensure 

that Betaseron, which would greatly improve their lives, come 

under the Saskatchewan drug plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve questioned the Minister of Health about this 

matter many times this session and he has indicated that a 

decision will be made quite shortly. 

 

Mr. Minister, what better time than now to announce this 

announcement that Betaseron will be insured under the drug 

plan. Will you make that commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, if my memory serves me 

correctly, the member asked me this very important question 

just two or three days ago. I advised the member that various 

steps were being taken to look into the matter, that the matter 

was under review right now. 

 

I do not have an announcement to be made today but I can  

assure the member that the matter is being given the utmost 

consideration. The appropriate people are being consulted and 

we’ll be making a decision in the very near future. 

 

Highway Maintenance 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, if this government decides to 

put a catch phase on licence plates in this province we have a 

suggestion — pothole proud. Because that’s the image we are 

representing to tourists. 

 

Randy Williams, the president of the Tourism Authority, says 

visitors are reluctant to travel in Saskatchewan because of the 

terrible road conditions, and we all can relate to that. He said, 

and I quote, “Some travellers with new vehicles and RVs won’t 

travel on our roads.” Mr. Williams also said it was in the best 

interest of this province to start spending more money on road 

repairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is sending mixed messages. It 

wants tourists to come to Saskatchewan, spend their money 

here, and pay our high fuel taxes. But at the same time, it is 

showing visitors that it doesn’t think enough of them to fix the 

roads. Will the interim Minister of Highways agree, if we are to 

ever have a strong tourism industry in this province, you have 

to take an interest in the roads? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to share with the member opposite that certainly we have a 

strong interest and investment in tourism in Saskatchewan. 

 

And when you look at what’s happened over the last couple of 

years through the partnership that we have formed and the 

transfer of responsibility to the Tourism Authority of 

Saskatchewan, we see tremendous growth in the tourism 

industry here in the province. When you take a look at the years 

in question from ’92 to 1996, you see significant growth in the 

tourism industry. 

 

So when I look at, and hear the comment that Mr. Williams 

makes, I’m not sure from where that information is garnered. 

Because when you look at 1992, the visitors to Saskatchewan 

just from the U.S. (United States) alone were in the 

neighbourhood of 81,461. That continues to grow in the years 

’93, ’94, and ’95 and ’96 to where the number now is 99,436. 

That’s the information that we have from our Tourism 

Authority. And when I talk to tourism branches across the 

province, that’s the information that they provide to us. 

 

So I’m not sure, Mr. Member, where you get the information as 

to where the tourism numbers in this province are deteriorating. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, 

let’s talk about the commitment to highways, is the subject for 

today. Ever since you came to power in 1991, Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in this province has realized that we have a problem in 

transportation. Transportation’s changing, Mr. Speaker, our  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

roads are deteriorating. Everybody recognizes that except the 

members opposite. The government didn’t seem to understand. 

 

And what did the government do to address this problem, Mr. 

Speaker? Well they cut $187 million out of our transportation 

system since they came into power, Mr. Speaker — $187 

million. And what kind of a commitment is that to 

transportation and to tourism? 

 

In my own area, Mr. Speaker, Lake Diefenbaker, we know 

there’s a problem because nobody is going to come into that 

area to fish, to camp, to do what have you, because they can’t 

get there with their expensive motor homes and trailers. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to wake up, your members 

and yourself, and realize that you’ve got a real problem with the 

highways in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to share with the member opposite 

that he obviously hasn’t taken the time to look at the new 

transportation strategy for Saskatchewan. And I think what he 

should do is he should take a look at the transportation strategy. 

Because clearly the transportation strategy indicates to you that 

over the next . . . over this coming year we’re going to spend 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $30 million into new 

infrastructure across the province. Over the next 10 years we’re 

going to spend $2.5 billion into the transportation strategy. 

 

And I ask you, when we talk about a national transportation 

policy for Canada, we don’t have a national transportation 

policy in Canada. And where do you stand on that. When we go 

to the federal government and say we need to have a national 

transportation strategy in Canada, and we hear nothing from 

you. Decimation of the gas tax under the previous 

administration. And today, of course, we have some roadways 

that require some additional support; and we’re putting that in 

through the $30 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saltcoats Reassessment 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

people in the town of Saltcoats feel they have been hung out to 

dry with SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency) reassessment program. Because Saltcoats has been 

assessed as a bedroom community of Yorkton or the ridiculous 

comparison as a resort community, many properties are 

assessed at the highest residential factor possible. 

 

SAMA officials have already admitted there has been mistakes, 

yet are not making any effort to correct the whole town’s 

assessment. I know this issue has been brought to the minister’s 

attention already. 

 

Can the Minister of Municipal Government tell us if any . . . 

what if any steps she has taken to correct the huge assessment 

error in that town of Saltcoats? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, in cases such as this, 

there is due process available for ratepayers. There are methods 

by which apparent errors can be referred to SAMA and be 

corrected prior to tax notices going out. If that doesn’t take 

place, and tax notices actually go out based on information that 

may turn out to be flawed, then the appeal process is open to 

those ratepayers. 

 

So they should be encouraged to use those due processes, and 

the objective of that appeal process is fairness and equity, and 

this is the way it should be achieved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, the appeal process is in 

the procedure of going on right now, and in one case, SAMA 

has even stopped for two weeks, said they’ll defer it for two 

weeks until they contact their lawyer. So they know there’s 

mistakes. We need your help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the property owners now have lots 

assessed as high as $30,000 on average. Saltcoats residents are 

facing assessment values of 5,500 for lots only on average. But 

just down the road in Bredenbury, similar lots are assessed at an 

average of 300. 

 

People in Saltcoats are outraged and feel that the fair market 

value for their property is unfairly high compared to the 

surrounding area. At least 50 assessment appeals have already 

been filed in that town. 

 

Will the minister take a leadership role and intervene on the 

people’s behalf and insist a total reassessment be done for the 

community, this time using common sense when valuing the 

properties? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to remind the 

member opposite that ownership of SAMA, the assessment 

management agency, rests with local government where they 

have representatives from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), from SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), and from the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), and from the 

assessors’ association. The government’s representation on the 

SAMA board of directors, which directs those activities, is three 

out of a membership of nine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So people who are aggrieved by the process should speak to the 

representative of those municipal organizations who sits on that 

board, and through their municipal administrator, if it’s an 

administrative level. We are not in a position to direct SAMA 

on how it should manage its affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

that’s not good enough. I realize there’s three members from 

each on that board. Somebody has got to take a leadership role 

with SAMA. They are not doing their job properly. 

  



1482  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, SAMA needs to be reminded that it should be 

serving all people in Saskatchewan fairly. People in Saltcoats 

are tired of SAMA’s arrogance, and similar complaints are 

arising from other communities. Many Saltcoats residents are 

considering refusing to even pay their taxes. Across 

Saskatchewan some town administrators, mayors and 

councillors are quitting over reassessment problems. Saltcoats 

officials tell me that with the extra education costs and cost of 

policing, they will pay $1 million more than the town of 

Bredenbury over the next 10 years — a similar-sized town. 

 

Madam Minister, the process is flawed. Will you assume your 

responsibilities and intervene and give SAMA the direction it 

seems to need to address these unfair assessments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

one day want less intervention by government. The next day 

they want more intervention by government. Which is it? This 

is a free-standing, independent agency, Mr. Speaker. In the 

main it is funded . . . the field services they provide are paid for 

by municipalities. 

 

The representation on the board of directors is, in the majority, 

from local governments, and that is where the responsibility 

lies, Mr. Speaker. They wanted to own the system. 

Municipalities told the Local Government and Finance Review 

Commission they wanted to own the system. They own the 

system. It’s up to them to run the system. 

 

Be careful what you ask for; you might get it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Four-day School Week 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Education minister. 

 

Madam Minister, last year the Scenic Valley School Division 

made some very innovative changes to their school hours — the 

length of the school day from Monday to Thursday, dedicated 

Fridays to extracurricular activities for students, professional 

activities for teachers. 

 

A recent survey shows that 90 per cent of parents like the new 

school hours. There’s only one problem. Your new amendments 

to The Education Act say that in the future different schools 

who want hours like those followed by Scenic Valley will 

require ministerial approval. 

 

Madam Minister, why can’t you just leave well enough alone? 

If the school division, the parents, and the students are happy 

with this arrangement, why do you need to get involved? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. All I can say is that the Department of Education and 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, as well as other  

educational organizations, have always felt that under The 

Education Act, “alter” was interpreted to mean, not to lengthen 

the school day. 

 

Scenic Valley obviously took a different approach last spring 

when they moved to lengthen their school day. What we’re 

doing is simply clarifying the legislation to ensure that while 

everyone understands the existing meaning of the legislation, 

that there will be no misinterpretation of the legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, you cut their funding. You 

asked for innovative ideas; they came up with one. It’s been 

singularly successful — probably more successful than 

anything the Department of Education has done in its lifetime. I 

guess before the minister entered politics she must have wanted 

to be a school principal; now she wants to be the principal of 

the whole province. 

 

Madam Minister, numerous schools throughout the province 

may need to alter their school hours to accommodate special 

circumstances. Until now they had the right to do that on their 

own. Now they need your approval. Why? 

 

Two nights ago you gave a quite different defence of the 

principle of school board autonomy. You said it was great. But 

your new legislation shows you really don’t believe in school 

board autonomy. Why can’t you simply leave well enough 

alone, and let school boards set their own hours without your 

approval? They’re doing it very successfully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I could report to the 

member that the Scenic Valley pilot project was for one year. 

They asked for an extension of the pilot project. We’ve 

extended the pilot project. There will be an external evaluation 

process and we will determine, based on the evaluation, 

whether or not this is something that other school divisions 

might want to consider. 

 

All I can say to the member is that in this session of the 

legislature we’re introducing an amendment to The Education 

Act, so that there can be no misunderstanding as to the ability of 

who can decide whether or not we can lengthen the school day. 

Everyone understands that it’s up to ministerial discretion and 

we just want to make sure that the legislation is very clear. 

 

Quebec Separation 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, we now see how close 

we came to losing our country in October of 1995. We hear 

today that the former premier of Quebec and his separatist 

government were prepared for a yes vote. They were prepared 

to move swiftly and decisively to destroy our country. 

 

But clearly we also see that Jean Chrétien was not prepared. His 

bungling of the federalist campaign brought us to the brink of 

losing our country. And he had no plan of action to respond to  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

Quebec, had the separatists won. 

 

Mr. Premier, you spoke to Jean Chrétien during the referendum 

campaign. Was there a deal if there was a yes vote? And more 

importantly, is there a plan for the next time to deal with the 

separatist traitors who would promote separation by lying to 

their people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the question the member 

raises is important, but I think, if I may, what is really more 

important is the dealing with fact. And the fact that we’re 

dealing with is that the separatists did not win the referendum. 

There’s no use speculating about what if or what might have . . . 

That’s important I guess at some points, but the most important 

fact remains is that those in Quebec who believe in Canada, 

who I believe still have the majority, voted in favour of Canada. 

 

In the subsequent days and weeks that followed, we know the 

facts also. The federal parliament has enacted several measures 

dealing with the devolution of power, eliminating overlap and 

duplication, and the like. One can have one’s views as to the 

adequacy of that, but there has been a response in this regard. 

 

The last point that I want to make is that I find the revelations, 

the confessions of M. Parizeau, to be absolutely shocking, 

because in effect the public statements repeatedly were that if 

there had been a yes, there’d be a year’s negotiations. Now we 

are told that that’s not the case. 

 

This indeed, I think, puts in doubt — well I could even be more 

harsh in my words but I’ll say in doubt — any assurance given 

by any separatist anywhere in Quebec on this issue. It simply 

cannot be trusted and we as Canadians have an obligation to do 

all that we can to give aid and comfort and support and to 

understand, more importantly, the role of the federalists in 

Quebec about keeping a united Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Automobile Highway Damage Compensation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the new Minister of Highways. And as this is my first 

opportunity to ask him a Highways question, I guess I should 

start with congratulating him on his new job; though I’m not 

sure I like the idea of having a minister of drinking and driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a new minister but we have the same old 

potholes. People at the chamber of commerce annual meeting 

say our transportation system is in a mess and the people 

continue to wreck their cars simply by driving down 

Saskatchewan roads. 

 

Last year the Highway department initiated a policy of 

compensating people whose cars were damaged by unmarked 

potholes or heaves in the roads — those without the NDP (New 

Democratic Party)campaign signs, Mr. Speaker. Is that still the 

policy of your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

And I want to say to the member opposite that in spite of the 

fact that he suggests I’m now the new minister of potholes for 

Saskatchewan, I want to tell you, when I assumed the new 

responsibilities I left the potholes with the old member. So I 

don’t have them any longer. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the policy that 

was previously in place that he alludes to continues to be the 

policy of the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to hear that because, Mr. Minister, on March 10, Irene 

Peyton of Hoosier was driving on Highway 51. She hit a huge, 

unmarked pothole which snapped every stud on the right front 

wheel and sent it flying out into the field. Not only was that 

very dangerous but it cost her $171.21 to get it repaired. 

 

Jerry O’Connor of Leader hit a huge, unmarked heave on the 

Mendham access on Highway 21. It ripped the plug out of his 

oil-pan, which cost him $125 to fix. The Swift Current 

Highways office told him he would not be compensated. 

 

Mr. Minister, both these people have written to the former 

minister of Highways asking for compensation. Will you take 

responsibility for the damages caused by your terrible highways 

and compensate these people for their losses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much. I want to share with 

the member opposite that this year . . . In particular I want to 

share, particularly with . . . (inaudible) . . . the roadways across 

the province, we’ve seen a significant number of, if I might call 

them, frost boils. And what’s happened with many of these of 

course is that . . . what’s happened with these of course, Mr. 

Member, is that we have a greater number of these conditions 

across the province this year than we have in the past year. 

 

And so what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve . . . Not only 

have we identified those on some of those roadways but, as I’ve 

said earlier, in this year’s budget we’ve already included 30 

million more dollars that we’re going to be putting into the 

highway system. 

 

Now in respect to the flagging and the appropriate notification 

of those roadways where there are some of these difficulties, 

that I might suggest we’re marking them as best we can. And if 

there are individual situations, Mr. Speaker, where in fact there 

has been damage caused, created, to a vehicle, I want to see that 

particular issue come to my attention and certainly would be 

prepared to look at it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the House this 

week the Minister of Labour explained that the Workers’ 

Compensation Board is arm’s length from government, and that 

the board itself was independent of government. His remarks  

  



1484  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

followed a decision by government members who sit on the 

Public Accounts Committee of the legislature to seek a legal 

opinion about whether WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 

should be autonomous, or even open to public review by the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments fly in the face of those 

made by your predecessor, the member from Regina Northeast, 

who told this House on June 7, 1993, and I quote: 

 

With respect to the administration of the board and the 

fund, we believe they should be accountable to the 

government, and I in turn, the minister, should be 

accountable to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Minister, what’s the story? Why are you contradicting your 

colleague from Regina Northeast? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I am. 

The Workers’ Compensation Board has been part of the Labour 

delegation during the consideration of the Department of 

Labour estimates for as long as I can remember, and I think the 

member would accept that that is a long time. 

 

And just recently, and I believe since the member from Regina 

Northeast made his statement, the Workers’ Compensation 

Board has agreed to appear in front of the Crown Corporations 

Committee where it appeared this year. I think the member was 

present at that meeting and had an opportunity to ask the Chair 

and the chief executive officer of the Workers’ Compensation 

Board, any question she wanted to. Now that’s a level of 

accountability that is without precedence for that board in this 

province during the 60 years of its existence. 

 

How many committees is the board going to have to appear in 

front of before the member is satisfied? I would suggest that 

one is quite enough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, in the brief period of time since 

this issue was raised in the House, I have received numerous 

phone calls and faxes from people who are irate that this 

government refuses to be accountable to the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. 

 

To quote one letter: 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board needs greater scrutiny 

and direction, not less. 

 

And another letter reads: 

 

If the Workers’ Compensation Board removed itself from 

accountability, this would give them all that much more 

power and control, leaving people like myself to no one’s 

mercy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we suspect that this government’s decision to not 

allow questioning of the Provincial Auditor’s concerns in the 

Public Accounts Committee is another attempt to silence him.  

The Provincial Auditor has raised legitimate concerns about the 

Workers’ Compensation which deserves answers. However, 

this government is once again attempting to undermine his 

authority, just as they did a few weeks ago. 

 

Will the minister tell the House why your government is so 

afraid to answer questions that have been raised by the 

Provincial Auditor; and why you are determined to undermine 

his work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not fair. That 

crosses the line and the member knows it. The senior officers of 

the Workers’ Compensation Board appeared before the Crown 

Corporations Committee, an appearance it had not made during 

its 60 years of existence. No committee of this House has 

previously asked the board to appear before it, considering that 

it was an independent tribunal, that it is set it up at arm’s length 

from this Assembly, and that it does not spend any public 

money at all. 

 

Now those officers appeared before the Crown Corporations 

Committee and the member herself was present that day, Mr. 

Speaker. And she had a full opportunity to ask the senior 

officers of the board any questions she wanted to, and I don’t 

think she did. I can’t recall what questions she asked. But the 

fact is that the Provincial Auditor was there at that meeting; 

private auditors were also there. The question of the auditor’s 

report was fully discussed, Mr. Speaker — fully discussed. 

 

And it is not fair for that member to come into this House and 

suggest that this government is trying to hide anything in those 

circumstances. Indeed we are accounting in a very full, 

complete way, unprecedented in the history of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Division Restructuring 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

session the Minister of Education proudly pronounced that after 

attending meetings across the province, school division 

restructuring and amalgamations would take place voluntarily. 

The minister claimed that she was leaving those decisions to the 

local people and that she would not be interfering. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how times have changed. An article in The 

Saskatchewan Educator quotes the minister as saying, “All 

divisions should submit restructuring plans to the Education 

department by June 30.” 

 

How can the minister say that the decisions are voluntary when 

she is forcing all boards to submit restructuring plans? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t seen the 

report in the Educator. All I can say is this. That all school 

divisions in the province have been asked to develop an action 

plan, which is a consultative kind of action plan, where they 

will indicate to the department what measures that they are  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

going to take to take the idea of restructuring to their respective 

publics. 

 

I have said on numerous occasions — and I think that the 

member does a real disservice to this House when he indicates 

that this government is forcing people to amalgamate — we 

indicated in December that restructuring in this province would 

be voluntary, it would be determined by the local people, and 

that there would be government leadership. 

 

We have many examples of school divisions across this 

province that are in the process of having the discussions in 

their communities. They’re in the process of restructuring. And 

I don’t think we can find a solitary person in those restructuring 

endeavours that will indicate that this government is forcing 

them to restructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you. Seated in the west gallery, 

just joined us a few minutes ago, I’d like to introduce to the 

members Murray Westby, the mayor of Watrous and the 

president of Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 

Join me in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  And why is the member from North 

Battleford on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — By leave, to join in the greetings of the guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, as critic for urban municipalities and as a 

former city councillor, I have enjoyed my dealings with the 

president of SUMA, and I also wish to join with the minister 

and other members of this House in welcoming him to the 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  And why is the hon. member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  With leave as well to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 

minister and the Liberal critic in introducing as well and joining 

with them in introducing Mr. Westby. I’m sure he enjoys 

coming to this Assembly and hearing the debate. I’m not sure if  

it beats selling tractors, but he’s certainly had a real positive 

influence in his community. We welcome him here. 

 

As well, on behalf of the member from Cypress who has a 

previous appointment, Mr. Speaker, would like to introduce a 

group of 37, 7 to 9 students from the community and school in 

Frontier. They’re with us and they’ve joined us; they’re in the 

east gallery. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Brad 

Gasper, and Dave Hesje — and I hope I’ve got that right; we’ll 

maybe get it later. 

 

Due to the fact that the member from Cypress is unable to be 

here, one of my colleagues and I will look forward to meeting 

with the group. But we’d like to invite everyone to welcome 

this group here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Child Prostitution Strategy 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise in the House today to inform the House about an important 

five-part strategy that the Minister of Justice and I announced 

earlier today in our efforts to join with communities across 

Saskatchewan in the campaign against child prostitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working on essentially two fronts. Firstly, 

through this strategy we will clearly send a message that 

children involved in the sex trade are victims of child abuse, 

and the people who purchase their services are child abusers. 

This is an extremely serious issue that we as a society must not 

tolerate. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’re substantially enhancing our 

commitment to working with communities in developing 

programs and services for vulnerable children and their 

families. In this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, we have provided 

nearly $25 million for initiatives under Saskatchewan’s action 

plan for children. The strategy we are talking about today is but 

one of the many initiatives under the action plan which partners 

government with communities, agencies, organizations, and 

individuals across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to join together with other governments, 

with communities, with agencies, because if we are to 

effectively address the issue of child prostitution, we need to 

begin working in all areas and across all sectors of society. 

 

I am pleased to be able to tell you today, Mr. Speaker, that 

under the strategy earlier announced, $250,000 has been 

targeted to outreach services for children involved in 

prostitution and street youth. Today the Minister of Justice has 

announced a strict law enforcement policy will be developed to 

target pimps, people who have sex with children, and others 

who exploit children involved in prostitution. 

 

Thirdly, government and community representatives will work 

in partnership on a public information campaign which 

identifies the act of procuring a child for the purpose of  

  



1486  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

prostitution as child abuse. 

 

Fourthly, a tracking and monitoring system will be created to 

enhance the detection and prosecution of perpetrators and to 

enhance services available to their victims. 

 

And fifthly, Mr. Speaker, we will review existing provincial 

and federal law to ensure that they do not create barriers to the 

successful prosecution of pimps and people who have sex with 

children or to the delivery of services to children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Justice, will be 

directing public prosecutions to develop a policy that ensures 

these cases are consistently treated as serious crimes against 

children. And we will continue to call upon our federal 

counterparts to proclaim and put into law, amendments to the 

Criminal Code which will reduce the existing barriers to 

successful prosecution of the people who sexually exploit our 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have taken some incremental steps 

forward in our campaign against prostitution. But if I may say, 

Mr. Speaker, the journey is not over and we have much, much 

left to do. 

 

How I wish, Mr. Speaker, how I wish we could find 

mechanisms, mechanisms to insist and ensure that those who 

are convicted of abusing our children, how I wish we could find 

a mechanism to make them pay some restitution, some 

damages, to the child they have injured. 

 

And how I wish, Mr. Speaker, we could find a way to rid our 

streets and rid our communities of the drug traffickers that are 

pushing the poison on our children and on our families. 

 

And how I wish and how I pray, Mr. Speaker, that we could 

find a way to so move the hearts and the lives and the lifestyles 

of parents that no child should be left insecure or unloved on 

our streets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take some incremental steps today — we take 

incremental steps. We have a long ways to go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

heartened and happy that it is becoming apparent to the 

government that the problem of child prostitution must be 

addressed. But I am somewhat disappointed because the 

government’s announcement demonstrates that there is not a 

well-thought-out, concrete, decisive and definitive plan to help 

the children who so desperately need help now. 

 

These children need a safe place to go. They need a 

comprehensive treatment program for drug and alcohol 

addictions and a safe place to escape the street. What the 

government has offered is $250,000 for outreach services. And 

even a small amount of money is welcome. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is quite simply not enough to address the 

need for comprehensive treatment centres and safe houses. This  

government has not provided a great number of detail about 

how the proposed initiatives will effectively and permanently 

help children stay off the streets. 

 

They need more than temporary help. And we as the 

representatives of the people have the obligation to provide 

more. 

 

This government has said it will strictly enforce penalties 

against pimps and pedophiles. This is not really a new initiative. 

This should have been done all along, and this is something the 

province should naturally have been doing and been known to 

do. 

 

Often the NDP call on the federal government to fight child 

prostitution. Well recent amendments to the Criminal Code lay 

out very clearly the jail terms for those convicted of child 

sexual exploitation. 

 

This government has said it will initiate a public education 

campaign making it clear that using a child sexually is child 

abuse. Most people already know that. Although I agree with 

this initiative because I think more awareness is needed. 

 

The community groups that have been fighting this problem for 

so long know this fact already. But what is needed in addition is 

public awareness about the penalties that pedophiles face under 

the Criminal Code. 

 

The minister has also proposed to create a system to track and 

monitor perpetrators. I question how this will be done. Such a 

system would have to cross provincial borders. Again, what we 

see is a lack of detail. And so there is no well-thought-out plan 

here. 

 

My Bill would expand the definition of child abuse and make it 

possible for Social Services to help these children. It would help 

those children under the age of 18, whether they live at home or 

not, and are engaged in prostitution. It would help them to seek 

an escape forum from the life on the streets. 

 

The existing provisions of The Child and Family Services Act 

are, in my interpretation and the advice I have been given, much 

too narrow. It is evident that changes must be made to our 

legislation. Manitoba has done it. The federal government has 

acted. And Alberta is doing their work. So we now need the 

leadership of this province. 

 

Those children in our province who are forced by necessity to 

sell their bodies likely do not even know who the Premier is or 

who the Minister of Social Services is or who I am — or who 

anyone in this House is. But they would certainly know that 

someone cares about them if they had a safe place to go. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to respond on behalf of the third party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment and certainly  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

acknowledge the steps that the government has taken today and 

congratulate the government for the steps that they have taken. 

There’s no doubt in my mind that anyone in this room certainly 

as a parent would feel a sense of betrayal and would feel some 

anger should one of our children end up being taken advantage 

of. 

 

And the steps that the government has come forward with today 

are what I would consider a step in the right direction. Certainly 

I think it’s important that we take a look at the laws of our land. 

It’s important that we take a look and we address the concerns 

about individuals who would take advantage of children on the 

streets. 

 

But there’s one area, Mr. Speaker, that I think is still missed. 

And the minister talked about, he prayed that there would be a 

day when this wouldn’t happen. He prayed that there would be 

a day when families would create a better environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that as we’ve devalued the values of 

families, as we’ve risen to a point of more and more break-ups 

in homes, we create situations that really put children in 

turmoil. 

 

The announcements today, while they are on a positive note, the 

unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to go a little 

further. We need to design programs and ask ourselves, why are 

young children on the streets. Are they wards of the province? 

Are they wards of broken homes? What’s the reason? 

 

There was a recent documentary talking about this on TV. 

There were a number of serious questions that were raised. In 

fact some shocking observations were brought forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while it’s imperative that we certainly address the 

fact that people would take advantage of and abuse our young 

people and our children, it’s also important that we look at how 

we can restore the value and the dignity of these young children 

and not force them into this situation, but find ways in which 

they are not on the streets in the first place. Help them before 

they end up in that position. I think that’s important. It’s 

imperative that we look at ways of addressing that concern as 

well. 

 

So I want to add, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased to see what the 

government has done, but I trust that we go beyond that and 

address the other concerns as well. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would request leave to make a motion which would change the 

names of members on standing committees. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTION 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move, seconded by the member from 

Regina Centre: 

 

That the name of Mr. Andy Renaud be substituted for that 

of Mr. Jack Langford on a list of members composing the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Psychologists Amendment Act, 

1997. The purpose of this Act is to amend The Psychologists 

Act, 1997, which was passed this session. The amendment 

reflects an important compromise that has been reached 

between the Saskatchewan Psychological Association, the 

Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan 

Educational Psychologists Association on the issue of title 

protection. 

 

As we are all familiar from our discussions on the new 

Psychologists Act, it was important to the Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association that the public be able to distinguish 

between Ph.D. psychologists and master’s level psychologists. 

While the new Act accomplished this by requiring 

psychologists to list their academic credentials after the title, 

“psychologist,” the Saskatchewan Psychological Association 

has proposed that such a distinction be made at the beginning of 

the title. 

 

The proposal is that all psychologists be permitted to use the 

title, “psychologist.” However, Ph.D. level psychologists would 

also be permitted to use the title, “doctoral psychologist.” This 

proposal is supported by the Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists 

Association as a clear title protection clause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposal is important to all three psychologist 

organizations as it signifies a willingness to work together to 

resolve issues. It is unfortunate that there was not time to fully 

explore this proposal with the three associations prior to the 

passage of the Act. 

 

However, I believe this Act will address one of the key issues 

remaining relative to the Act and assist the new Saskatchewan 

college of psychologists in moving forward and regulating all 

psychologists in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Psychologists 

Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

  



1488  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 

House that with respect to the immediately preceding item, I 

wish to declare a conflict pursuant to rule 41 and indicate to the 

House that I will not be not be voting on any stages of the Bill. 

 

The Speaker:  The member’s declaration pursuant to rule 41 

is acknowledged. I thank him for that. 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise and move second reading of a Bill to amend The 

Income Tax Act. 

 

This Bill introduces a major new plank in the government’s job 

strategy as I announced in the budget. This involves the 

extension of the manufacturing and processing investment tax 

credit to used machinery and equipment. The Bill also 

introduces several technical amendments to The Income Tax 

Act. 

 

Since 1992 our government has followed a strategy of using 

targeted tax incentives for key sectors of the Saskatchewan 

economy to stimulate growth and job creation. For example, we 

strengthened our small businesses by reducing their income 

taxes by 20 per cent, attracted call centres by removing the sales 

tax on 1 800 numbers, and improved the tax treatment of 

Saskatchewan-based truckers. 

 

We also introduced a number of tax incentives for 

manufacturing and processing including the elimination of the 

sales tax on direct agents, the reduction of the income tax rate 

by up to 40 per cent, and the introduction of an investment tax 

credit to encourage capital investment. 

 

The response to these measures from the manufacturing and 

processing sector has been favourable and this sector continues 

to create thousands of new jobs. We wish to build on this 

momentum by giving manufacturers and processors one more 

reason to expand and create jobs today and into the future. 

 

The investment tax credit was introduced in 1995 to encourage 

M&P (manufacturing and processing) companies to invest in 

capital assets. The credit offsets the amount of education and 

health tax the corporation would be required to pay on an 

investment in Saskatchewan. 

 

In our budget deliberations over the course of this past year, 

business expressed the importance of the investment tax credit 

in establishing their business investment plans. They also 

pointed out that the acquisition of used equipment is often an 

important investment alternative. However, since the credit only 

applies to new assets, companies moving existing assets into 

Saskatchewan have had to pay the sales tax but have been . . . 

have not been eligible to benefit from the credit. 

 

To remedy this situation I am pleased to introduce legislation 

that extends the credit to qualifying used M&P machinery and 

equipment upon which the E&H (education and health) tax is  

payable. I’m confident that this extension of the credit, together 

with the reduction in the provincial sales tax rate, will 

strengthen Saskatchewan’s investment climate and will promote 

the creation of good, long-term jobs for Saskatchewan people in 

our value added industries. 

 

The lowering of the sales tax rate to 7 per cent will provide a 

tax reduction of about $180 million per year to Saskatchewan 

residents. Of that total, about one-half, or $90 million, will go 

directly to improve the competitiveness of our business 

community. As a consequence of this tax reduction, we are 

reducing the rate of the credit for new and used acquisitions 

from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

This Bill also implements several technical amendments which 

will assist Revenue Canada in its administration of the 

Saskatchewan income tax system. I would be pleased to answer 

questions concerning the amendments when discussing this Bill 

at Committee of the Whole. 

 

I beg to inform the Assembly that his Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 

Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly, and I 

move that Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 

be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 50 — The Private 

Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 59 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la 

Loi sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to continue with some 

comments and explanations about Bill No. 59 as we did just a 

couple short days ago. 

 

Having had the opportunity to review explanatory notes that 

have been provided on this Bill and having had the opportunity 

to talk with various people, I want to make some comments 

around a number of the sections that I see that are extremely  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

necessary and are positive changes for education. 

 

And I want to begin by talking about elections of school boards, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a process that has been under 

way for a number of years in Saskatchewan where we are 

looking at restructuring of educational school divisions. 

Whether that involves amalgamations, whether that involves 

joining together of different school divisions, whether it 

involves two school divisions, three, those processes have been 

under way for a number of years. And I think we are going to 

start to see a very significant movement in that direction. 

 

The amendments to this Bill will not put in place roadblocks as 

far as school divisions being able to amalgamate. What it will 

do is, I think, eliminate the red tape, the obstacles that are now 

before boards of education in terms of electing that new board 

of that new configuration. 

 

And as the minister has indicated, there are urban and urban 

discussions going on, and rural and rural, but there are also 

urban and rural school divisions that are talking, that are 

looking towards restructuring and amalgamations. And 

currently the process of electing those new board members is 

not in place. So we have some changes here that I think will 

ensure that representation from that new entity takes place in a 

very controlled and approved fashion. 

 

One of the other clauses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, involves the 

school year, and the balance in the school year. And we know 

that there are many examples in the province where initially one 

school experimented with what is called the balanced school 

year, that is finishing the first semester prior to Christmas and 

starting immediately, of course, after Christmas with a new 

semester and finishing at a different time other than the 

traditional end of June. 

 

That required a change because, by The Education Act, the 

summer holidays begin after July 1. These changes that are put 

forth will clarify, and will allow school divisions across the 

province to experiment and indeed incorporate new school 

years. 

 

What it also does, in the same section when it talks about school 

day, it brings forth the clause that currently contains the rules 

regarding how long the school day is, when the school day can 

occur — that is the hours of the school day — and I know there 

is some confusion out there. We have had discussions and 

letters that have been sent by a school division in this province 

that feel that the provision that is now in the Act, in the changed 

Act, has altered what was in place before, and I guess it’s 

around confusion about what the word “alter” means. 

 

The current Act uses the terms, alter or shorten. And I know the 

Minister of Education, and I know other people in education, 

have interpreted that not to mean lengthen. And that is how the 

school divisions have used this Act; that is how the Minister of 

Education has interpreted it. And that indeed if school divisions 

wanted to lengthen the school year, there was a need to consult 

with the Minister of Education and get approval. This change 

clarifies that indeed it was lengthen. 

Now there’s still confusion because some of the school 

divisions, as I’ve indicated, felt that alters or shorten meant 

lengthen or shorten. The opposite of shorten of course, is 

lengthen. So there is some confusion around that, and I know 

the minister has been in consultation with school divisions, and 

trying to assure them that indeed this is not a change, but indeed 

this is just clarification. 

 

When we look at the section around amalgamations and 

restructuring, and I know that there’s a tremendous amount of 

examples that the minister has shared with this House. Just a 

few days ago, in estimates, the minister has indicated that there 

are a number of projects where school divisions are considering 

restructuring, considering amalgamations, and that indeed those 

local contracts, those discussions, will have to take place in a 

new setting. 

 

So the changes to The Education Act involves everyone, as I 

indicated last day. We have changes that will involve the 

students, we have changes that will involve the teachers, and of 

course we have changes that will have significant ramifications 

on school boards. And these are not to be taken lightly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have some concerns, and there are concerns that have been 

raised to us by all players in the education field, regarding 

section 17, the proposed changed section 17, where we are 

talking about a very specific group, and that group is our 

students with disabilities — those students who have been 

designated. 

 

(1445) 

 

Now the Act as it is changed, is claiming and putting in place a 

system that will allow for appeals under three very specific 

conditions. The first condition of course, is that the ability to 

have designation take place or not take place. There is an 

appeals procedure put in place to deal with that concern as a 

parent may have. 

 

The second one is around program. The parent will have the 

right to appeal a program that is put in place for that particular 

student. 

 

The third point that is also being put in place, is that there will 

be an appeals procedure for the placement. I’m hearing from 

boards of education that placement of course, deals with actual 

placement within a school. That has caused some concern for 

boards of education. I don’t think they’re insurmountable 

concerns. I think that these kinds of concerns are legitimate, and 

I know that the Minister of Education has also heard those 

concerns. 

 

And I think that there can be a very, very amicable solution to 

this in terms of ensuring that parents have the right to appeal, 

the right to appeal for designation or non-designation, the right 

to appeal a program that is either put in place or not put in place 

for their student who requires that special program. But there is 

some concern around placement. And I know that the minister 

is taking that under advisement. 

 

  



1490  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

The final two sections that have caused, I think, some concern 

for, especially, boards of education are the sections 19 and 20 

that deal with successor rights of teachers. And the first reaction 

by boards of education of course around sections 19 and 20 was 

less than positive, I guess maybe would be the best way to 

describe them. 

 

But when I look at the need for change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and the need for school divisions to address restructuring and 

address amalgamations and move forward, it is crucial that all 

the players are involved in this process. And the key, the key, I 

think, is of course the student. That is number one. If 

amalgamations are being done in the best interests of students, 

that is the first role. 

 

Secondly, I think what we’re looking at is the teachers have to 

be . . . their concerns have to be addressed. And when I take a 

look at the successor rights of teachers in terms of the ability to 

take forward a current contract that is in place, as a former 

teacher, as a former board member, I have a bit of confusion in 

terms of what is in the best interests of everyone involved. 

 

And when you take a look at the fact that teachers are crucial to 

amalgamations taking place, they have to be supportive and 

they have to be assured that their rights are also protected. And 

we as a Liberal Party have always stood for the fact that if a 

contract is signed, the contract is in place until something else is 

negotiated and replaces that. 

 

So when we take a look at teacher contracts . . . And there will 

be a number of situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can 

imagine two current school divisions that are going to 

amalgamate — and we know that there are examples across the 

province right now — the Act, as it suggests, will allow the 

teachers in each school division to keep their current contract 

until a new one is negotiated. 

 

It also talks about areas where there isn’t a full division that is 

added of course to a new configuration. It’s part of a school 

division. It’s a school maybe that is now moved to a new entity, 

a new school division. This Act is suggesting that the teachers 

in that school will also carry their current local agreement until 

a new one is restructured. 

 

I know it will cause confusion. I believe it will cause some 

headaches for the administrators. But I think that is in the best 

interests of the teachers and that will be in the best interest of 

working towards a new negotiated contract for that new school 

division. 

 

And I guess I would encourage the minister to ensure that a 

process is in place whereby when there is restructuring and 

amalgamation and we have — who knows? — the possibility of 

three, four, five local agreements all being in place in the same 

school division, that there will have to be a process of 

assistance from the Minister of Education’s department 

whereby this new school division, the board of education 

elected in that new school division, can move towards 

negotiating a new contract that meets the needs of the area. 

 

And I know that those concerns have been raised to the minister  

by boards of education, by individual trustees, and by teachers, 

because of course they have a very significant role in this. And 

there are teachers of course who do not want to lose certain 

items of their contract. 

 

But in the new process, in the new negotiations that must take 

place, I encourage the Minister of Education to provide 

leadership in that area so that indeed we do not end up in 

mediation processes where we end up in costly ventures for 

boards of education to arrive at a new contract for that new 

group of teachers. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just want to 

take a moment to also speak to Bill No. 59 and just 

acknowledge the fact that this Bill has been fairly recently 

introduced. And I know my colleague, the member from 

Rosthern, has had the privilege of meeting with representatives 

from the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation). 

 

We’ve also had some discussion from school boards and school 

groups. We’ve sought some more input, and I think all those 

involved in education certainly want us to take proper and due 

consideration before we just move through these series of Bills. 

And I think it’s imperative that discussion be allowed to take 

place. And therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No 60 — The 

Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 

again I’m pleased to address Bill No. 60 as a very, very 

important Act in the field of education. This is An Act to amend 

The Teachers’ Federation Act. Since this Bill was introduced 

six short days ago, a swirl of controversy has erupted 

concerning some particular sections. 

 

Part of the problem on this Bill and indeed Bill No. 59, The 

Education Act that we’ve just talked about, can be directly 

related to the extreme pressure that the minister and this 

government are focusing on a speedy passage of these Bills. I 

have received some criticism for adjourning this Bill earlier on 

this week, but I refuse to apologize for taking more time to 

gather input on legislation that will impact over 10,000 

teachers, and indirectly, thousands of students. 

 

I think it was extremely unreasonable to introduce legislation 

that will apply to thousands of people, on a Friday, and then 

expect to have significant input from stakeholders by Monday 

when it appeared for second reading. 

 

As a representative of the people and as Education critic, it is  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

my duty to gather valuable feedback on Bills and hopefully 

anticipate some of the problems and impact they will have 

before allowing them to pass. 

 

I am pleased to say that I have now had the time to meet with 

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation’s general secretary, 

Fred Herron, their president Carol Moen, and the assistant 

general secretary, Derwyn Crozier-Smith. I also met with the 

Saskatchewan school trustees executive: executive director, 

Craig Melvin, and the SSTA’s vice-president, Debbie Ward. 

And I was in communication on the telephone with President Al 

Klassen. 

 

Most of the problems and opposition to Bill 60 surrounds 

section 45. This section defines the powers and situations the 

STF may reprimand members for acting in opposition to 

collective membership. 

 

The issue is: what is the intent of, quote: “collective interests of 

teachers.” The STF has indicated that this section refers only to 

the collective bargaining interests of teachers. Others, including 

some teachers, feel that it has the potential to be applied in 

broader parameters. This issue needs to be crystal clear in 

regards to where it applies and when it applies. 

 

Another issue that has been raised is in regards to policies 

within section 45. Policies are passed by a simple majority of 

those in attendance at a council meeting. Too often in this world 

— and I’m not in any way insinuating the STF does this — but 

too often organizations pass policies in response to an isolated 

incident. Over time, you end up with a large number of policies 

that may or may not be relevant. It is a challenge for 

organizations to continually keep their membership informed 

and up to date on all of its policies. 

 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, policies are often open to 

interpretation as to their intent. It is very easy for people to be 

in contravention of policies because of the reasons that I have 

just mentioned. 

 

We will need to look at the relevance of policies versus bylaws 

in this regard. When I review the penalties as applied in section 

45, I do have to question the validity of the STF having the 

power to force a member to pay for all or any part of the cost of 

a hearing. 

 

Does this mean a teacher would have to risk paying everyone’s 

pay loss, mileage, meals, and rooms just to defend him or 

herself? This is a very onerous responsibility, and indeed I see it 

as a potentially large impediment to a fair process. 

 

In addition to this, the STF wants the ability to then go after its 

members in court to collect those penalties. This goes far 

beyond what is allowed in other organizations that are involved 

in collective bargaining. I think we all need to determine if this 

is a precedent worthy of note. 

 

At this time I must also express my disappointment with the 

minister’s lack of leadership on this legislation. Introducing 

these Bills on such a pressured time line and without collective 

input from both the SSTA and the STF when drafting the  

legislation has created some harsh feelings and animosity 

between these two key groups. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have received numerous letters, 

numerous phone calls from boards of education, from teachers, 

that I feel would not have been necessary. There needed to be 

clarification between the stakeholders. 

 

As I mentioned a couple of days ago, this has been a practice in 

education, where stakeholders are brought together and there is 

consultation, there is a degree of bickering back and forth in 

terms of trying to establish policy that is in the best interests of 

everyone. This obviously did not occur to its fullest extent. And 

I know there were some things, some meetings that occurred 

and sharing of some information, but there needs to be more. 

 

We do not need to have the two most important groups in 

education in the province of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Teachers Federation and the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, at loggerheads over an issue. We need to work 

together and build a better education system, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I’m gravely concerned that an atmosphere of ill will could 

adversely affect ongoing negotiations for the new collective 

bargaining agreement on the teachers’ contract. If the proper 

consultation had taken place before these Bills were introduced, 

the minister could have avoided some of the current 

controversy. 

 

At this time, I will conclude my remarks by saying that I look 

forward to further meetings and further input from the STF, 

from the SSTA, from the minister, to discuss possible 

amendments that may be introduced in Committee of the 

Whole. Thank you. 

 

(1500) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as the member from Canora has stated and my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern, has also mentioned, 

there are a number of concerns in regards to the present 

legislation before this Assembly — legislation that has actually 

just arrived before the Assembly. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s 

imperative that we don’t just, in a matter of a day or two, move 

through a piece of legislation that has a lot of people up and 

quite concerned. In fact it’s not just the SSTA or the STF; it’s 

individual teachers. But even the Catholic school board has 

reservations regarding this piece of legislation as well. 

 

And I think the minister, in her comments, made some . . . 

suggested that we need time to and we should take time to 

discuss the issues with all of the stakeholders. And I think that’s 

certainly important. I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that if it were the minister today sitting on this side of 

the Assembly, that minister would not even allow this 

legislation to get close to adjournment . . . or movement  

  



1492  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

through second reading; that they would be standing up and 

raising the concerns as well. 

 

I think it’s important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the issues be 

heard; that you take the time. And it’s not just representatives of 

the SSTA or the STF; there are individuals out there who may 

have differing opinions. There’s all the boards, the boards of 

education, who have found out recently that their shortfall is 

substantial. 

 

And as a result of the shortfall in their allocation of funding, 

they’re going to be looking at cutting teachers — cutting 

members of the STF from their teaching groups, from the 

teaching bodies. I think there’s a lot of concerns that are out 

there. And it’s certainly imperative that we do give due course 

and diligence to review some of these matters. 

 

And rather than just rushing through a piece of legislation that 

has a number of people calling us and calling the Liberal caucus 

and raising these matters, it’s imperative that we do take the 

time to review this appropriately. And if the minister thinks that 

this is supposed to be through in a matter of one, two, three, or 

five days, well then I don’t think the government members 

should be all that concerned if it’s adjourned for a day or two so 

that proper review can take place. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it isn’t a problem, I 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 5  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I’ll begin by inviting the minister to 

introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sitting 

next to me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind 

me is Brian Smith, the executive director of PEBA (Public 

Employees Benefits Agency). To my right is Kathy Strutt, the 

general manager of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan who has 

come in from Kindersley today. 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The minister has the same officials, 

minus one. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Minister, 

welcome to your officials this afternoon. I recognize that many 

of these pension Bills are similar in nature and are 

 housekeeping. However, I have a few questions in regard to 

Bill No. 6. 

 

As I understand the Bill, it allows for negotiation of 

contributions, in terms of the pension contributions. Is that 

correct, Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Then in these negotiations, Minister, in 

whose interest is it, or whose responsibility is it to negotiate 

lower contribution rates, the employer or the union? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, it’s done through the 

collective bargaining process. So it has to be both sides that 

agree to this. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, as I understand it as well, it allows 

. . . it provides for the negotiation of the contribution rates. Is 

there any provision for the negotiation in this process of the 

benefits that accrue out of the pension system as well? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, there’s no 

provision for that. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Are the parameters of the negotiations 

broad enough? While I understand that they can be negotiated 

and are flexible by agreement, are they flexible in so far as an 

employer could actually take a contribution holiday, or an 

employee could take a contribution holiday in that for some 

period of time there would actually be no contributions? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I think what needs to 

be clarified is this affects only the employee contributions. So 

again, I think the key part of the Bill is that it has to be agreed 

to by both sides. So the employer would have to be willing to 

agree to that through the collective bargaining process. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I agree, Minister, in terms that I said 

employer, but I meant employee. 

 

Back to my question. Is it possible then to negotiate a period of 

time where there would be in effect a zero contribution or a 

contribution holiday? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, it would be possible, 

but again what I would stress is that it has to be something that 

both sides agree is reasonable to be done. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Is there in this legislation, Minister, any 

impact on pension surpluses or deficits, again, if they would 

occur; or does again this negotiated approach allow it to be 

flexible enough to deal with either of those issues? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, all this really does is 

allow some flexibility. But it’s in the interests of both parties to 

ensure that the pension plan is in good financial shape. 

 

So I think it doesn’t have any dramatic effect one way or the 

other on the fiscal position of the pension plan. And I think both 

parties have a common interest in ensuring the pension  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

plan remains in good shape. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  A final question, Minister. I recognize that 

it applies to a number of Acts, if you like, or people under 

certain bargaining units — for example, SaskPower, SaskTel, 

things of that nature. Is the fact that this is becoming an item for 

bargaining going to be a further problem for the negotiating 

processes? As one employee group perhaps bargains for a little 

better position, does that put further pressure on the Crowns in 

order to, sort of, always one-upmanship, of ending up with the 

best deal? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think there already is flexibility in 

bargaining because a situation of one group of employees who, 

say, work for one Crown is going to be quite different often 

than the situation of another group of employees who work for 

another Crown, or another part of government. 

 

So I think in the system there already is flexibility and this may 

be something that most Crowns are not interested in even 

utilizing. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, officials. I have no 

further questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, or Deputy Chairman. 

Madam Minister, welcome, and to your officials. 

 

Just one question on this Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act. What area is that pension . . . or this specific 

Bill addressing? I know we had some discussion over the last 

couple of years about pensions that went back a number of 

years ago, where there was change in bringing in some of the 

municipal employees about 20 years ago and making sure that 

they were included in new provisions of the Act. I’m wondering 

where . . . what this specific Bill is addressing and the changes 

from the previous Bills. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, there are a number 

of technical changes that are being requested by the municipal 

employees’ union . . . pension group. This is not a plan that is a 

government plan; it’s actually we administer the plan on behalf 

of municipal employees. So they come to us and have to request 

us to make the changes, but it’s really up to them to decide what 

the changes are. 

 

(1515) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to move the 

committee report the Bill without amendment. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, just before I do 

that I’d like to thank Brian Smith because he’ll be leaving. And 

I would like to report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Next to 

me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance; behind Bill is 

Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister of revenue; and behind 

me is Kelly Laurans, manager of corporate taxes and incentives. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, 

Minister, and new officials, welcome. 

 

Minister, a question. As I understand, in the Bill, one of the 

things that is in section 3, it talks about a new definition of 

financial institutions. And my question is related to this clause 

which states: a “financial institution means a corporation . . .” 

which carries on “. . . the business of offering its services as a 

trustee to the public;” 

 

And I wonder if . . . that definition would certainly be the 

standard definition of banks and trust companies and things of 

that nature. But some accounting firms offer their services as 

trustees in the case of bankruptcies or things of that nature. Is 

the legislation intended to actually include under the definition 

those kinds of instances? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, it would not 

include accounting firms as described by the member. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. There’s no reference 

to insurance companies in the new definition of financial 

institutions. Are insurance companies covered somewhere else 

in the Act or are they deliberately not included? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, the insurance 

companies are not included in this either. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  With the new tax rate implemented in the 

section, clause 7 subsection 13, and the new deduction rates in 

the following section of 14(2), is the amount of taxes collected 

from financial institutions revenue neutral or will it increase or 

decrease? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The result will be in 1997-98, $2.5 

million more than the existing regime. 

 

  



1494  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. That concludes my 

questions, and thank your officials for their attendance. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I 

do that, I’d like to thank the officials. I would also like to move 

the Act without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I will invite the minister to introduce 

her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. Sitting next to me is Randy Williams, the CEO 

(chief executive officer) of Tourism Saskatchewan, and behind 

him is Bonnie Baird, who’s also from Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you and welcome to the minister and 

the officials. And I would like to say first off, that we definitely 

do salute the work of the Tourism Authority, and since the 

changes are something that has been actually recommended by 

the Authority, then it’s something that we of course would like 

to work with. 

 

We have a few questions, and I guess we’d like to make sure 

that the membership fee that’s charged to the tourist operators 

reflect the reality of tourism in Saskatchewan. Can you give us 

an idea of what factors or criteria will govern the level of fees 

paid by the members? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The fee will be $25, to recognize the 

fact that this is a small fee . . . to recognize the fact that it is 

small businesses that we’re dealing with. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there going to be . . . or is the Authority 

trying to do some sort of cost/benefit assessment to see how the 

Tourism Authority is benefiting the members? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The Authority just concluded a 

survey, and of course each and every year they monitor to 

ensure that the benefits are realized in terms of the costs that are 

associated with the Authority. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Has there been any negative feedback from the 

members or from the tourism industry as a whole with the 

changes to the Act last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The response has been very positive 

and a lot of support for the changes and what the effects have 

been. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are there any assurances to the members of  

the Authority that the cost level will remain something that’s 

going to be usable or bearable for all of them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think the important thing here is 

that the Authority relies on support from the industry; so they 

have to ensure that the accountability is there, the fees are 

appropriate for what is being delivered, and that the Authority is 

operating effectively. The support is there and they will 

continue to ensure that it remains. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, this Bill, along with many 

others, has regulations involved with it and lots of times the 

regulations have more teeth to them than the Bill itself. We are 

wondering if the work has been done on the regulations. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The regulations have been put 

together; they have gone through the board and the 

membership, and been approved by the board and the 

membership. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So they’ve all been approved now even before 

the Bill is finalized and is gazetted? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well in the sense that the Bill was 

approved by the membership too. So they said here’s the 

changes that we would propose to make in the Bill; here’s the 

changes that we would propose to make in the regulations. Of 

course both the Bill and the regulations depend on them being 

passed by the government. 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Will we be able to see the regulations fairly 

soon now? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The Authority is quite prepared to 

share the regulations with whoever would like to see them. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The one other aspect of this Bill revolves 

around capital funding and it’s going to be handled in a 

partnership between government and private sectors. I’m 

wondering what kind of cost controls the ministers envision or 

you have in mind about this partnership. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The Authority has no capital funds 

at its disposal right now. All of the expenses of course, are 

reviewed by the board and there will be an auditing process in 

place; so that there will be an audit at the end to confirm the 

results. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and thank you to 

your officials. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and to the 

minister and her officials. In this tourism Bill, clause 3 amends 

a process for selecting members of the board of the Authority. 

And you stated that this clause is necessary because the 

Authority members do not want to be involved with setting the 

standards for inclusion in this board. 

 

It seems to be unusual for a professional body not to want to be  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

involved and I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what was really 

being . . . what the concerns were and why it was suggested that 

this clause be placed into this specific Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think I need to clarify to the 

member opposite what is being done here. TISASK (Tourism 

Industry Association of Saskatchewan) was one of the agencies 

that merged to form the Tourism Authority. TISASK is 

designated in the Act as having a board seat. Well that has to be 

changed because TISASK no longer exists. So it’s just 

removing that seat because there’s no longer any rationale for it; 

and making the seat instead a seat that is open to election. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Now so what you’re saying is that seat, when 

you’re saying it’s open to election now, who gets to vote on that 

particular seat, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  All the members get to vote on that 

election. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Now when you set up the membership through 

regulation, do we have a set number of board members that will 

be on the . . . be recognized through regulation? When that set 

number is there, is that number a number that’s considered a 

permanent number or is that, as a result of regulation, in a 

position where it can be changed on an annual basis or it just 

makes it easier to change it down the road if there’s changes in 

the Authority? What’s the reasons for that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The Act specifies that there will be 

15 members, and the regulation just clarifies the positions of the 

members. But it’s in the legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of 

all I’d like to thank the officials, and I would like to move that 

the Bill be reported without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds 

Amendment Act, 1977 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

official. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 

to introduce Denise Haas, who’s from Saskatchewan Economic 

Development in the investment programs branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, Minister, 

welcome to your official. 

 

As I understand this Bill, it really is the wind-up of the 

community bonds program which I understand will terminate in 

the fiscal ’96 and ’97. Is that correct? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, because there would be ongoing 

bond programs that would have some ongoing term to them, I 

understand that what it is also going to do is put the 

responsibility for this program over to the Crown Investment 

Corporation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, with these bond programs there’s 

also a guarantee for the individual bond investors who have 

invested the money into the bond program for the duration of 

the bond program. And I believe in some of these programs 

they were for five-year term and then there was a further 

five-year that they could be renewed. Are all the conditions that 

were in place when the investors invested in the community 

bonds going to be honoured by CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) then? And why CIC instead of 

the Minister of Finance, for example? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the answer is that 

yes, all the terms and conditions will be the same as they were 

previously. It’s been transferred to CIC because they have the 

expertise at managing this sort of portfolio. So it’s a more 

appropriate place for the community bonds to continue. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  So then the guarantees will be exercised by 

CIC if need be, rather than by the government through 

Department of Finance? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Minister. That’s all 

the questions I have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 

to thank Ms. Haas first, and I’d like to move that the committee 

report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill  

  



1496  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1545) 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Deputy Chair: — We’ll begin the day by inviting the 

minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 

Glenda Yeates, who is the senior associate deputy minister of 

Health. Immediately behind me is Steve Petz, who is the 

associate deputy minister of Health. To the left of Ms. Yeates is 

Barry Lacey, who is the director of the integrated financial 

services unit of finance and management services. And behind 

Ms. Yeates is Wolfgang Langenbacher, who is the director of 

administration for finance and management services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

welcome to you and your officials again today. I’d like to start 

our questions out today, if we could maybe, around the area of 

water and how it relates to the Department of Health — in 

particular, groundwater. 

 

A couple of nights ago I asked some questions of the 

Environment minister as it relates to groundwater and the safety 

of it in the province, and I’m wondering if you could maybe 

explain to us, and to the people of Saskatchewan, what role 

your department plays in ensuring the safety of, in particular, 

groundwater around Saskatchewan, and that would include 

dugouts — community dugouts, private dugouts — community 

wells, and those types of things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, there are medical officers of 

health who administer functions under The Public Health Act 

with respect to the health implications of the water supply, and 

they work for district health boards. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I don’t think you answered my question 

entirely. But while we’re on the medical officers and you say 

they are employed by district health boards, how many do we 

have in the province? How many health boards have their own? 

Who shares? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, there is a chief medical officer 

of health for the province who is Dr. David Butler-Jones, who is 

the head of the population health branch of the Department of 

Health. And then there are eight medical officers of health who 

are in the health districts, and eight of the districts act as host 

districts for all 30 of the districts. So that you might have one 

medical officer of health who’s responsible for three, four, five, 

or perhaps six districts, and eight of them cover off the entire 

province. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, maybe . . . I 

don’t have to have those names now, but I’d like to know the 

districts that are the host districts. 

 

On funding of those officers, is that a line item in district 

budgets, or is that a provincial . . . are they funded by the 

province over and above the district budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The money that was previously provided 

by the province for public health services and mental health 

services has been given to the districts. And that funding has 

been kept separate as a source of funding for the districts which 

deliver the services as opposed to being incorporated into the 

needs-based, population-based funding. 

 

So we’ve just continued with the funding but now we give those 

amounts to the districts. And then they in turn employ the 

public health people, as well as there would be a similar 

situation in the area of mental health as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Who would make the decision, Mr. Minister, 

as to where these officers would be deployed in terms of timing 

of work? For example, if Midwest Health District had a number  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

of water problems and it took up a considerable amount of time 

and someone else ran short, who makes that type of decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That decision would be made by the host 

districts together. So that the eight districts that have the 

medical officers of health would get together and assess what 

the needs of the other districts were. And if one of them needed 

particularly more help, then they would try to assist one another 

and cover each other off as needs arose. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So I guess the districts as a whole would have 

to decide if they needed . . . if eight of these people weren’t 

enough, they would have to make that decision to spend more 

of their allotted monies on that area. Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that’s correct. And I’m advised that as 

between or amongst all the provinces, we probably have the 

best coverage in terms of the number of medical officers of 

health. And the addition of the chief medical officer of health in 

the person of Dr. David Butler-Jones is also a bit of an 

expansion in that area. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Is the safety of the water supply in the 

province under the Department of Health? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised that the primary responsibility 

would be with the municipalities. The Department of the 

Environment would also have responsibility. But if there were 

health concerns arising out of the water supply that were not 

adequately dealt with, then that would also become of interest 

to and the responsibility of the medical health officers, who 

would be expected to ensure that other parties, including 

municipalities, exercised the responsibilities they should 

exercise to ensure that the people have a safe water supply. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, you’re talking in terms of if 

there’s a problem. Who goes about the province these days 

ensuring on a regular basis that the water supply is indeed safe? 

And that would pertain to wells as well as dugouts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Department of the Environment 

regularly tests various water supplies, and municipalities also 

routinely test their water supplies. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess because there’s a number of different 

departments involved . . . and I’ll just quote something that, if I 

can read it, the statement that you made in this context. It says: 

 

Upon receipt of an application, numerous agencies, 

including the respective health districts, can be asked to 

review and provide comments regarding an application. 

 

I guess listening to your comments and listening to the 

comments of the Minister of Environment previous, I’m just 

wondering who is the focal point? I use an example I guess, Mr. 

Minister, a comment from the gentleman — and you replied to 

his point — was if a landowner’s water supply is affected, 

whether it be by a chemical spill or whether it be from, we use 

an example of a new hog barn, and this maybe 20, 30 miles  

away from the site, his question was: who does he sue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well municipalities have a primary 

responsibility to ensure that there’s a safe water supply for the 

people. 

 

In terms of the specific question of who one would sue, I can’t 

answer that question because it would depend upon the 

circumstances; whether any particular party (a) had a 

responsibility and (b) failed to exercise that responsibility. And 

without knowing the circumstances of any particular case, I 

can’t answer the question who somebody would go about suing. 

 

My concern, in fact, is not who someone would sue if they got 

into trouble. My concern, from the point of view of the 

Department of Health, would be to ensure that if anything is 

brought to our attention, that we take all reasonable steps that 

we can take to make sure that nobody is put at risk; to rectify 

the situation; to provide services and testing if it is alleged that 

any particular water supply is not safe. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well just to close this off and be sure in my 

mind: if a municipality doesn’t indicate that there’s a problem, 

then your department wouldn’t be involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that is not what I mean to indicate. If 

through any source, whether a municipality, the Department of 

Environment, a citizen, otherwise, someone suggests that a 

water supply is not safe, then that is something that medical 

health officers under The Public Health Act will want to look 

into, provide testing, and take any steps and make any orders 

that they may have jurisdiction to make in order to try to rectify 

that situation — regardless of how the matter arises. 

 

My point was to say that in the course of everyday life, we 

expect that the municipalities will be testing their water supply 

and ensuring it’s safe, and indeed that is what happens on a 

day-to-day basis, and year to year. So one expects that the 

municipalities will carry out their responsibilities. The 

Department of Environment will get involved if there’s some 

danger to the environment. 

 

And if there’s some danger to the public health, regardless of 

how it arises, then the Department of Health will, through the 

medical health officers and in cooperation with the health 

districts, will take all such steps and make all such orders within 

their jurisdiction as are necessary to ensure the public safety. 

 

Mr. McLane:  In the event there is a problem in a 

jurisdiction and municipality, for instance, and there is a 

problem, is there any cost associated back to the municipality in 

any work that’s done by your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  When the department serves 

municipalities, as I’ve described, to test the water supply, they 

don’t charge back any cost for that service. That does not mean 

to say that somebody just wanting to get a well tested or 

something like that can call up the Department of Health and 

have them test it. But when the Department of Health is brought  

  



1498  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

in through the medical health officers . . . or medical officers of 

health to check out a situation, they don’t charge the cost of that 

back to the municipality. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving on then, if 

we could talk a minute about the physician recruitment in the 

province and a couple of weeks ago, I believe . . . well shortly 

after the budget you announced a new organization that will be 

focusing on this and subsequently you’ve talked about some 

dollars being put back into rural communities or communities in 

general to recruit physicians in rural Saskatchewan. Would you 

elaborate on that a bit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Actually I think it would be fair to say 

that we would agree with what I assume the member’s concern 

would be too, that we have to address the question of the areas 

of the province that have an inadequate physician supply as a 

very serious matter. So let’s agree that that’s a matter that we 

take seriously, you take it seriously, and we both want to do 

something about it. 

 

Having said that, I want to point out, as the member will know, 

that this is a challenge in many parts of Canada. And I’ve 

spoken to many of my colleague ministers of Health in other 

provinces and unfortunately they have the same kinds of 

problems we do. But what I want to say is that I think it would 

be fair to say that, in the last number of months we’ve been 

doing more in terms of new ideas for trying to deal with the 

situation than has been done in the past. 

 

And the member talks about the recruitment agency. I think 

that’s very important. And I actually had dinner last Friday 

evening with the residents and interns in Saskatoon and we 

discussed ways to increase the number of medical graduates 

that will stay in the province. They pointed out to me that in the 

medical school — which the member will know is under the 

jurisdiction of the University of Saskatchewan as opposed to the 

Department of Health — they have had recruitment from the 

United States and other places that have come in to talk to our 

students about practising. And nobody from Saskatchewan — 

this is very hard to believe — has ever gone into the medical 

school from our own province, to talk to the students about the 

opportunities of practice here. 

 

And so one of the things we’re trying to do in cooperation with 

the medical association and the college of physicians and 

surgeons, as well as the SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations) — which the member is very familiar 

with; is a former president — is to have a recruitment agency 

that will do for Saskatchewan what recruiters do for other parts 

of the world, with our own students, whose education we pay 

for. And so we’re hopeful that that will make a difference. 

 

And obviously it’s something we should try. And what we’re 

trying to do is get the students to sit down with people from 

rural Saskatchewan. And I was very pleased to see many 

representatives of some of the rural districts at the dinner we 

had last Friday, who were speaking to the residents and interns 

about opportunities. And some of the residents and interns were 

talking to me and indicated that they actually were going to 

practice in rural Saskatchewan. So that’s one thing we’re doing. 

Another thing I should mention which I think is very 

significant, is that the department of family medicine at the 

College of Medicine, which trains the general practitioners or 

family practitioners, wants to change the method by which 

family practitioners are educated, by involving them more in 

rural Saskatchewan and everyday, real-life practices in the rural 

areas. That too, I hope, will make a big difference. 

 

A third thing that we’ve done at the medical school which I 

think is important, is a bursary program which has gone up to 

$18,000 per year per student. And in return for that, the students 

must work for a year where needed within the province. And at 

the present time — that program isn’t that old — but there are 

six graduates of the medical school that are out working in 

different parts of Saskatchewan and returning that service 

commitment. 

 

A fourth recent development is, as the member will know, more 

support for on-call physicians in rural areas. Because one of the 

problems that we have in the rural areas is physician burn-out 

because of lack of support. And we want a rule whereby 

physicians in a rural area should have to be on call at the 

hospital once every three weeks on weekends, but not beyond 

that. And beyond that we want to provide them with support; so 

that physicians can be called in to support them. 

 

And I’m pleased to report to the member that, by all accounts 

from what I hear from the medical community — and of course 

I speak to them quite regularly, and the health districts — that 

seems to be working rather well. Although I’ve certainly 

indicated to all concerned that if any changes are needed then 

we want to hear about those. We’re certainly prepared to make 

changes. 

 

A fifth thing that we’re doing, and a fifth change in the 

relatively recent past, is the practice enhancement fund. And I 

apologize to the member for this lengthy answer because I think 

this is what he asked about, was the practice enhancement fund. 

But I thought it was worthwhile to indicate the many other 

things that are being done as well, because the member will be 

interested in them and perhaps has some questions about them. 

 

The practice enhancement fund is a fund jointly announced by 

myself, on behalf of the government, and the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association which will provide grants of $25,000 to 

physicians who do not presently practice within the province 

and who are willing to set up practice in areas of the province 

where we need them, and to make a commitment that they will 

remain there for a least 18 months. 

 

That’s something that has been tried in other provinces; we 

want to try it here. We don’t know how it will work in the sense 

that we haven’t done it before. And we don’t know how many 

physicians we’ll bring in, although there have been some 

indications of support and we’re encouraged by that. 

 

If it doesn’t work very well, then we’ll change it. We’ll try 

something else — and I’ve indicated that — but we think it may 

work, and we want to try it. 

 

And another thing we’re doing, a sixth thing that is new, is  

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

providing funding for specialist education on the part of rural 

practitioners. So that if rural practitioners want to specialize and 

become an anesthetist or some other specialty that is relevant to 

their rural practice, we will provide them with support. It’s only 

two physicians a year, but we’ll also pay for two replacement 

doctors for them to enhance their education, get the training 

they need, and practice in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So those are six things that we’re doing. And I could actually go 

on and indicate some other things that are covered by the rural 

practitioners fund that we have — the rural and remote 

incentives fund, which has gone up, by the way, from 570,000 

two years ago to 1.6 million this year. So it basically tripled in 

size. 

 

And I want to say this to the member and to everybody: I have 

indicated to the medical association, the college of physicians 

and surgeons, SAHO, the College of Medicine, and anyone else 

that is prepared to listen to me, that this government and this 

minister will do anything reasonable to stabilize the supply of 

physicians in our province, and takes very seriously the need to 

have an adequate physician supply in each and every part of the 

province. 

 

It’s a big challenge. It’s a big job. It’s a big problem. But I want 

to assure you that I am extremely sincere in my commitment to 

try to address this problem. We’re doing a lot of specific things. 

We hope they’ll work. If they don’t work, we’ll work with the 

opposition, with the medical community, or anybody else to 

make it work better. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly I think 

you and I would agree on one thing today and that is that there 

has been very little done in this area in the past 15 years and so 

I would commend you for any efforts that you are making. And 

it does appear that you are sincere and are trying to resolve this 

problem and I certainly will be watching and helping wherever 

I can to ensure that this does happen. 

 

One thing I did notice that you mentioned, or didn’t mention, 

when you’re talking about the $25,000 enhancement fee, is that 

you talked about, for Saskatchewan. I didn’t hear you say rural 

Saskatchewan necessarily; you said that where doctors might be 

needed. Now that does concern me a little bit because I think — 

and for general practitioners, my understanding and from my 

involvement in health care — that it is mostly in rural 

Saskatchewan where we are short of these doctors. Maybe you 

can clarify that a bit, if you would. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, well the member is correct that I may 

not have been quite as clear as I could have been. 

 

That fund would be available for physicians to go to 

communities with populations under $10,000 . . . or 10,000 

people, not communities over 10,000 people. And that certainly 

is where we have most of the problem. Although as the member 

will know, there will be communities over 10,000, where in 

some areas, especially some of the specialties, will be short of 

particular physicians. But this is aimed at rural Saskatchewan. 

Mr. McLane:  Is the $25,000 fee, is that a one-time shot? Is 

that . . . will happen once to a physician? Can it happen five 

times to a community? What parameters have you around that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That would be a one-time grant per 

physician. So that any particular physician would only be able 

to get that grant once. Now I wouldn’t say that any particular 

community would only get the grant once, because they might 

get . . . well they might get two at once, depending on the 

situation. And they might get one today, and if it’s successful, 

one at some future time as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  One of the areas — I didn’t hear you talk 

specifically about it, but I know you’re receptive to any ideas 

— we’ve talked about, the idea of a doctor pool. And that 

alleviates a lot of the time the problems of burn-out in doctors 

and does give them some time off. Now I know in the past six 

months or so you’ve thrown some money at after hours . . . 

remuneration for after hours for the doctors. 

 

My question would be, what about a doctor pool? It seems to 

me that one of the advantages — and I’m almost reluctant to 

say this about the health district — one of the advantages I 

might see of a health district is that they would have the 

potential to have a doctor pool and move those doctors about 

and maybe even, if we can use the word, “rent” them out to 

other districts, which would ensure that a doctor can have his 

weekend off when he needs it, or his week to go on holidays, or 

his two weeks to go to take a course or something. 

 

Where are you at with that sort of an idea or scenario? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well it’s a very good idea and suggestion. 

And there is a new program which is the SMA (Saskatchewan 

Medical Association) locum pool — new in the sense that as a 

result of the money to the rural and remote incentives fund that 

I’ve mentioned that has tripled in the last few years, we have 

expanded funding to the SMA locum pool to increase financial 

incentives to physicians to participate in the program. In other 

words, we’ve made the funding available to the SMA to create 

the pool. That’s not an entirely new idea but we haven’t been as 

successful in the past as we should have been. So you put more 

resources there. 

 

And we’re hoping that that will enable the SMA to have an 

attractive package for physicians that are willing to be part of 

the pool. We certainly want to attract them to the pool. 

 

We also think that it is somewhat related to the question of the 

on-call coverage, in the sense that the two can go together. 

Doctors from the pool may access some of the on-call funding, 

and the two programs may complement one another. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll be watching in 

great interest with some of these initiatives, and seeing how 

they pan out. 

 

Other members of the legislature here are wanting to ask a few 

questions in the short time that we have left today, but just in 

closing, one question regarding district health board elections 

this fall. Have you made any changes in that they’re going to be  

  



1500  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

concurrent or coincide with municipal elections? Or are we 

going to still have the added cost burden of having them 

separate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No decision has been finally made at this 

point. But I want to say to the member that the feedback that I 

have received from various sources, the health districts, SAHO, 

and so on — and I have been trying to talk to people about this 

over the last few months — is that they feel that in view of the 

fact that there are several municipal elections taking place this 

fall, that we should try to combine the health board elections 

with municipal elections to the extent that we can. 

 

And while I don’t have an announcement to be made today — 

and in fact it would probably be the Minister of Municipal 

Government as being primarily responsible for local elections 

who would make any such announcement — but we view the 

matter quite favourably in the sense that if logistically we could 

combine them this year, we think that we should do that and 

that’s what the public would expect us to do. 

 

So we’re going to have . . . well we’re having a serious look at 

that right now. And I expect that within a few weeks, certainly a 

maximum of one month, we’ll be making an announcement, 

and if it is feasible to combine them that we would want to go 

that way. But we do want to get the appropriate advice with 

respect to the issue of whether logistically you can do this. And 

the work is being done right now. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Certainly I would hope you could make that 

announcement sooner than later, because I’d hate to have to 

keep the House in session for any longer than we had to and 

that’d be one announcement we’d like to have before us before 

we get out of here. 

 

Could you give us an indication of what the costs might be for 

standalone district health board elections this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The estimate for standalone district health 

board elections is $570,000. 

 

Mr. McLane:  One last question on this before I pass it on is, 

any plans or discussions to improve the dismal turnout voting 

record of the district board elections to date of, in case you’re 

wondering, is between 15 and 20 per cent? How are you going 

to get people interested in electing district board members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised by the officials that the 

turnout, while too low, was in the neighbourhood of the turnout 

for other local government elections. And I agree with the 

member that one of the things we should do is people that are 

democrats, all of us, and believe in the democratic system, is 

encourage people to participate in it. Because if they don’t 

participate in it, then obviously that takes away from the health 

of the democratic system. And unfortunately, as the member 

will know, in municipal elections we quite often don’t get a 50 

per cent turnout and the same was certainly true of the first 

health board elections. 

 

Perhaps one way to increase the turnout in the health board  

elections, not to mention school board elections I guess, is to 

the extent possible combine all of the local elections so that 

people only have to go out once. That may have some positive 

effect. 

 

And so I guess I would just say I certainly agree with the 

sentiment behind the member’s questions and I think we have 

to do our utmost to encourage people to vote. And I think if we 

consider as seriously as we can, combining the health board 

elections with the others, that may go a long way to increasing 

the voter turnout somewhat, although we seem to have a 

long-standing problem in all local government elections in 

terms of turnout. 

 

So I guess we just have to agree to do everything we can to 

encourage people to participate in something we take too much 

for granted, which is our democratic system. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, first of 

all a follow-up regarding the question that the member put in 

regards to elections this fall. Based on some of the public 

meetings that I have attended, I would almost guess that in 

some cases you may find the turnout may be somewhat higher 

this fall. I guess time will tell if people are very concerned 

about health care in their area and what they perceive as being 

quality health care in the services provided. 

 

So we’ll have to wait and see whether or not people do take that 

time, or if they’re going to continue to view health board 

elections as a waste of time because of the fact that there’s very 

little a health board can do. They have so many dollars coming 

in, basically dictated as to where they’re going, and it doesn’t 

give them a lot to work with. And I think that’s one of the major 

concerns out there. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talked about local Saskatchewan youths 

staying in our province. I would find it interesting that you 

mention this and encouraging more young people staying here 

because of the fact they’ve been offered jobs. 

 

I happened to run into an individual in Kelowna when we were 

visiting at my wife’s folks back in February, and I had asked 

him why he was in Kelowna as he comes from Saskatchewan, 

wanted to practise here. His comment was, he left 

Saskatchewan because he applied to a number of hospitals, 

district areas, and wasn’t given the opportunity to practise. 

 

So that really surprised me. In fact he said no one even wanted 

him. So he moved to Kelowna and set up a practice in Kelowna. 

So I hope that isn’t something that other residents are finding. 

This individual actually looked at rural Saskatchewan, looked at 

the area that he had grown up in, and made application out 

there. 

 

Now I’m not exactly sure what were the circumstances and why 

he didn’t have that . . . wasn’t given consideration, but I think 

he was quite disturbed and quite annoyed that in a province that 

was crying for doctors and wanted to see local people stay 

around, that he ended up moving to Kelowna in order to put to 

practice his educational level of training. 

 

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

Mr. Minister, when it comes to health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I think we’re finding that a lot of people are 

becoming very discouraged with the health care and the level of 

health care and what’s being offered. I think there is a feeling 

that there’s been too much money, especially at the district 

board level, ending up in administrative positions and really not 

being put into service levels. 

 

That perception is there because we see the cut-back in the level 

of acute care beds; we see the cut-back in heavy care beds. We 

see the loss of staffing and access to acute care services. Even 

in our own community one board member made the comment 

that based on the numbers of this review . . . and it slips my 

mind right now, going back to the late ’80s where the talk of 

one bed per thousand population would say, well in this 

community, eight beds; that’s all you need. 

 

And I guess if you’re providing just emergency services, that’s 

about all you would need. Although I’ve been in some of our 

local centres at times when they have had all the beds full and 

they’ve had people on stretchers in the hallways because there 

were no active beds available to them as a result of the 

cut-backs implemented on them by the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I would like to know is, what is your real 

perception of health care in the province of Saskatchewan? Are 

we working toward a system that basically provides acute care 

at a handful of communities like the large urban centres? Or is 

it possible, Mr. Minister, to start looking at the fact that there 

are physicians who would be willing to look at the Kiplings or 

the Moosomins of this world and, that with district boards 

working together, providing more than just a GP (general 

practitioner) service. 

 

I know there’s a couple doctors in our area took a fair bit of . . . 

and increased their level of training in — I forget the name, 

term for gastrectomies or whatever the word here — and they 

would like to provide that service but they’ve certainly been 

hampered. And I can understand. I think maybe there’s some 

hindrances from the College of Medicine in regards to licensing 

and providing that service. 

 

(1630) 

 

Also some of these smaller centres may be looking at extra 

costs as far as equipment. But it would seem to me, Mr. 

Minister, that if districts can find a way of providing even some 

. . . if they have physicians willing to come to that district and 

willing to provide almost in some specialist fields — they’ve 

got the training — and they could find a way to provide that 

service. If we could get other districts working together, it 

would alleviate some of the pressure that we do have in our 

large urban centres in regards to acute care beds. 

 

And as you’re probably hearing, and as I hear every once in 

awhile, of people on long waiting-lists. So while I . . . my view 

has always been, if you can find a way to provide a service and 

it can meet a budget guideline, does the wellness model allow 

for that to take place? Or are we specifically geared to sending 

people to large urban centres and forcing them onto 

waiting-lists because there just aren’t enough beds in the large  

urban centres to accommodate the different surgeries that are 

required and the different acute care services that are required. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well that’s a very good question. The 

answer to the question is the wellness model and health reform 

does contemplate being able to get various surgical procedures 

at the local level. And I’m going to return to that in a moment, 

but first the member raised several issues that I want to 

comment briefly on. 

 

First of all, the member said that the health districts weren’t 

provided with sufficient monies — or some such comment — 

to make decisions. I want to tell the member that the health 

districts in Saskatchewan receive more than $1 billion to spend. 

That’s actually quite a bit of money. And as the member knows, 

this government has been putting a lot of new money into the 

health system, especially as a result of cut-backs from the 

federal Liberals in terms of health care. 

 

And I know that the member, having served in the previous 

government of Premier Devine, will know a bit about the 

importance of spending money carefully and how difficult it 

can be to back-fill for the federal government. 

 

In terms of your comment about the young doctor in Kelowna 

who didn’t find a receptive environment here, I share your 

concern and sentiment in that regard. And that’s why, as I was 

saying to the member from Arm River, we need to do a better 

job creating a more welcoming environment. And that’s why 

we’ve hired the recruiting agency and why I’ve taken the step 

of meeting directly with the residents and interns to try and 

discuss ways of improving the situation and making more of 

them want to stay in the province. 

 

Unfortunately, historically going back to the 1950s when the 

medical school was started in Saskatoon, we’ve only ever kept 

about 35 per cent of our graduates. And we need to improve 

that. 

 

In terms of the level of health care administration, I believe that 

as a result of going from 450 administrative boards to 30 district 

boards, the administration has been reduced by about 20 per 

cent across the province in terms of the number of 

administrators. And there are some, including the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, that say we should go back to the 450 

administrations. I think we should stick with the 30 and stick 

with the reduced number of administrations that we have. 

 

To answer the question specifically of the member about 

surgical procedures, it is not my view that we should try to 

discourage surgery in rural Saskatchewan and centralize it in 

the cities. I’ve made it quite clear on a number of occasions 

over the last year or so that we should encourage some surgeries 

to be performed in rural Saskatchewan where the numbers 

warrant and where it’s feasible. And in fact if you go to a place 

like Tisdale, there are at least 11 specialist services that are 

offered on an itinerant basis. So specialists go out there, 

perform surgery, and the local physician does the follow-up. 

 

I think that’s good for the specialist, for the system in 

Saskatoon and Regina, which would otherwise have to find a  

  



1502  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

bed for that person, for the local hospital which is used, and for 

the local physician who can use his or her skills cooperating 

with the specialist who’s done the surgery. We need to 

encourage more of that. 

 

In terms of specific questions about procedures that doctors in 

Moosomin or Kipling may wish to do, I can’t answer those 

questions. Those should be addressed at the local level. 

 

But I would say that, you know, we have to do everything in a 

sustainable manner. And if somebody gets trained in a 

speciality, we have to see that there’s sufficient numbers to 

warrant buying a piece of equipment and so on. But if it is 

practical, then it’s the view of the Department of Health and 

myself as Minister of Health, and the government, that these 

things should be done to the extent that they can be done in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

It should not be our view that we have hospitals only in Regina 

and Saskatoon. Although I would point out those hospitals are 

not for Regina and Saskatoon. They are for the people of the 

province as a whole, and the majority of people in them are 

from outside of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

A proposal has been made by the Liberal Party, under the 

leadership of Dr. Melenchuk, that we go to an Australian model 

whereby you would only have hospitals in Saskatoon and 

Regina. We reject that proposal. 

 

We think that we should have base hospitals in Saskatoon and 

Regina. We should have larger rural hospitals in places like 

Yorkton, which provide some speciality services like 

orthopedic surgery; North Battleford, Swift Current, Prince 

Albert, and some others that . . . Moose Jaw, and some others 

that I may not be mentioning right at the moment — 

Lloydminster. And then we should have a series of other rural 

hospitals, like the Tisdales and Rosetowns, and perhaps 

Moosomin — I don’t know — that should offer surgeries that 

can practically be done there. 

 

And that is the view of myself as minister, that is the view and 

the policy of the Department of Health and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. What we need to do is find what is practical and 

suitable for people across the province, what is sustainable 

fiscally, and to reassure people that we as government want to 

see these services across the province. 

 

And one of the messages that I’ve been trying to get out as a 

result of the very excellent budget of my colleague, the Minister 

of Finance, is that the money is there to stabilize the system and 

to keep in practice the view that I have in this regard. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair:  Before we start I would ask the minister to 

introduce her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sitting 

next to me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of Finance. Behind  

Bill is Bill Van Sickle, the executive director of administration. 

Behind me is Kirk McGregor, the assistant deputy minister of 

taxation and intergovernmental affairs. Next to me on my right 

is Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue 

division. And behind Len is Joanne Brockman, director of fiscal 

policy. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Minister, and 

welcome to your officials again this afternoon. 

 

Minister, in the time we have I would like to touch on a number 

of areas hopefully. The first one I would like to touch on is, I 

think it would come under category of budget analysis, and I 

am assuming that that would have to do also with the 

forecasting of financial trends and things of that nature. And I 

wonder if you would outline for us please, how your analysis 

and budget forecasting and things of that nature operate. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what we do in terms 

of developing forecasts is we obviously look at what outside 

agencies say about the economic performance of the province 

and what their projections are. So we look at what agencies like 

DRI (Data Resources Incorporated), Conference Board of 

Canada, project for the province. And we get our own figures 

internally from the different departments. We ask, for example, 

Energy and Mines what their forecasts are for the resource 

sector. And through that we compile our own estimates of what 

we think the economic forecasts or the fiscal forecast is going to 

be for the province. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, do you have as a matter of course 

or policy that you estimate on the safe side . . . I was going to 

say conservatively, and I know you wouldn’t want me to use 

that word, but on the safe side? Do you sort of hedge your bets 

a bit or do you try to be accurate? I know that forecasting is sort 

of like reading tea leaves. You can only build a certain level of 

certainty into it. But do you have any kind of a priority or 

policy, if you like, on the way that you do forecast? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I would 

say to the member opposite is we’re definitely not liberal in our 

forecasting. What we are is cautious. And so we tend to . . . If 

we’re going to be surprised, we want to be pleasantly surprised, 

rather than unpleasantly surprised. So if there’s a range, we go, 

generally, for the low range. 

 

And there’s often confusion. People say, well how come you 

only want the Saskatchewan economy to grow by whatever per 

cent? We say no, that’s not what we want. Our goal is probably 

something quite higher, but in terms of what we’re going spend 

our money on the basis of, we’re going to aim at the low end so 

that we don’t overspend and we are on target. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, leading out of your forecasting, in 

terms of the economic activity, another thing that I imagine has 

a great deal of impact in terms of your forecasting is the trends 

in interest rates and things of that nature, which would also 

have impact in terms of long- and short-term bonds and things 

of that nature. 

  



May 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

Minister, I wonder if you have figures on the fact on your debt 

reduction account, there is a fairly noticeable diminishing in the 

amount that we're paying on interest. Do you have the 

breakdown on how much of that is attributed to the fact that 

you’ve paid down things in terms of long-term debt as 

compared to the reduction in interest rates that have occurred 

over the last while? 

 

I’m asking of the amount that you’re saving on interest rates 

that you’re paying on long-term debt. Is there a breakdown 

between how much is actually due to interest rate declines and 

how much is because the principal amount that you’re paying 

interest on is diminished? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It’s really difficult to separate those 

out because they are intertwined. What I would say though is 

this: one of the major reasons why — the major reason why — 

we are paying less in interest is that we balanced the budget and 

we’re paying down the debt. If you look at governments where 

their interest costs are still going up, it’s because they still have 

a deficit. So the most important factor in lowering the interest 

cost to the government was getting rid of that $842 million 

deficit and then paying down the debt. 

 

We don’t benefit as much from cuts in interest rates as other 

governments because we borrow our money more on a 

long-term basis. And so it takes a long time of low interest rates 

for it to have as much impact. The flip side of that is when you 

get into something like the pre-referendum jitters, before the 

last referendum in Quebec, we also didn’t suffer as much from 

high interest rates, because ours are more like long-term 

mortgages that are locked in at a particular rate. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I appreciate that we just don’t go 

to a bank and get a line of credit as a member opposite 

suggested as you might do in a business. But you would have a 

number of bonds that would be at different maturity lengths of 

time, five-, ten-, whatever year bonds. Do you have a 

breakdown on how much of our debt is financed in these 

different instruments, if you like, of the short-term and mix of 

the long-term bonds? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Perhaps the best part to reveal that 

breakdown is in the budget address on page 61. There’s a 

breakdown there and it shows that savings bonds are about 10 

per cent, promissory notes about 2 per cent of the debt, bonds 

due in one year about 4 per cent, and then about 84 per cent is 

bonds due after one year. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, would you . . . Is there a 

noticeable difference in the interest rates that would be on those 

different categories? And I notice that 84 per cent, as you’ve 

indicated, are bonds greater than one year. But what I’m getting 

at, for example, Minister, if you were offering bonds of a 

five-year term, what would the interest rate likely be on 

five-year term bonds as compared to ten-year term bonds? Is 

there a difference between the rates of those kinds of terms? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, yes, there obviously  

is a difference. It’s the same principle as when you go out to get 

a mortgage for your house. They give you a different mortgage 

rate if it’s a one-year mortgage or a two-year or a five-year 

mortgage. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, which way . . . the short-term 

bonds more attractive as an interest rate when we’re actually 

borrowing the money if you like, than long-term bonds? I know 

that they’re different but which is the most attractive and have 

you taken that into consideration? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think one of the things that the 

Department of Finance in Saskatchewan needs to be credited 

with is taking a long-term view. It’s the same as your mortgage 

on your house; it’s cheaper to borrow money on the short term. 

But you’re also exposing taxpayers to a lot more risk, because if 

there’s fluctuations in interest rates upward you really have 

them exposed. 

 

And I know the Department of Finance has traditionally in 

Saskatchewan gone for the long haul with a more secure 

position for taxpayers. And I think the fact that they have been 

right in that is proven by the reality that the federal government, 

which has tended to more short-term borrowing, is now moving 

to more long-term borrowing as well to provide that security 

rather than exposing taxpayers to risk. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I guess, Minister, sort of tying back to your 

forecasting and your forecasting department and things of that 

nature, surely there is some ability to look and make some 

assumptions about the stability of interest rates over the 

reasonable term. 

 

And what I’d like to ask you is, is what is the actual spread in 

interest rates? And if you do not want to give me the actual 

rates, would you have the spread between 5-, 10-, 15-, and 

20-year bonds in terms of how much more . . . or how much 

higher is the rate on the longer-term bonds that you’re buying 

and how much does that impact? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  If you look in the budget speech on 

page 59 we assume that short-term rates are 4 per cent; 

long-term rates are 8 per cent. You can project those out to a 

certain extent, but the only thing I would say is they are always 

still projections. Something comes that is unexpected, and all of 

a sudden in the next year, you know, the interest rates shoot up 

— another referendum in Quebec which unsettles everybody or 

things of that kind. But the projections are 4 per cent 

short-term; 8 per cent long-term. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, do you have the figures then as to 

the difference? I believe one percentage point on our debt 

would be something in the magnitude of $6 million? Would that 

be reasonably accurate? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s accurate, to the member 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, then I guess why I have to 

question . . . and I appreciate the difference between the 

stability that you’re buying. We’re looking at a 4 per cent  

  



1504  Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 1997 

spread. That’s something like $24 million a year to have that 

comfort level on interest rates. 

 

In view of the forecasting that your department tries to do, do 

you not think that perhaps we could tighten that up a little bit so 

that we could have more of our portfolio at the short-term rates? 

Or a better mix of it that would result in some significant 

savings in interest payments? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, you know I think 

that comment might sound very wise today. But I would ask the 

member opposite, what if a year and a half from now we were 

into another referendum in Quebec. And when we were into the 

referendum in Quebec the last time, and interest rates were 

shooting up, there were governments across Canada going like 

this, because they had said: gee, it’s cheaper for me today to 

borrow money short term. And they were in a real jam, some of 

them. A real jam. 

 

So in terms of being safe with taxpayers’ money, the safest 

thing to do is to borrow for the long term and ensure that you 

know what your rate is rather than taking those chances. 

Because when the rates are low, taking the chances look 

wonderful. But when those rates shoot up, for a reason we can’t 

project right today, that doesn’t look like a very wise use of 

taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, can you give us a figure on how 

much guaranteed debt that the province is holding? I believe 

there’s something in the magnitude of almost $400 million 

that’s accounted by for Saskferco and the NewGrade. Can you 

give us the total numbers? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, this is detailed on 

page 70 of the budget speech, and as of March 31, 1997 it’s 

about $570 million and it’s estimated to go down to about, just 

over 500 million. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, when the government enters into 

these type of loan guarantees, which amounts to a fairly 

significant amount of exposure by the province of 

Saskatchewan of half a billion dollars, what are the criteria that 

the government uses in deciding how they will go into a loan 

guarantee situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  These are done on an individual 

basis, the same as any other decision about investing or not 

investing money. But what I would say to the member is 

virtually all of these are hold-overs from the 1980s; so they’re 

decisions that were made in the 1980s. 

 

I think what’s important is to look at what has happened to 

guaranteed debt in the province. When we took office in 

1991-92, guaranteed debt of the province was about one and a 

half billion dollars. Now it’s down; as of ’98 it’ll be down to 

500 million. So it’s been cut by . . . been cut to about a third of 

what it was. So it’s been dramatically reduced. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister, and I recognize that 

the overall number has gone down. Have there been projects 

that you have approved guarantees for, and what criteria would  

you use if you did? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  There have been no major new 

guarantees. There have just been continuations of existing 

guarantees. And it’s the same . . . from our point of view, if you 

guarantee something it’s the same as if you’re investing in it. 

You have to be sure that the taxpayers’ money is safe and that 

you’re going to get it returned at some point in the future. 

 

And so those are the criteria, but this government has not used 

loan guarantees to any extent at all. Most of what we’ve been 

doing is just managing the ones that we inherited . . . or the 

programs that we inherited from the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move the committee rise, report progress, 

and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1477 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1477 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Estimates 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1477 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1478 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Multiple Sclerosis Month 

  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1478 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 

 Saskatchewan Population Growing 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 

 Battered Women’s Week 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 

 Provincial 4-H Public Speaking Competition 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1479 

 Mental Health Awareness Week 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Multiple Sclerosis Drug 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1480 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1480 

 Highway Maintenance 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1480 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1480 

 Saltcoats Reassessment 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1481 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1481 

 Four-day School Week 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1482 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1482 

 Quebec Separation 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1482 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1483 

 Automobile Highway Damage Compensation 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1483 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1483 

 Workers’ Compensation Board 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1483 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1484 

 School Division Restructuring 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1484 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1484 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Child Prostitution Strategy 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1486 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1486 

MOTION 

 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1487 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 62 — The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1487 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1488 

 Bill No. 65 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1488 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 50 — The Private Investigators and Security Guards Act, 1997 .............................................................................. 1488 

 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1488 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1490 

 Bill No 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1490 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1491 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 5  The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1492 

 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1492 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1492 

 Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1493 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1493 

 Bill No. 61 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1493 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1493 

 Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1494 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1494 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1494 

 Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1977 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1495 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1495 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1495 

 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1495 

 Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1496 

 Bill No. 61 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1496 

 Bill No. 8 — The Tourism Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1496 

 Bill No. 52 — The Community Bonds Amendment Act, 1997 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1496 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Health — Vote 32 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Finance — Vote 18 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1502 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1502 


