



















































Hansard: March 24, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 375 

 March 24, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance, the proposed amendment 

thereto moved by Mr. Gantefoer, and the proposed 

subamendment thereto moved by Mr. Boyd. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Was that it, Mr. Speaker? No further 

amendments or subamendments or amendments to the 

subamendments? Those are a lot of words and some great 

potential detours on the way to the basic question that faces us 

in this debate, and that is, do we reduce the debt? Yes. Do we 

enhance programs and services? Yes. And do the people of 

Saskatchewan want a 7 per cent sales tax as opposed to a 9 per 

cent sales tax? Yes. But the opposition would deter us. They 

would meander around. They would muddy the waters. They 

want to criticize the government for providing a substantial cut 

in their taxes and for improving their services and programs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before we recessed at 5 o’clock, we were 

discussing two of the great flimflams in Saskatchewan political 

history. One of those flimflams occurred in 1986-87, in the 

budget of that year. That was when the then PC (Progressive 

Conservatives) Finance minister said that there would be 

approximately a $300 million deficit in the budget that year. A 

few months later, he pointed out and agreed that the deficit 

would increase to $500 million or thereabouts and assured us 

that there would be no variation and no departure from that — 

only to find out that at the end of the fiscal year the actual 

deficit was $l.2 billion. That’s one of the great flimflams. 

 

The other great flimflam that I was speaking about shortly 

before we recessed was the lack of disclosure by the Liberal 

Party opposite that Saskatchewan taxpayers are going to get 

dinged with a bill of approximately $250 million immediately 

after the 1995 provincial election. 

 

And like their Conservative brothers, they decided to withhold 

information and deny the truth to Saskatchewan people, as 

opposed to letting us know that the Federal government was 

planning to cut back equalization payments and to make up for 

changes in equalization policy to the tune of about $250 

million. They decided to not let Saskatchewan people know, to 

let us go through that election campaign when that knowledge 

might have had a major bearing on how people viewed various 

political parties and especially the Liberal Party. They decided 

to withhold that information from the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. In that way, they acted no differently than Gary 

Lane, no differently than the PCs before them. I say, shame on 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure for me 

to, as I stated at the outset, to participate in this debate on the 

budget. This budget contains a great deal of good news. 

 

And I won’t go through all of the details of what is proposed or 

included in the budget. I think that if people want that kind of 

information, they should not hesitate to phone their member of 

the legislature, whether it’s a member on the NDP side or a 

member from the Liberal benches or the PC benches. I think 

any of the members would be happy to oblige and to provide 

those constituents with the details that they ask for. And I have 

no hesitation in saying that, that members will provide that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I do want to talk about the essential ingredients of the 

budget, and that is to me that it’s a balanced budget. It’s 

balanced in the sense that it provides funds not only for 

reducing the debt, not only for reducing taxes, but also funds for 

improving services and programs, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

essential component of the fiscal policy that we put before 

Saskatchewan people — and that is, a sense of balance in what 

it is that we propose to do. 

 

We say that funds should be allocated roughly in thirds when 

we do have the funds. As we stated in 1995, when we first gave 

thought to potential surpluses as opposed to dealing with 

deficits in our budgets, we began to deal seriously with the 

question of what should we be doing if we run surpluses. That 

is to say, if more tax money comes in or more revenue comes in 

than we propose to spend, then what is it that the Saskatchewan 

government should be doing with those additional funds? 

 

And we said that there needed to be balance in dealing with 

those surpluses — that is to say, that roughly one third of those 

funds should be allocated to improve services and programs. 

Governments change and times change, and the services and 

programs that we provide, while requiring reforms and while 

requiring re-balance and reconfiguration, from time to time also 

we should be investing in important priorities. 

 

And one of the important priorities that we have determined is 

that there should be funds allocated, as an example, in programs 

that benefit poor children. For a number of reasons, but 

primarily because children who are poor don’t seem to have the 

same opportunities in the education system. 

 

We find that poor children are far more apt to — either as 

children or later as adults — to become consumers of the health 

care system because they were neglected during their youth. So 

that we think, and as do many other governments in Canada 

think, that investing in poor children is a good priority for 

government. So that’s why, when we do have additional funds, 

we need to priorize those funds and to allocate funds for those 

priorities. 

 

And so that one of the ways that we think we should deal with 

surpluses is to put roughly a third of the surpluses that we 

experience into enhancing programs and services, and we’re  



376  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

doing that. Not only are we investing more in programs that are 

aimed at children, we’re also investing more in the areas of 

education. 

 

We’re also investing more, and I think significantly more — I 

think $56 million more — in the area of health care. Those are 

important priorities for us, Mr. Speaker, and those are areas 

where we feel more funds are allocated so that those areas and 

the programs can be carried on, and to provide ultimate benefit 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we feel that roughly one third of the surpluses should go 

towards improving services and programs. We also feel that a 

third of surpluses should be used to reduce taxes. Okay. And 

this we’ve done in the budget. We’re proposing to reduce the 

provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. 

 

There are also a number of other tax measures, particular tax 

measures, aimed at stimulating economic development 

measures in the province. I think that there’s one measure that 

deals that if you’re involved in manufacturing and processing, 

whereas in the past we’ve written off the sales tax on new 

equipment and plant expansions that manufacture and process 

products for export sales, we say that now if you buy used 

equipment we’ll also reduce or take away the sales tax on that 

particular part of your input costs. 

 

And there are other measures, I believe. I think one is aimed at 

the hog industry as a means of stimulating the expansion of the 

hog industry. 

 

So there are a number of tax measures. And roughly speaking, 

about one third of the surplus funds that we have, that is to say 

one third of the funds in excess of what we need to run the 

government, we propose to put towards reducing taxes. 

 

The other third we propose to put towards reducing debt. And 

we feel that’s an important and necessary and fundamental 

policy initiative; that we cannot just deal with the questions that 

face us today; that we need to put money away to reduce the 

debt burden for future generations because, who knows, they 

may be in a worse position than we are today, in a worse 

position than we are today to be able to deal with the choices 

that they have to make in terms of taxes and spending and 

programs and the like. 

 

And then there’s some suggestion that the demographics of 

Saskatchewan suggest that it will be more difficult for future 

generations to in fact find the revenues and allocate those 

revenues to the priority areas. And there’s some suggestion that 

in terms of the kind of population growth, a very fast increase in 

the number of senior citizens in Saskatchewan, relative to the 

rest of the population. 

 

So we feel that it’s important and that it’s morally right, if you 

like, to put funds to reducing debt so that the debt then, and the 

interest we pay on that debt, becomes less of a burden in the 

future. There’s some that would advocate that perhaps even 

more — and that there should be an unbalanced approach — 

and that even more funds should be used to reduce the debt that 

we have. Because the more you reduce debt, the more you  

reduce interest payments. And ultimately the greater financial 

flexibility, the greater the financial freedom that Saskatchewan 

people will enjoy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the essential and fundamental question that faces 

Saskatchewan is the question of, how much of the surplus 

money that you have should be allocated towards debt; how 

much of it should be allocated towards enhancing programs and 

services and how much of it should be allocated towards 

reducing taxes? 

 

Now we’ve taken a stand on this. We said, as early as 1995 

when we began to contemplate the issue, that we felt that we 

should deal with this matter roughly in thirds and balance it in 

that way. 

 

But we have yet to hear from the opposition parties to say that 

this is the wrong mix; that this is the wrong allocation; that you 

should be putting more into debt reduction; that you should be 

putting more into tax reduction; that you should take more of 

the surplus monies and put it into improving services and 

programs. 

 

They are very silent on that basic, fundamental question, Mr. 

Speaker, that faces Saskatchewan people and that faces the 

government, and I think that faces all of us who are interested in 

public administration in the province of Saskatchewan. But that 

is the fundamental question. And that is the question that faces 

you the same as it faces us: how much of the surpluses that we 

forecast should be going to reduce taxes? How much of the 

surpluses should be used to enhance programs and services, and 

how much to reduce debt? 

 

Because I tell you, you can find advocate for any point of view. 

Okay? The Conservative Party would, for example, advocate 

that all of these surpluses should be used to reduce taxes. Tories 

don’t talk very much about putting new money into services 

and programs. These are not people who stand up as a matter of 

course and say it’s our priority to find funds to improve services 

for poor children in Saskatchewan or to find more money and to 

allocate it towards children in poverty. They don’t talk about 

that kind of thing. 

 

Oh yes, they complain the odd time about a road in their area 

not being looked after, or they’ve got some particular concern 

and say the government should put more money into it. But 

that’s not a big deal with them. Okay? If you listen to them, and 

as I listen to the opposition leader today, and I must assume that 

he speaks for them because he’s their leader, which brings up 

the question of who speaks for the Liberals, but that’s another 

question, Mr. Speaker. But the Conservative leader . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  You’re just jealous because you’ll never 

get there. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well the member is absolutely correct 

that I will never get to be the leader of the Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan. Never wanted to be, never will be, don’t care 

about that, Mr. Speaker. 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservative leader was quite clear today in 

his response to the Speech from the Throne. And I have to 

assume that to some extent, or I think to a very full extent, he 

speaks for all of the members of the Conservative Party. And 

the Conservative member that followed him, to some extent 

echoed what the Conservative leader was saying. And he started 

off talking about taxes; he ended up talking about taxes, and 

almost all of the comments that he had to make had to do with 

taxes and reducing taxes. 

 

So we can assume from that, even if the Conservative leader 

doesn’t want to deal with the fundamental question of where it 

is that that fund should be allocated when given those three 

priorities, and those are the essential three areas — those are the 

essential three areas . . . I mean there’s really no place else to 

spend the money. You know, you’ll either take the extra money 

you have to reduce your debt, you take it to reduce taxes, or you 

take it to enhance services and programs. But we don’t hear him 

talking about the interplay among the three; we simply hear him 

talk about taxes, taxes, taxes, and nothing else. 

 

So we can assume from what the Conservative leader is saying, 

we can assume from what he is saying that they would not 

favour the approach that we have taken. That is to say, for every 

$100 in surplus, that we put 33 of those dollars towards debt, 33 

to improving services and programs, and 33 to tax cuts. The 

Conservatives would take all of the $100 and use it to reduce 

taxes. That is their approach, and I respect that. Even though 

they don’t say that, that is something that we can deduce or that 

is something that we can glean from the comments that 

Conservative members make. 

 

And that’s fair enough; that’s their position. I might take 

exception with that though. I would have thought, I would have 

thought, given the role that Conservatives have played in 

Saskatchewan — and it’s a very significant role I might add — 

in the ballooning debt burden faced by Saskatchewan people, in 

the massive debt burden faced by Saskatchewan people, that the 

Tories might as a matter of priority say that any funds we 

should have should be used to reduce debt, but then . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . their debt. But then I’m not one who 

really expects a great deal of responsibility from the 

Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. They demonstrated scant 

acquaintance with that concept in the past, and I don’t expect 

much responsibility from them these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Liberals I get a much 

muddier picture. On the one hand, the Liberals stand up and 

complain at length about the high tax load in Saskatchewan. 

The member from Melville earlier today went on very, very . . . 

at great length about how the taxes were higher now than when 

you took office, and listed 690 million or whatever the figure is, 

listed all these measures and so on. 

 

And I for one readily concede that we have increased taxes. I 

for one readily concede that taxes are probably too high. But I 

feel that these are things that should be dealt with in a 

responsible way. 

 

But the member, without really saying there should be further 

cuts in taxes, because I haven’t heard that from the Liberal  

Party this time around, they still try to send out this message or 

give this impression that they favour further tax cuts. Certainly 

in the last provincial election when they ran they said that they 

would reduce the provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 5 per 

cent. And putting aside the ridiculousness of that particular 

proposal and that notion, Mr. Speaker, nevertheless I guess we 

have to accept that as their last sort of policy statement on it, as 

a statement of their policy, that they would favour a further 

reduction in taxes. 

 

But the Liberals are not satisfied with that. To listen to their 

remarks, to analyse what it is they’re saying, their major 

concern is that more funds should be expended in areas that are 

of concern to them. 

 

They say you should put more money into municipalities, more 

money into health, more money into education, more money 

into roads — just about anything that you can name. The 

members are saying, what you’re doing is not enough, and you 

should take more of the surplus monies that you have and put 

that into increased spending. 

 

So I assume from the Liberal approach . . . and I might add that 

not one of their speakers, as with the Conservative speakers, has 

ever had the word “debt” cross their lips on this particular topic 

— not once. Not once have they taken a position that, you 

know, that it’s better public policy to take the surplus funds we 

have now, to use it to reduce debt and thereby provide for 

greater flexibility for future generations in dealing with the 

choices that they have to make, recognizing that they may have 

to make more difficult choices than we are making today. Not 

once have they said that that’s an issue for them. 

 

So I have to assume that when the Liberals say, spend more 

money, they’re also saying, don’t put as much money towards 

reducing debt. And I take the position, in the context of 

Saskatchewan, that is irresponsible public policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  I think it’s grossly irresponsible. I think 

only a responsible government would make sure that funds are 

being used and steps are being taken, in addition to actually 

putting cash down, to reduce debt; take additional steps to, for 

example, reduce debt liabilities that we have, because that is a 

responsible course of action. 

 

And for that party, in talking solely about find more money for 

this, find more money for that, find more money, you name it 

— I’ve got a long checklist here, you know — you find more 

money for that, they’re essentially saying and we don’t really 

care if you put any money down on debt. 

 

But that’s the essential question for Saskatchewan people to 

judge. And that’s a question that I feel that they can’t ask their 

member of the Legislative Assembly. Where do you stand in 

that fundamental question? Where do you stand on the issue of 

putting money down to reduce debt, on reducing taxes, and 

program enhancement and services? Because if you go out to 

your constituents, and your constituents ask you — ask you as 

Liberal members, where do you stand — and then you say, well  



378  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

we agree with all of those, but then come here to the Chamber 

and say, but you should be spending more money, well then 

something else has got to suffer. 

 

You can’t sort of advocate more spending in one area without it 

having an impact on some other area unless you’ve got some 

new, hare-brained scheme like you had in the 1995 election, 

about how you create additional revenues. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well they’re good at that. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well they’re good at hare-brained 

schemes, I agree. I certainly agree with the member when he 

says that. But not one — not one, Mr. Speaker — has talked 

about debt reduction. They’re silent on this. And I think that’s a 

major shortcoming, and I really would encourage people of 

Saskatchewan to ask their member of the Legislative Assembly 

where they stand on that fundamental question, because that is a 

fundamental question — a basic question. You can quibble 

about the details, as to once you’ve decided you’re going to 

spend a third on enhancing services and programs, you can 

quibble about how much of that should go into education, how 

much of that should go into health, or how much of that should 

go into highways and transportation. 

 

But you can’t continue, as a matter of believable public policy, 

continue to espouse that you should be putting all your efforts 

into one area and somehow seem to indicate that it won’t have 

any implications elsewhere. Because it will. 

 

Now I might say as an aside, Mr. Speaker, that I find it very 

difficult to understand, as will the people of Saskatchewan, that 

the Liberals, in their major criticism of the budget speech, are 

saying to us that you’re not putting enough money into priority 

areas such as health, education, and the like and that you should 

be taking even more money wherever you find it from, whether 

that means putting less into debt reduction or perhaps even 

running deficits. They say that you should find additional funds 

and put those into spending more in those areas. And that’s 

what they’re advising us as a provincial government to do. By 

the same token, they say to their colleagues in Ottawa, we 

support you in cutting back on health care. So I can’t figure out 

— and I have some difficulty understanding — just what the 

position of the Liberal Party is. 

 

Now the Conservatives, to their credit, can, and sometimes are 

consistent in these things. They say, we favour tax cuts. We’re 

not necessarily as concerned about putting money into priority 

areas. We favour tax cuts. 

 

We don’t find the Conservatives spending a lot of their time 

arguing for improvements in services and programs or the 

government should be spending more, right. But the Liberals, 

the Liberals in the one day will say, we agree with what you’re 

doing in Ottawa to cut back on health and social services. We 

agree with you. In fact we applaud you and we support you. 

That’s one day. 

 

The next day, or even the same day, and the next speaker, or 

maybe even the same speaker, will say, but when the provincial 

government doesn’t put in enough money, we’re going to  

criticize you to put even more money in. 

 

So you know, I can’t figure it out, Mr. Speaker. It’s when Ralph 

Goodale and their brothers and sisters in Ottawa cut, they say 

we support that, we think that’s necessary, we approve of that. 

We agree with what the federal government is doing in cutting 

funds for health care. We agree with what the Liberal 

government is doing in cutting funds for education. We agree 

what the Liberal government is doing in cutting funds for social 

services. We agree with what the Liberal government in Ottawa 

is doing and we agree with the impact it’s having on 

Saskatchewan. That’s what they’re saying. But the next day 

they say, you’re not spending enough. 

 

Well a wise person once told me, Mr. Speaker, none of this had 

to be logical and now I believe him and now I understand what 

it is that they’re saying, Mr. Speaker. They approve — they 

applaud — the cuts in health care by the Liberal government in 

Ottawa. They agree, and they’re prepared to defend the kind of 

impact it has on vital services in the area of health, education, 

and social services here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Who is it, the member for North Battleford himself, who said 

we had to have some understanding of the difficult choices 

being faced by the federal government and therefore, you know, 

by definition, we should support their cuts to health care. 

 

So which is it? We’re somewhat confused on this side. Do you 

want to cut health care or do you want to improve health care? 

Which is it? 

 

And you know, all I can say, at some point the people of 

Saskatchewan and the people in your constituencies are going 

to ask you that question, and at that point, you’ve got to have an 

answer for them, Mr. Speaker. Maybe you can skate around at 

this point, but I don’t think that you can do that for ever. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re not very clear about the Liberal fiscal 

policy. We don’t know whether it’s to spend more and borrow 

the money to make ends meet. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Nor do they. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  And a member says, nor do they. And I 

guess they don’t. I guess they feel that you can simply skate 

along and criticize and not offer any sort of realistic analysis of 

Saskatchewan’s finances and hope to somehow luck into office. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not going to cut it any more in 

Saskatchewan, that’s not going to cut it anymore with 

Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people have been burned 

and they’ve been burned bad by the PC administrations of the 

past. They will not for a moment — they will not for a moment 

— contemplate giving their support to some political party that 

doesn’t have a realistic analysis and a realistic appraisal of 

Saskatchewan finances. And I must say, based on what I’ve 

heard from you people so far, there is nothing very realistic 

about the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan. 

 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

Now the Progressive Conservative Party, as I mentioned earlier, 

made it clear that taxes is their major concern. And their leader 

even went so far as to say that he might vote for, vote for the 

budget, which — as I understand it — would be a precedent in 

Saskatchewan history, although not a precedent necessarily in 

Canada. There was a time, I believe, in the early 1970s when a 

PC opposition voted with the Schreyer NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government of the day because they believed that the 

budget that the Schreyer government was bringing in was the 

right budget and were prepared to vote for it. 

 

But the Liberal leader here is saying that he may create such a 

precedent here in Saskatchewan although . . . but I do find that 

he’s starting to hedge a little bit on this. I wasn’t quite clear 

whether he was saying, yes I’m going to vote for the budget but 

only if you vote for my amendment to the budget. I’m not quite 

clear on that. Then he says, I don’t think it’ll be us as a 

Conservative Party that will be voting for the budget. We’re 

going to vote as individuals for the budget, and we’re going to 

have freedom for the members to vote as they please. It will be 

a free vote of our members to vote for the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that by itself is . . . you know, I’ve talked in the past about 

how the Conservative Party always seems to find fault with just 

about anything and everything we do in Canada, and seems to 

find favour with just about anything and everything American. 

If it’s American, they love it. If it’s Canadian, it’s bad. And 

here they go again. 

 

Here we have a parliamentary system, a parliamentary system 

which arguably and according to many observers, is probably 

the best form of democracy in the world — the best. But here 

go the Conservatives saying, well the parliamentary system is 

not good enough. We’d like to bring in a number of 

Americanisms. Instead of there being a clear choice for the 

people about the government’s financial plans for the coming 

year in the way of a budget, and where it’s clear that the 

government stands, and the members come together and they 

vote for it to make it clear to the public so that there’s no 

confusion; they now say, well we would have free votes on 

these things. 

 

They would have free votes, which is the American way to go. 

And that of course sets the stage for people trying to exert 

influences on individual members about what should be in the 

budget, or what changes might be made to the budget, or what 

particular interest groups might see a benefit in the way of the 

budget, or what interest groups don’t want to see in the way of 

the budget. To my mind it opens the system for that kind of 

influence — the kind of influence that I submit has brought the 

American system into disrepute, and makes people want to hold 

their noses to a very great extent about the American system. 

But the Conservatives say, we’d prefer the American way. All I 

can say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the wrong way to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I think that the Conservatives should rethink 

their taxes-or-nothing approach. I really think that they should 

speak out on questions of debt. I really believe as a matter, not 

only of public policy but if for no other reason than to recognize 

the legacy that they’ve left for Saskatchewan people, that they 

should be encouraging government. They should be  

encouraging those entrusted with the responsibility of the 

expenditure and funds in this province to ensure that sufficient 

funds are set aside to not only reduce taxes but also to reduce 

debt. Because the debt reduction is important for future 

generations. 

 

And we need to have more than simply a wall of silence from 

the Conservative Party on that particular topic. If there is any 

group  any group  in Saskatchewan that should be talking, 

not about cutting taxes but about cutting the debt, it’s the PC 

Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also struck by the comments of the Leader 

of the PC Party, where he went on at great length about the tax 

regime in Saskatchewan versus the tax regime in Alberta. And 

he went on at some length to compare Saskatchewan with 

Alberta, and if only we were more like Alberta, Saskatchewan 

would be in far better shape than we are now; that somehow the 

economy would be improving more; there would be more jobs 

forthcoming — all kinds of things if we acted more like 

Alberta. 

 

But now the Liberal leader didn’t mention two things that 

Saskatchewan people know, and I don’t think that he’s being 

quite forthcoming with Saskatchewan people by not pointing 

them out. And those are two words: one is oil and the other is 

Devine. Okay? 

 

He doesn’t point out that Saskatchewan has significantly far 

more oil revenues than we’ll ever realize, and natural resource 

revenues, all put together. And that this gives Alberta a 

tremendous advantage compared to all other provinces, and 

which is why Alberta is the only province in Canada to not have 

a sales tax. 

 

This is not the result of good public administration. This is not 

the result of outstanding fiscal policy on the part of the Alberta 

government. No. The fact they don’t have a sales tax is a result 

of a number of other choices they’ve made. And also, no 

amount of good fortune because of the resources they have. If 

we had their oil revenues, in relative terms, I suspect that we 

could do away with the sales tax tomorrow just like that; no 

problem at all. 

 

I also suspect that if we decided to have a health care premium, 

which they have in Alberta, that we could probably reduce the 

sales tax significantly, could probably cut it in half again, right? 

We could probably have a 3 per cent sales tax or no sales tax at 

all if we decided to impose a health care premium like they 

have in Alberta. Now if people say, well that’s not really a tax, 

but it is a tax. Every person in Alberta has to pay it. It’s a tax. 

It’s a head tax. And it’s a very big tax. It’s in excess of $800 a 

year for a family. That’s a lot of sales tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So he doesn’t point that out, and I think the Conservative leader 

is — how should I put it? — less than forthcoming by not 

disclosing those kinds of things. And it’s almost like he likes 

Alberta better than he likes Saskatchewan. He’s trying to make 

unfavourable comparisons between Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

He doesn’t provide the full picture. I think that’s unfair. To me, 

I have a real question about where does his heart lie, Mr.  



380  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

Speaker. 

 

But you know the other thing he didn’t point out and is 

significant . . . and I would venture to say that if Alberta had 

had Grant Devine as their premier during the ‘80s and we 

hadn’t had Grant Devine as premier during the 1980s, we’d be 

in a lot better shape today now too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, to beg for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank all of my 

colleagues in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to everyone here, I’d like to 

introduce 10 Cubs from the 64th Cubs out in the north end of 

Regina. Accompanying the 10 Cubs in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, is Marilyn Pollock, who is Akela or leader, Laura 

Grant, Rakasha, and James Holt, Baloo. It will be my pleasure 

to meet with this group in a few minutes for pictures and then 

later on question-and-answer period. I ask all members of the 

legislature to join me in welcoming the 64th Cubs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think I’m going to ask my guests to 

stand up, the 1st Regina Girl Guides, because they’re behind the 

clock, and you can’t see them very well over there. Do you 

guys want to stand up? Now they’re accompanied tonight by 

Katherine Gray-Owen and Deborah Gray-Owen, and they’re 

having a tour of the legislature and then we’re going to get 

together for a photo. I think we’ll have to fight for room on the 

steps there with Kim’s group, but I think we can manage that, 

and then we’ll get together for a short little visit after. So I 

would like everybody to join me in welcoming them to the 

legislature tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, to say that the PCs have a 

rather curious approach to the whole concept of fiscal policy is, 

I think, an understatement, Mr. Speaker. Now this is the group 

who had a leader, who had a leader by the name of Grant 

Devine, and who in a moment of lucidity, in a moment of clear 

thinking, said that deficits, that is borrowing to make ends meet, 

is no more than deferred taxes. The point being that if you 

borrow today, at some point you’re going to have to pay it back. 

 

The real tragic thing for Saskatchewan people is that they could 

never quite figure out when it is that they had to start paying 

back, and they kept borrowing and borrowing and borrowing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s also funny that when you hear the Liberal or the 

Conservative leader call for cuts in taxes — non-ending, 

without pause — and that’s the only issue that they have on the 

agenda, that he wouldn’t have remembered the words of his 

former leader. That you’re the people that decided to defer 

paying the taxes. That you’re the people who kept the deficits 

coming. And I guess we have to ask at some point: at what 

point did you think that you could quit deferring taxes too? Or 

is this another one of your irresponsible considerations, that you 

can just keep spending, keep borrowing without there ever 

being a tomorrow and without there ever . . . or without ever 

having to account for that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know where the Conservatives stand. The 

Conservative leader was quite clear. He said that we’ve got to 

cut taxes — cut, cut, cut to create, in his words, a positive 

business climate and then get out of the way. Well get out of the 

way of what? Child poverty? Get out of the way of what? 

Funding for health care? Get out of the way of what? Reducing 

the debt? Should be clearer on these things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole business of the tax cuts in the budget is, 

I would submit, going to create an interesting little conundrum 

for the Conservative Party especially, and for the Liberal Party, 

inasmuch as in the last provincial election, they too advocated 

major tax cuts. And when you listen to their rhetoric, when you 

listen to their rhetoric, which in support of tax cuts the rhetoric 

always goes this way — cut the taxes. Cut the taxes, and by 

cutting the taxes, you will create such an economic stimulus 

that the economic stimulus will create more jobs and create 

more economic activity and will create even more revenue to 

make up for any revenue that you might lose by cutting the 

taxes in the first place. 

 

Does that sum it up? Is that the PC and Liberal approach to tax 

cuts? Isn’t that the argument that they always use in promoting 

tax cuts? Isn’t that what the Liberal Party said in 1995? They 

said, well if we cut the provincial sales tax — they said in that 

election — if we cut the provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 

5 per cent, which is what you said you wanted to do, we’ll 

create such an economic boom, such an economic boom in 

Saskatchewan, that that boom will create more jobs. More 

people will be spending. More people will be going out to buy 

things, and even though the sales tax is less, they’ll be buying 

so much more. So many more jobs will be created, so many 

more jobs will be created that even more revenue will come  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

back to the government to make up for the revenue that they 

lost in the first place. 

 

Isn’t that what you said in 1995? Well that’s what you said. 

Well we said we should reduce the charges on people. But the 

Conservative Party, the Conservative Party also says the same 

thing. Their major priority in the tax cut is to increase economic 

activity. That’s what you say. 

 

(1945) 

 

Now none of us are opposed to economic activity. But we’ve 

said that we would reduce taxes in a balanced way. That when 

we had the money, we would do it when we could sustain the 

tax cut, when it was affordable, when we were assured that the 

revenues would always be there from other sources to support 

the tax cut. Now you take the position, you take the position it 

doesn’t matter, it doesn’t matter. You can just blindly cut the 

taxes, you can blindly cut the taxes because when you do it’ll 

create such economic activity that even more money will be 

flowing into the provincial coffers. So now the question is, what 

will happen here as a result of the cut in the sales tax which has 

been announced in the budget and which has now gone into 

effect. 

 

I submit to you it causes an interesting little conundrum. Now 

we hope that the tax cut will also create jobs. We hope that the 

tax cut will also be good for economic activity. But our major 

priority is to reduce the tax burden on Saskatchewan families. 

That’s our priority, and we do it in a sustainable and affordable 

way. 

 

But you people say you can have tax cuts every day. So what 

happens if this tax cut doesn’t generate a like amount of 

revenues or the level of economic activity that you suggest? My 

suggestion is you’re going to find it very difficult to peddle tax 

cuts to the Saskatchewan public without clearly identifying 

where the revenues will come from to make up for the revenues 

you lose as a result of the tax cuts. 

 

No more hocus-pocus, no more going to the public and saying 

tax cut, close your eyes. Trust us; everything is going to work 

out. No more of that. That’s what I submit, Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No economic stimulation indeed. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Saskatchewan public is . . . After 

this tax cut, I think there will be some economic uptake as a 

result of this but probably not as much as you in the right wing 

happen to believe that tax cuts will create. 

 

I think it was the Leader-Post that ran some kind of a poll 

today. And they asked the people, will you go out and spend 

more money as a result of the cut in the sales tax. 

Overwhelming the majority said no; it won’t cause us to spend 

any more money. For all I know, they’re going to take that 

money and go on vacations out of the province, without there 

being any benefit to the Saskatchewan economy. But it doesn’t 

matter to us. 

 

We said that the priority here is to reduce the burden on 

Saskatchewan families; that’s our priority. If it creates 

economic activity in addition to that, that’s fine. But if it  

doesn’t, we know that we can afford it. We know that we can 

sustain it from other revenues — unlike you people who say, 

irresponsibly, cut taxes and don’t worry about a thing. I think 

you’re not going to make that position or take that position ever 

again with the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to wrap up on the question of the 

stabilization funds. There was criticism today by, I believe, the 

former leader of the Liberal Party, the member from Melville, 

about the Saskatchewan government, about the government 

casting the Liquor and Gaming Authority fund, the profits in 

that fund, as a stabilization fund to use to stabilize various 

budgets. Now they make these criticisms after reading a press 

report, I believe, by the Provincial Auditor, who I understand 

has criticized the government for the idea that we would seek to 

have funds or monies put aside in a fund to stabilize budgets 

during successive years. 

 

Let me tell you that from my point of view and from the point 

of view of most economists in Saskatchewan, nothing could be 

wiser than the Saskatchewan government having some sort of 

stabilization fund. Why? Because Saskatchewan, probably more 

so than any other jurisdiction in Canada, is subject to cycles in 

the economy. We are to a very great degree dependent on world 

markets for commodities, commodities such as oil and 

commodities such as grain. When those prices fall, it impacts 

on the Saskatchewan economy and it impacts on Saskatchewan 

finances. So it makes a great deal of sense to have some sort of 

stabilization measure in place. 

 

We could have a drought this year, we could have a drought this 

year and the average revenues that we project to come in from 

the agricultural sector may be way off. Maybe even no revenues 

will come in. And it’s at times like that, that I think that it’s 

sound public policy, it’s good public administration, to have 

some kind of a stabilization reserve so that one year you don’t 

have a huge surplus, the next year you decide to run a deficit, 

but that you have the money there to stabilize the spending on 

programs and services. You have the funds there to be able to 

sustain tax cuts that you’ve initiated. You have the funds there 

to carry through with your plan to reduce debt. 

 

I think that’s sound public policy. I think that’s progressive 

public administration in Saskatchewan. 

 

That the Provincial Auditor would take a different point of 

view, that is the prerogative of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would not dare to question what it is that the 

auditor is saying. But all I can say is from a policy point of 

view, it’s good public policy and it’s good public administration 

to have some form of stabilization reserve so that the budgets 

don’t immediately reflect drastic downturns in the provincial 

economy, as can happen here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I just want to say that I support, I support, I support the 

coming out of the closet of the Liquor and Gaming Authority 

funds and clearly set down as a stabilization fund. I welcome 

that. 

 

Every government in Saskatchewan — Liberal, Conservative,  



382  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

NDP — successive governments have used the funds in the . . . 

the profits from first the Liquor Board and now the Liquor and 

Gaming Authority, set them aside as a form of stabilization — 

always been the case. Ross Thatcher did it, Allan Blakeney did 

it, Tommy Douglas did it, Grant Devine did it, and the current 

administration is doing it, with one exception. The current 

administration is being a little bit more open and forthcoming 

about how it is that we plan to use the funds in the Liquor and 

Gaming Authority, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome that. I think 

that’s a . . . I think that’s a prudent move and I think it’s a good 

move of public policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support this budget. I think that 

it’s a great budget. I support the initiatives. I think it strikes the 

right balance. It’s a fair budget, Mr. Speaker. I might say 

personally that I’m proudest of the money that will be going to 

support programs for children in poverty in Saskatchewan. I 

think that’s the real priority area that all members of the 

Legislative Assembly need to spend their time on. 

 

And without any further comment, Mr. Speaker, I would say 

that I am going to support the main motion. I certainly will not 

be supporting any amendments to the motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into the debate on the budget 

address for 1997. 

 

I’d like to make some comments about the budget in general 

and then I guess make some specific reference to some of the 

sections around education and post-secondary education. But 

after listening to the member from Regina Victoria . . . And I 

know that he probably was hoping for an award tonight, being 

that the Oscars are on, but I’m sure that he’s been passed over 

and indeed the people that were probably watching the 

legislative channel have now switched to the Oscars. I hope that 

the remaining audience will stay in tune for at least a few 

things. 

 

It’s also interesting to note the perspective of the different 

speakers who have been up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to how they 

perceive what a budget is. And I know that the member for 

Regina Victoria has been part of municipal government. He’s 

been involved with planning budgets over the years for the city 

of Regina and now of course the provincial government. And I 

guess I’ve always looked at a budget as something that you 

estimate what your revenues will be for a period of time — a 

year — and then you look at your expenditures and try to 

balance. 

 

I note that we’ve had some surplus in the last couple years. And 

it’s interesting to note that the member for Regina Victoria 

spent a lot of time debating the issue as to what should be done 

with the surplus. 

 

And if we take a quick look at last year’s budget, and of course 

the forecast for 1996-97, we see that the projection is for a $368 

million surplus. Well, we are very well aware that of course  

$364.7 million of that surplus came from the sale of Cameco 

shares. So if we take that out, the budget for last year, the 

surplus budget for operating was a large $4.2 million. 

 

The Finance minister has put together the budget for this 

coming year and we see a balance of $24 million. Now he talks 

about splitting a third and a third and a third, and then 

wondering where the position is of the taxpayers and how very 

important this is. Well when we’re looking at splitting $4 

million from last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think you 

need to spend as quite as large amount of time as did the 

member for Regina Victoria. 

 

The other thing that’s interesting, of course, is that we hear 

from the auditor that indeed we’re only seeing about 60 per cent 

of the picture. That indeed 40 per cent of the picture is tied up 

in the Crowns. And as an audience, as an opposition, the 

taxpayers in the province never get to see that other 40 per cent 

and it’s difficult to analyse the entire financial picture of the 

province without knowing everything. 

 

So when we take a look at the position of the members 

opposite, it’s interesting to note the comments of the Premier in 

the last couple of days. And the Premier made these comments 

last week in response to some discussion around the budget. 

And this is a quote, and he says in reference to, of course, the 

PC policies of tax cuts in the ‘80s. He said: 

 

You’ll remember how your taxation policies were: you put 

a tax on lotteries, then you took it off and you said there’s a 

tax break. You put a tax on used cars, then you took it off 

and you said there was a tax break. 

 

That’s a quotation of the Premier not more than a week ago. 

 

My question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we had a 7 per cent tax 

rate. This government put it up to 9 per cent, and now we’re 

back down to 7 per cent, and this is a tax break, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They weren’t tax breaks in the 1980s but they’re now 

tax breaks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  It’s interesting to see how that perspective 

has changed by the Premier over these last 10 years. 

 

When we take a look at the overall budget, Mr. Speaker, and I 

know that after five years or six years of excessive fees and 

large tax increases, utility rate increases, people have been 

looking for a break. No question. They’ve been looking for a 

break and they were hoping that this break was there, more than 

just the 2 per cent sales tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting to note that the 2 per cent sales tax reduction was 

probably quite unexpected. I hear of great confusion in terms of 

retail stores, in terms of trying to get someone in to change the 

cash registers to enable that procedure to work, well after 

midnight. 

 

And I’d be also interested to know as to the large purchases that 

people make, especially the members of the government  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

benches opposite. I wonder how many government members 

bought a brand-new car in the last, oh let’s say, two months, 

and wonder about whether or not they invested the additional 2 

per cent in sales tax. 

 

One of the largest groups, Mr. Speaker, that don’t find this 

budget very, very accommodating is indeed the local 

governments represented by municipal government, both urban 

and rural, and the school boards. 

 

We take a look at revenue sharing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Revenue sharing has been going down successively year after 

year after year. We have a form of downloading, no question. 

Thirty million dollars, I understand, is being cut from revenue 

sharing to the urban and rural councils for this year. They have 

to deal with that situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re 

struggling with their infrastructure; they’re struggling with 

making ends meet. 

 

And I’d like to share a couple of quotations from some of the 

people in my constituency. This is the mayor of Preeceville, 

Mayor Gary Sawatzky, and he makes this comment. He said: 

 

Yes, there will be a consumer who will be left with $30 in 

his pocket, but you come back to him, (this is a quotation) 

but you come back to him and say, by the way, we’re 

raising your taxes 3 mills or more to compensate for the 

revenue-sharing grant cuts. 

 

(2000) 

 

That’s the quotation from the mayor of Preeceville. That’s how 

he views what has happened in terms of revenue sharing. A 

further comment from the same mayor. He says: 

 

The revenue-sharing cut for 1997 will trigger our local 

taxes to increase, thereby making it impossible to maintain 

revenue-neutral budgets during the legislated property 

assessment revelations. The local taxpayers will have 

enough problems dealing with managing the local shifts 

under the reassessment without any added provincial 

cut-backs. 

 

So you see, there’s a different perspective out there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of what the 2 per cent will really mean. Yes, 

there will be some savings to every one of us and that has been 

looked forward to for many, many years. But on the other side, 

when we take a look at the hits that the urban municipal 

governments have taken, the rural municipal governments, the 

school boards — there will be tax increases. We’re hearing that 

all across the province. And that tax increase is going to eat up 

any bit of savings that these people incur. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to also relate a few of the things 

that I see happening in the province — things that I see as 

positive. First of all, let’s take a look at what has occurred in 

1996. We had a very good year as far as agriculture. 

Commodity prices were up last year. Farmers were looking 

forward to large harvests. And as you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, indeed what can happen when the weather turns nasty. 

We still have farmers out there that have crop under the snow. 

There are farmers that have been dealing with trying to dry 

grain throughout the entire winter. They’ve lost a lot of their 

product because it is heated and burned on them before they’ve 

had a chance to get it dried. And on the other side, of course, 

they’ve eaten up a lot of their expected profits because of the 

large costs of additional trucking, additional costs for drying the 

grain. All of these things have hurt that agriculture economy. 

 

The other problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course is that we 

see that the price of grain is not as good for this coming year. 

And indeed farmers are concerned about higher taxes, incurring 

additional costs for reassessment. All of those other things that 

farmers worry about may prove to be true in this next year. 

 

One of the other things that I think I’ve heard from some 

farmers, that they’re very pleased with, is that indeed there 

seems to be a program in place now that will deal with the 

unexpected catastrophe in this province for farmers. And that’s 

the coverage for up to 50 per cent. 

 

But I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this program that has 

come about is as a direct result of a very strong influence by the 

federal government. A program put together by the federal and 

provincial government, where indeed the first costs for a 50 per 

cent coverage will be borne 80 per cent by the federal and 

provincial government. And that’s a good program, and I 

compliment the provincial government for getting involved in 

that and making sure that indeed there is a base there. Farmers 

can insure up to 50 per cent of their coverage for only a cost of 

20 per cent of premium. And as indicated in many of the 

articles in the newspapers, that cost is less than a dollar per acre 

in most instances across the province. So those are positive 

things. 

 

The other positive thing that I’m hearing from many people 

come into talk to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is around interest 

rates. Interest rates a number of years ago were the death knell 

for many a farmer. You can’t mortgage costs that buy 

machinery, buy farm land when you have an interest rate of 18 

per cent because all you’re doing is working for the bank or for 

the financial institution. 

 

And what we see now is that the interest rate for this province, 

and the country across the whole, has dropped almost five 

points in terms of the prime rate. That’s not a provincial plan, 

that’s a federal plan. And indeed we’re reaping the benefits of 

that. The provincial government is reaping the benefits of that, 

and individuals across the province are also sharing in that. And 

that’s a big load, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The other very important thing, as the Finance minister has 

noted, and our opposition members have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I want to be raising a point of 

personal privilege on some comments the member made. I do 

not wish to interrupt his speech but I do want to be able to 

reserve the opportunity to raise a point of privilege with respect 

to the member’s remarks about the members on this side and  



384  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

their conduct with respect to knowledge about the PST 

(provincial sales tax). So I would just ask that I be able to do 

that as soon as the member finishes speaking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Point of order is taken. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Cameco money that 

has been transferred into debt — the 364.7 million — has 

lowered the debt. And as a result we pay a lot less in interest 

charges. The Finance minister has indicated that in 1995-96, by 

the audited financial statement, we see that there was an 

expenditure of $872 million in terms of interest rate charges — 

872 million. The projection for this year’s budget, ’97-98, is 

765 million. That’s a saving of in excess of $107 million. 

 

So as a result we indeed see that the conditions for the 

provincial government are better. We have a hundred million 

dollars to spend on health, on education, and all of the other 

services that we require in this province. So indeed we see the 

provisions that the interest rate has done, the fact that Cameco 

shares have been sold, have benefited all taxpayers. And we 

want to see that benefit passed on. 

 

There are many areas to comment on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

highways, health, municipal government, but my colleagues 

will make the appropriate responses for each of those areas. 

 

What I would like to focus on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact 

that the budget has done very little for school children and 

post-secondary students. We don’t see very much there. And I 

want to make . . . I’m going to state some information that I 

would ask members to consider and then make their own 

analysis. 

 

Last year we saw a budget that said there will be cuts. The 

university budget for capital funding was slashed by $5 million. 

There was a projection this year that there was going to be 

another $5 million cuts for university. Next year another $5 

million cut by the Finance minister of the province. 

 

Universities looked at this 3 per cent reduction, and they knew 

that it was a doom and gloom story, so they began to make 

plans. We know of university planning where they have taken 

into account the increased costs that have occurred as a result of 

inflation. They’ve looked at programs, they’ve looked at the 

different ways that they can achieve some savings, and they 

have also looked at tuition fee increases. That was their way of 

dealing with the proposed reduction in terms of grant, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

When of course the budget came down and indeed the revoking 

of the proposed cuts had occurred, then of course there was 

great joy, I think, in most of the university circles that I have 

talked to. They of course are pleased that indeed a $5 million hit 

is not taking place. 

 

But they’ve also taken a look at it and said, well what does it do 

for the programs at the universities? And the different people 

that have responded have said there won’t be much change in  

terms of possible tuition fee increases. There won’t be much 

change in terms of some of the reduction in some of the 

programs. 

 

Those things will occur because the monies that have been 

allocated for universities and for post-secondary have been in 

the area of capital funding. Yes, there will be some new capital 

funding to the tune of about $8 million, as I read the budget, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that’s after last year’s cut of 5 million. 

So the net result, if you take it back two years, is that there’s 

only 3 million additional dollars for capital, but there will be 

purchases of new equipment. There will be improvements to 

buildings. Those things will be taking place. 

 

I would like to compliment the Minister of Finance also in the 

area of post-secondary education for the placement of $3 

million into a special fund. A special fund has been created by 

this government to implement the changes suggested by the 

MacKay report. 

 

Universities know that they must look at different ways of 

sharing. They must look at different ways of saving money. 

Therefore the suggestions that were made in the MacKay report, 

some of those things will now be able to be implemented and 

they will benefit all people in Saskatchewan. If we have 

resource centres that can be accessed from any computer 

terminal anywhere in Saskatchewan, those will be of benefit to 

everyone, not just the University of Regina or the University of 

Saskatchewan. So that is a good investment. That is an 

investment in resources, and that will help. 

 

What we’re not seeing though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, what is 

the long-term strategy here? There were discussions; there were 

meetings. Mr. MacKay had numerous discussions with both 

presidents in terms of making some suggestions. And the 

minister responsible for Post-Secondary Education has 

indicated that we’ll work together and we’ll try to achieve. And 

indeed, now we see some funds. We don’t see the strategy 

though that will be used in terms of trying to create a better 

university program. 

 

The part also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that interested me last week 

when the budget come out – and I noted that the Minister of 

Finance, the Minister of Finance states that in the budget, she 

says that the grants will be $163 million. The operating grant 

will be 163 million. The minister for Post-Secondary Education 

made a release the same day and he says: I am pleased to 

announce that the grants for universities will be at $168 million. 

 

The budget address is saying 163; Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education is stating 168, right in the news release that was 

given. I wonder which number is correct. And I’m sure that we 

do know that the number that is correct, of course, is that the 

funding is at the same level as last year. And that is the part that 

universities have looked at. They know that there’s not a cut, 

but neither is there a large sum of money that has come 

forward. 

 

Another interesting point in the Post-Secondary budget, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is that student support and employment 

programs seems to have jumped from $47 million worth of  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

funding to $64 million worth of funding – a quick $17 million 

of additional funding for the income security and support 

services. I thought that that was a very positive move. 

 

On the other side though, I happened to take a look into Social 

Services to see whether or not the numbers were affected there. 

And in the category of Social Services, income security and 

support, we see a reduction of $17 million. The exact same 

money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 17 million. All that has happened 

is the money has been shifted from the area of responsibility in 

Social Services to the area of Post-Secondary Education. It’s 

not new money; it’s just been reallocated. 

 

The grants that have been paid out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 

the years to post-secondary education and training has been 

dropping steadily. We note that in 1994-95 the grants totalled 

$293 million. Those were the grants that were paid out to all 

post-secondary institutions — the regional colleges, SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 

universities and any other affiliated groups. 

 

What we see in this year’s budget is that there is a grant of 270 

million, a reduction of $23 million. So I don’t think that we can 

criticize people at the university or at the SIAST programs 

when they say, yes we’re relieved that the cuts didn’t occur, but 

we’re not overjoyed because indeed we’re still short $23 

million from just a short three years ago. 

 

(2015) 

 

When we hear Dr. Wells, president of the University of Regina, 

say, I think there will be an increase, but it won’t be as big as it 

might have been, that’s the comment of Dr. Wells when he 

looks at the fact that indeed there has been no monies to 

actually look at programs. 

 

University of Saskatchewan vice-president, Tony Whitworth, 

doubts the 10 per cent tuition hikes planned for each of the next 

two years will be entirely wiped out. His quote: 

 

My recommendation to the board of governors will be to 

ease back from the 10 per cent, but we’re still looking at a 

significant increase (he said). 

 

A significant increase. A final quote. He says: 

 

We can’t go to zero because we’re still very much short of 

balancing our books. 

 

That’s the end of the quotation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about funding to 

post-secondary education, we know that indeed universities are 

not looking forward to the fact that indeed there still will be 

tuition fee increases, there still will be cuts to programs and 

there will be changes to how we deliver the program. 

 

I’m very encouraged that Saskatchewan has lobbied for a long 

time for a Saskatchewan-made training program. This is not 

new. This has been a program that we’ve advocated for years 

and years in the education circles, and finally that program will  

be there. We know that Alberta has just completed its contract 

with the federal government regarding the training program and 

I understand from the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 

that that will occur in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

So we’ll finally be able to have a program where we can decide 

what kind of trained personnel we actually turn out, what skills 

will be required for our people. Because Saskatchewan is, of 

course, a lot different than the Maritimes for instance, and we 

can’t train people in the exact same way. This kind of program 

will be there, and I look forward to discussions with the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education as he brings this about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to turn to the section on education, 

that is, the education of kindergarten to grade 12. And I think to 

understand where we are with funding of school boards and 

funding of schools and providing an education for all of our 

children, I think we have to understand how school boards are 

funded. And basically what we’re looking at, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that boards rely on two sources of income. One is 

taxes from the local taxpayer, and the second one is grants from 

the provincial government. Those make up the largest amount 

of the amount of revenue that a school board receives. 

 

As a point of interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is interesting to 

note that in 1991 the total amount of costs for school boards 

was about $984 million. That’s the entire budget picture for all 

school boards in the province. It includes tuition fees, which is 

basically an in and an out. It includes the capital, includes the 

operating, includes debt reduction, all of the costs for a school 

board — 984 million. Estimated for 1996 — and again we 

won’t know what that real cost is because December 31 has just 

occurred, and many school boards are having their books 

audited — that is estimated to be around 980 million, almost the 

same amount over a period of six years. 

 

Now what does that tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We know 

costs have risen dramatically for school boards. There have 

been increases in salaries. There have been increases in 

materials. There have been increases in trying to implement 

curriculum. But what has happened is that boards have had to 

make cuts. They’ve had to make cuts to the program. They’ve 

had to make cuts to their staffing levels. They’ve had to make 

cuts to all of things that at first many school boards looked at 

and said, well those were frills. And we know that there is 

sharing going on in all school divisions across the province. 

 

The foundation grant is the way that the province distributes the 

money, and it tries to distribute the money to all the school 

boards, taking into account low assessed areas, taking into 

account of course enrolments, populations, sparsity factors, 

small school grants. All of those things come into play, and they 

distribute the money. 

 

The problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course is that when we 

start to look at the grants that have been allocated to school 

boards over the last number of years, we see in 1991-92 that the 

operating grant and another fund that was called the educational 

development fund and the capital grant . . . those are the three 

main transfers of money that go to school boards. In 1991-92 

that number was $451 million. In 1997-98 the budget has  



386  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

suggested that the estimates in those categories will be 390 

million, a difference of $61 million in the area of capital, 

educational development fund, and operating. Those are 

significant dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and boards haven’t 

been able to cope with those changes over the years as the funds 

have decreased. 

 

Last year the Minister of Finance announced that there was 

going to be an increase of $2 million for boards of education in 

terms of their funding levels. The change in the operating grant, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, indeed went from 353 million to 355 

million. But the educational development fund went from 

approximately 2 million to zero; so the net result for school 

divisions was they received the same 355 million in the area of 

operating. 

 

So what we’re seeing now is how did boards cope with that last 

year? Well there were increases in taxes. There were cuts to 

staffing positions. There was less purchasing. School divisions 

that maybe were thinking of buying new buses didn’t do that, 

and as a result they kept their costs low enough to be able to 

balance their budgets. They weren’t looking at surpluses, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They were looking at balancing their budgets, 

trying to cope with the fact that this government had not given 

much revenue to them. 

 

The other thing that occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there 

was a significant contract that was signed last year, and the full 

financial implications were not felt last year. They’ve been 

moved into this year. The additional cost for this year for the 

teachers’ contract that was signed last year by the government 

negotiating team is about $8 million. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what I see in the budget this year is that the education budget 

has been increased by $8 million. It balances. All it has done is 

pick up the cost of the teachers’ salaries for last year, not the 

future. 

 

What about those same cost increases? — the fuel prices, where 

a few years ago there was a cost of a litre of gasoline was 41 

cents. Now it’s 61 cents. Cost of materials: the government is 

continuing with its implementation of new curriculum, and so it 

should be. We should develop new curriculum and implement 

them, but we must have the funding at that local level to be able 

to implement them. And that’s just not occurring. 

 

So what has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the numbers 

that I just quoted to you — 451 million in 1991 down to 390 

million in 1997-98. There’s been a shift. Every one of these 

individuals in this Assembly is a taxpayer. We’re all taxpayers 

and we’ve seen the education shift. A number of years ago 

education was funded approximately 60 per cent by the 

government grant, 40 per cent by us, the taxpayers. Now as a 

result of that reduction in terms of the grant picking up the 

increased costs over the last six, seven, eight years, it’s a 40/60 

split – 40 per cent comes from the government and 60 per cent 

comes from the local taxpayer. 

 

I’m sure all members have heard from ratepayers that there is 

pressure on the taxpayer. I believe the minister responsible for 

Municipal Government indicated that it’s a serious problem 

when she talked to SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and said we must look at that; we must look at 

the fact that we must shift back to a 60/40 and alleviate the 

pressure on the taxpayer. 

 

But that has not occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and as a result, I 

think what we’re seeing is that there’s tremendous 

disappointment in the education circles around this budget. 

 

The other thing that affects boards of education, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is how the government, how the Department of 

Education on advice from the Minister of Education, breaks 

down the revenue and the expenditures for a board. 

 

One column of the grant pay-out is called the recognized 

expenditures. What occurs there is that every student is 

multiplied by . . . the head count is multiplied by a certain 

number, a dollar figure, approximately $3,200, $3,300, as the 

child moves through the education system. There are things in 

that side that are there for rural technology development. 

There’s a special education fund there. There’s money that is 

recognized as far as expenditures, so that if a board has a 

particular program in place, there is an expenditure recognition. 

 

What also occurs though on the other side of the balance sheet 

is the recognized revenue. This is where the Department of 

Education says to boards across this province, from your local 

revenue sources you shall contribute this much money. And that 

is determined by something called the equalization factor. You 

take the assessment, you multiply it by the equalization factor, 

and that’s the result of dollars that the local division must put 

in.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, last year there was great discussion in this 

very Assembly about the fact that the equalization factor 

changed last year by 2 mills. So what was really happening is 

that the government recognized a number of new initiatives. 

New expenditures were going to be made in different areas of 

education. But on the other side they said to the boards of 

education, but you will pay for it because 2 mill increase in the 

equalization factor means $12 million approximately across the 

province. So as a result, the school boards have been forced to 

contribute an additional $12 million. 

 

If we take that back a number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

1996 — as I just indicated this last year — 68.4 mills. Back it 

up to 1991. Equalization factor, 59.0 mills. From 1991 to 1996, 

the equalization factor increased by 9.4 mills. That’s the 

equivalent of about $56 million. So there’s the difference. We 

see now why the 60/40 split has occurred — lowering of grants 

by the government and an increase of contributions from the 

local level. School divisions have been forced to pick up more 

and more and more of the tax. And they’re getting to the point, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where they’re saying there’s no more 

room, and they need to have some support from this 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s been a lot of reaction, there’s been 

a lot of reaction to the budget. And I want to share a couple of 

quotations from what I believe are two of the largest 

stakeholders in education — the teacher’s federation and the 

school trustees association. This is a quotation from the general  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

secretary of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Fred 

Herron. This is his reaction to the budget: 

 

It does very little to address the incremental cuts to K to 12 

education that have taken place over the last years. Larger 

class sizes, cuts to programs, and fewer resources is the 

legacy of the previous cuts. 

 

So you see that’s the reaction of the teachers’ federation. Their 

president, Carol Moen, has indicated almost identical comments 

when she said that teachers were looking forward to the fact 

that there indeed was going to be additional monies in 

education. The conditions that teachers have worked under, the 

increased class sizes, the fact that programs have been cut. We 

now know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are band programs, 

there are guidance and counselling programs, in fact there are 

basic programs like industrial arts and home economics that 

have been cut. Those programs have now been cut from school 

divisions because they don’t have the funding. Teachers’ jobs 

have been lost as a result of this, and teachers were looking for 

a change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It didn’t occur. 

 

(2030) 

 

Saskatchewan school trustees president, Mr. Al Klassen, 

responds this way: the budget is disappointing because it 

doesn’t provide relief to local taxpayers. They were expecting 

some relief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it didn’t occur. As a 

result, education will continue to suffer. 

 

We know that. I’ve indicated program cuts. I’ve indicated loss 

of jobs to teachers. We’re hearing from many school divisions. 

Regina East School Division is looking at closures of some very 

viable schools. Humboldt Rural School Division is looking at 

closures of schools. Grade discontinuance will occur, not in 

schools that are 30 enrolment These are schools that have l50 

students, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and those particular plans of 

school divisions will not turn around because of result of this 

budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have made some comments about 

education and post-secondary, and I ask that the people who 

take a good look at this budget take a look at whether or not 

there is an advantage for students in the kindergarten to grade l2 

schools. What did this budget do for them? Take a look at the 

university students. What did this budget do for them? There 

isn’t a lot, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It created salary compensation; 

yes, it met those costs. It met capital increases at the university. 

But it did not look at program. And I understand that there is a 

lot of disappointment out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with those comments, I would like to 

again state that I was pleased to second the motion put forward 

by the critic, the member from Melfort-Tisdale, and I definitely 

cannot support a budget that produces a few goodies but on the 

other side has taken so much away from children in the school 

systems and in the university system. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

Originally I’d given notice a few moments ago about rising on a 

point of personal privilege. However upon reflection, I believe 

that this matter is more likely a point of order rather than a point 

of personal privilege. 

 

And they arise from the remarks made by the member from 

Canora during his remarks to the budget debate, at which time 

the member from Canora was talking about the confusion with 

respect to the 2 per cent reduction  I’m paraphrasing his 

remarks  where he said that the public made large purchases 

without advance knowledge of the reduction, unlike the 

government members who put off their purchases — buying 

new cars — until after the cut took effect. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the remarks that I heard. I would 

like you to check the record, Mr. Speaker, on that unless the 

member would like to clarify it right now exactly to what he 

said. But I believe that remarks of that type do reflect on the 

integrity of the members of the government, and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it imputes bad motives on the members of the 

government. It is a, I think can be considered as, a charge that 

members of the House have used confidential knowledge for 

their own personal gain at the expense of the taxpayer. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you rule on this. I do 

believe, Mr. Speaker, I do not . . . I know the member and I 

believe him to be an hon. member. I think he was, perhaps, 

trying to make a political statement rather than try to be . . . to 

make malice. 

 

However, I do think that the record ought to be corrected on 

that matter, and I would ask that you rule on this matter, Mr. 

Speaker, and ask for a withdrawal on that. I refer you to 

Beauchesne’s, sixth edition of Beauchesne’s, on page 141, item 

481, which refers to points of order. And it mentions in this 

point of order 

 

. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that the Member, while 

speaking, must not . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

An Hon. Member:  It went off . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Okay. Your mike was off. Continue. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you. I’ll just go back to the 

Beauchesne’s on page 141, item 481, which reads: 

 

. . . it has been sanctioned by usage that a Member, while 

speaking, must not: 

 

(e) impute bad motives or motives different from those 

acknowledged by a Member. 

 

(f) make a personal charge against a Member. 

 

I ask that you take consideration of that, Mr. Speaker, and I ask 

for your rule. 

 



388  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . On the point of order, I want to say 

that I was listening very carefully to the opposition leader and 

did not hear any referral to accusations of any kind against any 

members. What I will do, we’ll check the Hansard and bring a 

ruling back as quickly as possible to the House. 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

privilege for me to be able to enter into the budget debate this 

evening. In my return speech to the throne speech, I highlighted 

a few areas that I wanted to put emphasis on as those areas that 

are important to the people that I represent in Regina Wascana 

Plains. 

 

The first area I want to highlight is one that is a continual 

concern and worry to the people in my constituency, and should 

remain that way after the remarks from the members opposite, 

in particular the leader this evening of the Liberal Party, 

because their concern is that we maintain the fiscal integrity of 

the province of Saskatchewan. It’s been a long road for us since 

1991 and we’ve heard recently how far the Conservative Party 

took this province into debt and to the brink of bankruptcy and 

we’ve come a long way since those days. 

 

The people do not want to see us ever return to a situation 

where we’re spending more each and every year than the 

amount of money we’re collecting in either taxes or collection 

of monies from people in Saskatchewan. And I became very 

concerned when I heard the member opposite because he put 

forward the Liberal “yeah but” budget. We put millions of 

dollars into this program and the member opposite says, yeah 

but, we would put millions of dollars more. We put millions of 

dollars into back-filling in health, in education, and social 

programing, and the member opposite says, yeah but, we would 

spend millions of dollars more. 

 

The “yeah but” budget is going to cost this province a lot 

because what it does is take away the ground that we fought so 

hard to secure, the ground in this province that says we are no 

longer going to say yes, let’s give monies and more monies and 

more monies to everyone and anyone that asks. And we’ll do it 

so that today we can meet the short-term political needs and the 

political gain of the short-term-thinking government. And 

mortgage the future of our children, and mortgage the future of 

this province in its ability to make its own determination and 

deliberation on where monies would be spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are very concerned about 

maintaining the hard-fought battle to have fiscal integrity and 

responsibility in this province; and they don’t want to hear 

about a “yeah, but” budget from the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  The people in my constituency are looking 

to the leaders on all sides of the House to demonstrate some 

leadership that will say we’re going to prepare this province for 

the approaching turn of the century. 

 

It will help to restore some of the hope and optimism to people 

in our communities across the province. And it’s also going to  

allow them to understand that their leaders know that we have 

to lay the foundations for the future, not only of our province, 

but of our young adults and for our children. 

 

We’re prepared to put the collective dollars that we have 

available to us to work to do just that, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

age-old phrase, but as it said we will do, we’re prepared in this 

budget to put our money where our mouth is. 

 

This budget is a good news budget. It’s a good news budget and 

how do we usually handle good news? Well we’re not used to 

that good news and as a newspaper article I recently spied says, 

“Good news? How do we handle that?” And the columnist says, 

Murray Mandryk says: 

 

I was told once that there were budgets like this. 

 

Generation after generation of political columnists have 

passed down legends of our distant past when budgets 

were balanced, taxes were cut, jobs were created (not lost) 

and there was still new money left over for program 

spending (or, at least, the appearance . . .) (of spending 

more on programs). 

 

Never believed them, though. 

 

Budgets like the one Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon 

presented Thursday afternoon were myth, I believed, 

cynical fool that I was. 

 

That MacKinnon’s budget is making a believer out of you, 

me and likely most of us in this province . . . 

 

A good news budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Where’s the good news contained in this 

budget that the people have highlighted to me when I went back 

out to my constituency? Well the first one is taxation. And of 

course the obvious one that they wanted to highlight to me, and 

my neighbours pointed out, was the 2 per cent reduction. It was 

a most welcome announcement for all the people in the 

constituency. 

 

They pointed out they’re at the brink of tax fatigue and they’re 

mostly middle income earners and they wanted to see some 

relief, but also relief that would spur on the economy. And they 

believe this will do it. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that perhaps 

although it’s a very visible tax reduction, it’s certainly not “tax 

relief at last” as the Leader-Post puts it, because over the past 

number of years since I’ve been involved in looking at budgets 

on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, there are a 

number of tax measures that I think deserve re-highlighting this 

evening. 

 

The first one, of course, would be midnight of October 21, 

1991. A wonderful feeling to be able to stand on the podium 

with the Premier who announced, as of midnight tonight there 

will be no harmonization in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  What that said is that unlike the Tories who 

were prepared to expand the base and harmonize with the 

federal government . . . there would be taxes on children’s 

clothing, on restaurant meals, on reading materials, on electric 

home heating bills and fuel bills, and if you remember they did 

try that. They sort of tested the waters and said, well we’ll just 

expand the base a little bit and see what people think. We’ll 

charge that first on used cars. The reaction came. They said, 

maybe not; we didn’t mean that. We’ll try lottery tickets 

because of course that will go to health care and make it better 

and so we’ll put a tax on that and expand the base that way. 

And they learned their lesson very quickly. 

 

No harmonization was what people voted for in 1991. And lo 

and behold, the Conservatives feel they still are fighting that 

battle, that they didn’t lose the election on that issue. And we 

hear from the Liberals opposite that if they were in government 

they would harmonize with the GST (goods and services tax). 

There would be harmonization of taxes and that somehow is a 

tax cut. The employers in my constituency don’t believe that 

that’s a tax cut and the people who want to purchase things 

within the constituency do not believe harmonization is a tax 

cut in this province. 

 

Oh well, thinking back, in 1992 there was a child tax reduction 

for low income families that was increased by 25 per cent, 

which meant a $250 reduction per child. There was a small 

business corporation income tax rate that was reduced from 10 

per cent to 9 per cent. There was a phase-out of the announced 

E&H (education and health) tax on direct agents used in 

manufacturing and processing activities — all to do with tax 

cuts that were targeted to help people in greatest in need or 

targeted to look at our Partnership for Renewal strategy and 

support a boost in the economy. 

 

March, 1993, there was a further reduction to small business 

corporation income tax from 9 per cent to 8.5 per cent. Down 

from 10 per cent to eight and a half per cent — reduction in the 

rate collection for small business corporations across the 

province, to help them to inject dollars into the economy. There 

was a removal of the E&H tax for the 1-800 telephone services 

that also had call centres expand in this province. There was 

manufacturing processing tax credit equal to 8 per cent of the 

value of eligible equipment acquired by Saskatchewan small 

business. 

 

(2045) 

 

There was a further reduction in the E&H tax on direct agents 

that were used in manufacturing and processing, from 5 per cent 

to 3 per cent. In ’94, again a further E&H tax reduction which 

totally eliminated the taxes on the direct agents. There was a 

continuation of the reduction of small business corporation 

income tax rate to 8 per cent in 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. Each and every year there have 

been tax reductions from this government. They’re not perhaps 

as visible as the reduction in the PST, but they’ve been there. 

They’ve been there on the premiss of the two things that we’ve  

been saying to people in this province — that we will reduce 

taxes on targeted sectors of the economy that will turn the 

economy around and produce jobs, and the second one would 

be that they’re going to be sustainable. We’re not going to 

announce a reduction and then say, oops, we can’t sustain that 

tax reduction. 

 

So again, many reductions, culminating in this budget, which 

sees a reduction of the provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 7 

per cent; an extension of the PST exemptions to include certain 

medical devices purchased by individuals in addition to those I 

mentioned in the ’91 announcement; and a continual personal 

income tax cut of up to $300 per family. This is a good news 

budget for the people not only of my constituency who said 

they felt tax fatigue and wanted to know what we were going to 

do to spare the economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they shook their heads when I said that, 

because some of them had forgotten those tax reductions on the 

personal income tax side and on some of the E&H sides that 

would spur the economy. But they haven’t forgotten the one 

thing that was interesting that was put forward by the Liberals 

when they were campaigning. 

 

The Liberals had this book that they were going to put forward 

as a strategy. And they were thinking about it, and they 

predicated their tax reductions on an 8 per cent growth in the 

economy — an unheard-of rate of growth. So they said, well 

oops, we didn’t really mean that, and they kind of whited out 

different parts of their platform — scratch-and-sniff budgeting. 

 

People understood that you scratched this and beneath the 

surface there was something smelling; it wasn’t quite right. 

They certainly didn’t want that crew responsible for providing 

leadership for the budgeting in the province and again didn’t 

elect a Liberal government in this province — a very wise move 

when you saw not only a “yeah, but” budget, but a 

scratch-and-sniff budget to boot. It’s a new way of Liberal 

funding I’ll tell you, a new-way-of-living budget. 

 

The next part of the budget that people have congratulated me 

on and, through me, wanted to pass on to the colleagues on the 

government side is that there are a number of initiatives that are 

going to be felt in creating jobs and stimulating the economy. 

And the first one I wanted to congratulate the department on 

was the renaming of the Department of Economic Development 

to the Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 

That’s a key initiative, Mr. Speaker, because what it says is that 

Saskatchewan has always recognized the three engines of the 

economy: the public sector, private sector partnerships, but also 

the strong sector that has created jobs and furthered the 

economy, and that’s the cooperative sector. 

 

And to put our money where our mouth is on this one, Mr. 

Speaker, this year there’ll be an additional quarter-million 

dollars to assist in strengthening the cooperative sector in this 

province. There’s another half a million dollars for regional 

economic development authorities. Mr. Speaker, as part of the 

city of Regina who had looked at what we could do by pulling 

our community together and developing a REDA (regional 

economic development authority) and also developing a  



390  Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1997 

strategy, this is most welcome news when we talk about 

community-based economic development. 

 

There’s more than a half a million dollars that will go to the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, and that will 

enable them to establish a satellite office in Saskatchewan 

which is a resulting of the confidence we have and what the 

benefits are to trade for our economy in the diversification 

particularly of our agricultural economy. This will result in 

improved services to exporters in Saskatchewan that already 

have quite a significant role to play in the dollars that come to 

Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and Saskatchewan agricultural 

developers. 

 

There’s a further $6 million in strategic initiatives funds that 

will focus on developing key sectors of the economy as outlined 

in the Partnership for Growth. This is good news for the 

economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was really horrified when I heard the member 

opposite talking about education, and I almost said to myself 

that, there’s a nerve. People . . . (inaudible) . . . some people 

have nerve, but this one’s got nerve, Mr. Speaker. After the 

federal government pulls out of this province $51 million in 

educational funding, billions of dollars, not only to this 

province but across the provinces, for educating our young 

people, for training for jobs in this country, he stands up and 

has the nerve to say, “yeah, but.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the budget address our Finance minister said: 

 

Learning today is a lifelong experience. An explosion in 

information and technology is creating exciting new jobs 

and opportunities. Our young people will need to be 

trained — and retrained — throughout their careers to get 

and to keep jobs. 

 

Just when there’s a need to do more, the federal 

government is shutting down thousands of training spaces 

at SIAST and our Regional Colleges. More than one in 

four . . . opportunities will be lost as a result of the federal 

(Liberal) cuts. 

 

Apprenticeship programs. Mr. Speaker, across this province 

people talk to me about, what can you do to have more 

apprenticeship programs in place; apprenticeship training for 

our young people. Apprenticeship programs alone will lose 70 

percent of their funding from the federal Liberal government’s 

commitment to education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our young people are eager and ambitious. We 

have to give them the training and skills they need to get ahead. 

Over the next three years we will deliver more training to more 

young people for more jobs than ever before in the history of 

our province. We are completely restoring the funding for 

apprenticeship and adult basic education that was lost from the 

severe cut-backs from the federal Liberal government. 

 

We’re expanding our own JobStart and Future Skills. I like 

those programs, Mr. Speaker, because it reflects what’s really 

happening out there in the community. If someone is in a job  

and that job is no longer available to them because of 

technological changes — because of whatever is happening — 

to say that we don’t need a person over here, we really need 

someone to train quickly for a job that is available here, the 

employer wants someone who is trained. And we don’t say to 

people any longer that you have to go back and take two full 

years of education and training before you’re going to get out 

into the workplace. 

 

Our economy can’t wait and our people can’t wait for the jobs. 

These kinds of jobs will offer modular opportunities in 

education, some quick training, some certification in 

cooperation with the SIAST or the community colleges, into a 

job where the employer says, you work here and at the end of it 

there’s a full-time job waiting for you — very important 

initiatives for the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s not enough money ever to answer all of the questions of 

people who say yes, we want more in our budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

But there is more funding for education. The Finance minister 

announced, on behalf of our colleagues and her colleagues, the 

operating grants for schools will increase to $363 million in 

’97-98 and to 369 million in l998-99, a $22 million increase 

over last year. Mr. Speaker, we know that in education there is 

never enough. It’s the same in health. But we’re doing what we 

can in maintaining the fiscal integrity and giving the monies to 

new programs and enhancements of our programs when it’s 

available. 

 

It’s not the same story when we look at what the Liberals did in 

Ottawa, and we hear that the Liberals here say, well yes, we 

would like to do something more but you know . . . and we 

know that the priorities of people are health, education, social 

programs, but those are the places we should cut first. And Dr. 

Melenchuk, the Liberal leader, or one of the Liberal leaders, has 

already said that if they were elected as government they would 

find millions of dollars to cut out of health. Was he the adviser 

to the federal Liberals, I want to know? Because, Mr. Speaker, 

in my constituency there is a real concern for the health care in 

this province. 

 

And I recently had a few experiences that have put me into 

contact with the changing health care of our people and the 

needs of our people. And I’m pleased that this budget is saying 

that we’re now to a state in our health care reform that we can 

look at the savings that come from looking at a change in 

attitude from bricks-and-mortar health care to 

programs-and-people health care, and put that back into 

providing the programs and services that are needed, such as: 

stabilization of our hospital and nursing home systems; security 

for the front-line care-givers, funding that will be made 

available to use to retrain or redeploy people who are front-line 

workers. Twenty-four hour access for home care services will 

be available. Improvements for weekend on-the-call services, 

and the physician recruitment we need to have happen for rural 

Saskatchewan. Expanding the role of nurses in the primary care 

projects. And one I’m particularly interested in because people 

are very happy about the announcement of the operational 

funding for the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in Regina.  

 

There are many, many other announcements in the health  



March 24, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

budget and I’m surprised the members opposite don’t quote 

them in their speeches because they are indeed good news for 

providing wellness prevention, but also curative care, a model 

that not only nationally but internationally has received acclaim. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care is interesting to me because I’ve 

recently had a 17-year-old daughter who had a problem with . . . 

somewhere in the region of her abdomen and it took a little 

while to discover that this young woman needed gall-bladder 

surgery. So when we found that out, the surgeon pointed out to 

me that because maybe with diet this would be controlling the 

pain, we would be put on the list, and within about five to six 

weeks she would probably receive her surgery. 

 

If there were a change and she had great pain, and it wasn’t 

controlled by diet and so on, she would certainly put her on a 

priority list that would see her receive surgery much quicker 

than that. 

 

We went home and watched ER on television. And a woman 

was wheeled into the emergency room on this American 

program. And it was determined that she had gall-bladder 

problems and would require surgery. She was in a lot of pain 

and was asking could that happen very quickly, and they said 

yes, they would put her on a list and in about a year to 18 

months she would receive her surgery. She said to the people in 

the emergency room, but I’m in a lot of pain and could you tell 

me why this is going to be different than my neighbour who 

received her surgery in a matter of months. The very quick 

answer was, Mr. Speaker, the same kind of answer we would 

receive under the two-tier Liberal system of health care. The 

answer was, but you don’t have private insurance, do you. 

 

My daughter couldn’t believe what she was watching on 

television. She said, Mom, is that really the case? This is the 

case, Mr. Speaker, when you go into privatization of the health 

care system. She was horrified. 

 

Our health care system is undergoing change. And we’re seeing 

that my daughter did receive her operation within weeks of 

being diagnosed, and she received a laparoscopic operation that 

had her going home with us the very next day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a greatly improved system. With the 

technologies available today, we don’t need to have someone in 

the hospital for a week before they’re able to get out of bed. We 

can send someone home to be able to rest and relax and recover 

in their own home surrounding without endangering the patients 

in any way, but thanks to the new technologies that are also 

very expensive. 

 

We’re changing our health care system to make certain we can 

afford those technological advances, like an MRI for the city of 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  There are six points that we have outlined  

that we want to invest in in this budget. And the other one that 

my people are really very pleased about is the determination of 

our government, in the face of the federal Liberals’ actions such 

as the abolition of the Crow benefit, rail line abandonments, 

deregulation of highways, and all of the policies that put stress 

on our roads and our highway system, that this government is 

prepared to contribute $2.5 billion over the next 10 years, to 

improve our roads and highways — a welcome announcement 

for the people of Saskatchewan. Not just thrown out there to 

say, whenever anyone comes forward we’ll say, oh yes, you get 

a strip of pavement, but in the context of an overall 

transportation strategy that our Highways minister has been 

working very hard on over the number of months and will be 

prepared to tell us more about in the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my previous address, I gave an 

overview of 1996 that was entitled, 1996 was a very good year. 

With this budget, all I can say now, 1997 — a great year for a 

wonderful province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  My wholehearted support is given to the 

budget presented by our most capable Finance minister. I want 

to be on record as supporting the budget that’s been presented 

and against the amendments that would water down the moves 

that we’ve made and the strides we’ve made to have 

Saskatchewan a province on the move again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 

anxious to enter into this debate. I was not able to get to speak 

to the throne speech, so I’m very anxious to do the budget 

debate. 

 

But looking at the hour and knowing the amount of comments 

that I have for tomorrow morning, I would like to take my place 

and continue tomorrow, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’d like to 

adjourn debate tonight. I move that I adjourn debate tonight. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:03 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 375 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 382 

  Kowalsky (Point of Order) ............................................................................................................................................... 383, 387 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 388 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 391 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 380 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 380 

 


