



















































Hansard: April 10, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 741 

 April 10, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of the 

province surrounding the abdication of the responsibility by this 

government regarding their gambling policy. And the prayer 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

present a petition today on behalf of people who are affected 

with young offenders: 

 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of their gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

I so present. The people that have signed this petition are from 

Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of people in the province that have been 

affected by big game damage. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides for 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from the Kincaid, Mankota area of my constituency. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime; 

and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to change the big 

game damage compensation program; and 

 

Of citizens urging the government to commission an 

independent study to review the social impact of gambling. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure and 

honour to introduce Elizabeth Weir, Leader of the New 

Brunswick NDP (New Democratic Party), seated in the west 

gallery. Her constituency is Saint John Harbour and she is the 

true opposition to Frank McKenna. 

 

Accompanying Elizabeth is Didi Diagle, a friend of mine and 

an activist in the New Democratic Party. I ask all members to 

welcome Elizabeth and Didi to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just by way 

of coincidence, I also want to introduce someone from New 

Brunswick who’s with us today — namely, seated in your 

gallery, Marilyn Landry, and I’d ask Marilyn just to stand 

briefly. Marilyn is a guest with a keen interest in the 

parliamentary and legislative process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

She is participating in the Canadian Political Science 

Association’s parliamentary internship program in Ottawa, 

which as you will know is administered by your colleague, the 

Speaker of the House of Commons. The goals are to provide 

individual members of the House of Commons with expert help 

and to offer participants like Marilyn a chance to learn about 

parliament. 

 

And Marilyn Landry is residing in Ottawa right now, 

completing a master’s degree in criminology at the University 

of Ottawa. And I’d like all members to join with me in 

welcoming her to our province and to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join in 

welcoming Ms. Weir to the Saskatchewan legislature on behalf 

of the official opposition here in this House, Mr. Speaker. I 

would also as well like to extend to all the guests in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are here today to see these 

proceedings and visit our building — I want to extend a warm 

welcome to everybody that’s here in the legislature today to 

watch the proceedings. 

  



742  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

our caucus, I would also like to welcome Elizabeth Weir to our 

Assembly. I had the privilege of meeting Ms. Weir last summer 

in Winnipeg at the CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association) convention and I’m pleased to see her attend our 

Assembly, and ask everyone to again welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured to 

have this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all 

members in the legislature, many guests from the 

multiculturalism community who are here today to observe the 

second reading of the multiculturalism Bill. 

 

I’m pleased to introduce in . . . I’ll introduce them in 

alphabetical order and I’d like them to stand as they’re 

introduced, if you would: Mr. Ved Arora, representing the 

Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages, and the 

Multilingual Association of Regina; Mr. Adrian Boyko, 

member of the Multiculturalism Legislation Framework 

Committee and president of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress; 

Ms. Erica Cancino, provincial representative from the 

Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan; Ms. Mary Chan, 

Vice-Chair of the Interim Multiculturalism Committee; Ms. 

Lydia Chatto, on the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 

Organization for Heritage Languages; Ms. Linda Dirkson, a 

member of the former minister’s Advisory Committee on 

Multicultural Legislation, and executive director of the Moose 

Jaw Multicultural Council; Mr. George Gette, Chair of the 

Interim Multiculturalism Committee; Ms. Bula Ghosh,member 

of the Interim Multiculturalism Committee; Ms. Lianne 

Gusway, executive director of Hostelling International in 

Saskatchewan; Ms. Vera Hooton, president of the Prince Albert 

Multicultural Council; Ms. Joan Kanigen-Fairen, executive 

director of the Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage 

Languages; Mr. Keith Karasin, executive director, Regina Open 

Door Society; Dr. Eusebio Koh, a member of the Interim 

Multiculturalism Committee; Mr. Wade Luzny, executive 

director of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan; Mr. 

Denis Magnan, member of the former minister’s Advisory 

Committee on Multicultural Legislation; Ostap Skrypnyk, from 

the Interim Multiculturalism Committee; Ms. Mary Mahon 

Jones, general manager, Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 

Organizations; Mr. Brian McKinstry, executive director, 

Saskatchewan German Council; Ms. Marge Nainaar, a member 

of the former minister’s Advisory Committee on Multicultural 

Legislation, the Interim Multicultural Committee, general 

manager and program coordinator for the Prince Albert 

Multicultural Council; Ms. Mavis Palmer, representing the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan; Mr. Ken Sagal, 

president, Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations; Mr. 

Bill Ursel, Canadian Languages Network — that’s SOHL 

(Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage Languages), the 

S-O-H-L. 

 

And as well, a number that I . . . in the interest of time I won’t 

name them, but a number of the dedicated staff in my 

department who have worked with these committees and all of 

these groups through the process leading up to today. 

 

And so I’d ask all members in the House to join me in 

welcoming these members of our multiculturalism community. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the official opposition I too am pleased to welcome members 

of the multicultural society here today. The many cultural 

groups within Saskatchewan truly do lend to the wonderful 

mosaic that makes our province such an enjoyable place to live 

in. And I’d ask all members to join with me in applauding your 

presence here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to introduce to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 26 

students and parents that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

The 26 individuals are from the Regina Home Educators. 

They’re joined by their teachers, Karen Henrion, B. Makellky, 

A. Linnen, Marian Persson, Mary Gust, and Judy Whiting. 

 

I’d like to welcome the students and their teachers to the 

Assembly this afternoon and I hope they enjoy this afternoon’s 

proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My legs were tiring 

out. I felt like a jack-in-the-box, popping up and down, and got 

more and more nervous as the proceedings wore on. 

 

It is my delight to introduce to you and through you a number 

of guests seated in the west gallery. We have joining us today, 

Christina Jennings of Shaftesbury Films. Christina is up doing 

some site work in preparation for some filming of one of Gail 

Bowen’s books, Deadly Appearances. 

 

With Christina is Jeremy Hole, who is the writer that has been 

hired to make the transformation. Also in the group, Stephen 

Onda of Heartland Motion Pictures here in Regina, and Tamara 

Kelly, also of Heartland. And seated with those four are, of 

course, Gail Bowen, the writer of the series of books, and her 

husband, Ted Bowen. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming this group. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure on behalf of my hon. colleague, the member from 

Regina Northeast, to introduce through you and to you to the 

members of the legislature, nine students from the new 

immigrant orientation program of the Regina Open Door 

Society. They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 

they are here accompanied by their instructor, Mehmaud Bakaa. 

And they’re here for a tour of the facilities. They’ve come on a   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

very appropriate day. I’ll be meeting with them a little bit later. 

And I’d just like to have everybody here to welcome them here 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I’m 

going to have to grow a few inches. You always seem to see 

right over me to who’s ever on the other side. 

 

I’d like to ask members of the Legislative Assembly to join me 

today in welcoming Mr. Jim Durocher, the president of the 

Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. Jim. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, I’m 

not particularly fond of members’ statements, and as such to do 

two in two days is clearly an example of the good things that 

are happening in this community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think given the recent debate in this Chamber 

about our Crown corporations, that it’s important for me to help 

balance out some of the opposition’s arguments with a few 

facts. As you know, SaskPower is a major employer in my 

community, but as such today it is with great pleasure that I tell 

you of one of its successes. 

 

SaskPower has agreed to sell its wholly owned subsidiary, 

Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd., to Direct Energy Marketing 

Limited of Calgary. Channel Lake Petroleum consists primarily 

of Alberta oil and gas properties that SaskPower acquired in 

1993 at a cost of $25 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell 

you that once the sale has met the necessary regulatory 

requirements and is completed by June 1 of this year, 

SaskPower will have achieved a $5 million profit or 20 per cent 

return on its investments from this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  As you can see, Mr. Speaker, our Crown 

corporations are taking a responsible and sensible approach to 

managing their investments in the best interests of their overall 

portfolios and their shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members, including the members 

opposite, to join with us in congratulating SaskPower on its 

good business decision. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

North Battleford North Stars Win Northern Division 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Coming as I do from 

the best community in the province, I must confess that there 

are rare occasions on which possibly my enthusiasm for the 

Battlefords causes me to run away with myself. 

Last week I was at such an occasion where my enthusiasm may 

have gotten the better of me when I was paying tribute to the 

North Battleford North Stars winning the northern division of 

the SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League) and I 

predicted that in the final series against the Weyburn Red 

Wings that humiliation and annihilation awaited Weyburn. The 

next game Weyburn scored 13 goals against us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the series is now over. I wish to say to the North 

Battleford North Stars, thanks for a great season. I say to the 

Weyburn Red Wings, congratulations and just wait until next 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan-made Film Debuts in Germany 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A number of weeks ago 

I had the pleasure of rising in the Assembly and acknowledging 

the success that our Saskatchewan film industry is having. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I again have the opportunity to 

congratulate our film industry and the success of the film The 

Lost Daughter which finished production this last February. 

The film, co-produced by Minds Eye Pictures in Regina and 

funded in part by SaskFILM, was a viewers’ choice hit in 

Germany where over 11 million people tuned in to watch the 

world premiere of the four-hour miniseries. The same success is 

expected in other countries throughout Europe, the Orient, 

Australia, and North America as the film makes its debut there. 

 

This film, starring Richard Chamberlain, focuses on the 

manipulation and religious doctrines of cults and how victims 

fall prey to them. It is based on actual events of the cult tragedy 

that took place in St. Casimir, Quebec. 

 

The Saskatchewan film industry is exciting, vibrant, growing, 

and it is demonstrating that it can produce quality films that 

appeal to the public. Working in partnership with private 

companies, the Sask film industry will not only provide us with 

quality films, it will also generate growing economic benefits 

for the industry and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I congratulate Kevin Dewalt, CEO (chief executive officer) of 

Minds Eye Pictures and executive producer of The Lost 

Daughter, along with the many other staff members who 

worked long and hard on this project. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Mr. Fred Heal 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to express my sincere condolences to the friends and family of 

Fred Heal, who passed away last Sunday. Mr. Heal received his 

Ph.D. in environmental studies in 1972 and later served this 

province in the departments of Environment, Energy, and 

Economic Development. 

 

But he was perhaps best known for the integral role he played   



744  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

as executive director of the Meewasin Valley Authority. He was 

a key figure in developing Wanuskewin Heritage Park and the 

partners for the Saskatchewan River Basin. Wanuskewin is a 

testament to Saskatchewan’s beautiful landscape and the rich 

history of the native people. It is also a testament to the creative 

vision and energy of Fred Heal. 

 

Fred Heal was a well-respected member of the parks 

development community, the city of Saskatoon, and our 

province. I am told he was an adventurous spirit and that he 

valued his associations with first nations people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members of this Assembly join 

me in expressing my sympathy to those close to Fred Heal. He 

will be sorely missed by all who knew him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Country Singer of the Year 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My remarks 

today are about Rosetown’s musical talent. I’m not talking 

about myself, Mr. Speaker, although anybody wanting to come 

to the concert of the Regina Philharmonic Choir on April 26 is 

welcome. I gave up . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What about the concert tonight? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  And the concert tonight. 

 

I gave up having my name in lights when I realized that you, 

Mr. Speaker, and the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

could not be competed with in your group, the Loose Jaws from 

Moose Jaw. 

 

I’m talking, Mr. Speaker, about somebody recognized for her 

musical talent outside the halls of government. I’m talking 

about Marilyn Faye Parney, Saskatchewan’s country music 

entertainer of the year and a resident of Rosetown in my 

constituency. 

 

Marilyn and her band, Rose Country, were nominated in no less 

than 11 different categories this year. In addition to winning the 

award for entertainer of the year, Marilyn also won the award 

for song of the year for her composition, “Paradise,” a romantic 

ballad. 

 

Members of this Assembly will agree I’m sure, that it’s also an 

apt description of the experience of living in this, the best 

province in the best country in the world. In a recent interview, 

Marilyn said that she prefers to stick close to home instead of 

moving to Nashville. Some country music performers don’t feel 

accepted at home, but Marilyn said the people of Rosetown 

have always supported her. There’s a lesson there, Mr. Speaker, 

for all of us — supportive communities matter. 

 

Saskatchewan’s commitment to community is what makes it the 

best place in the world to live. 

 

Of course the Rosetown-Biggar constituency seems to be a 

more than inspiring place than most. Two other constituents, 

Terry Harris and Wiseton resident Dianne Fullerton, were also 

nominated. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all others to join me in 

congratulating these Saskatchewan talents, and particularly 

Marilyn Faye Parney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Speed Skaters from Melville 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure 

for me to recognize the efforts of young people, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’d like to do so today in the House — to recognize the 

achievements of two youths from my constituency. 

 

Recently in the Canadian short-track speed skating 

championship, Chelsey Parker won a bronze medal in the 

juvenile girls’ category, while Kerry Simpson won a bronze 

medal as a member of the juvenile-intermediate-senior female 

relay team. This happened in Charlottetown, Prince Edward 

Island. 

 

Both girls are members of the Melville Speed Skating Club and 

earlier this year both girls had won the gold medals in the 

Canadian long-track speed skating championships in British 

Columbia. 

 

I’d just like everyone to join me in congratulating Chelsey and 

Kerry, along with the Melville Speed Skating Club, for all their 

achievements, their efforts on behalf of young people. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bed and Breakfasts Part of Our Growing 

Tourism Industry 

 

Ms. Lorje:  My constituent, Kathy Chaplin, operates 

Chaplin’s Bed and Breakfast on her farm 14 kilometres 

south-east of Saskatoon. In addition to a comfortable bed and a 

fine breakfast, she offers exposure to cows, goats, pigs, 

chickens, rabbits, and one mean turkey — luckily kept in a 

cage. 

 

She tells me that many of her guests have children with no idea 

of where food comes from. When told how eggs arrive, one 

child told her to “get real.” 

 

So Ms. Chaplin provides a valuable educational service as well 

as an attractive, economical, and pleasant retreat for the 

vacationing public. 

 

Kathy and the 100 other bed and breakfasts in the province are a 

strong part of our rapidly growing tourism industry in 

Saskatchewan. And I am happy to use this Assembly to give 

them a promotional boost. 

 

Tomorrow and Saturday, the Saskatchewan Country Vacations 

Association is holding its 25th anniversary party and conference 

in Saskatoon. Members of the association have   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

advantages in marketing, networking, and quality control. If 

you see the black rooster symbol of the association in the 

window of a B&B (bed and breakfast), you know that the 

establishment has met the highest esthetic and safety standards, 

and you know you will be treated well, fed royally, and 

entertained appropriately. 

 

I wish Kathy Chaplin and all members of the SCVA 

(Saskatchewan Country Vacations Association) all the best in 

their efforts to boost Saskatchewan tourism. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Edam First Responders Win Skills Competition 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every member of 

this Assembly has come home or picked up the phone only to 

learn that some medical emergency has occurred involving a 

member of their family or a close friend. Each one of us has 

wondered what kind of care our loved ones received while they 

were waiting for the ambulance to come. Was the first person 

on the scene capable? Were they a source of comfort? Were 

appropriate steps taken? 

 

Well in Edam, Mr. Speaker, families don’t have to wonder any 

more. A team of Edam first responders provided a 

province-wide skills competition and it proved that they were 

the best in the province. 

 

This competition was a realistic enactment of the role first 

responders play. Julie Levasseur, George Greening, and Dianne 

Weitzel were given a scenario of a farmer caught in a power 

take-off shaft. They had to assess his injuries, treat them, and 

report to the ambulance, which arrived 20 minutes later. The 

Edam team knew what to do, Mr. Speaker, and as a result they 

won. 

 

Mr. Speaker, such a display of skill is no surprise to anyone 

who’s worked with a first responder. They provide an important 

service in dozens of rural Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Neighbours helping neighbours, Mr. Speaker — that’s the 

Saskatchewan model of community spirit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members of this Assembly to 

join me in congratulating Edam first responders on their success 

in this competition, and all Saskatchewan first responders who 

save lives in our province every day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gun Control Legislation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Alexa McDonough, the federal 

NDP leader, is known as a very strong supporter of gun 

registration and gun control. Indeed she based her campaign for 

the federal NDP leadership on her support for the gun 

registration. 

 

My question of the Minister of Justice is, in the unlikely event 

that the NDP form the government after the next federal 

election and Alexa McDonough is our new prime minister, 

what will happen to his court challenge against the federal 

government, against the gun registration? Will he continue to 

pursue that litigation or will it go away? Is this case against the 

federal government just political grandstanding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well once again 

we start off with plain lack of information. It’s the Alberta case 

that we’re supporting. Now what we have here, very clearly, is 

Liberals who once again don’t understand what all the issues 

are and where Saskatchewan people are on this. 

 

The NDP as a federal party, but also as a provincial party, and 

this government are very strongly behind the people who say 

that the federal government screwed this up royally. And 

basically what we have is a situation where a Saskatchewan 

suggestion, which was joined by Alberta and Manitoba, which 

was joined by the members opposite — and I think the member 

in fact sitting right in front of you who is a strong supporter of 

the position this province took — the members over in the third 

party, we went together and said to Ottawa: look, if you listen 

to us, we’ll show you the Saskatchewan way of doing this that 

will make sense. 

 

And we are very, very surprised that you would now raise this 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’m sorry that the Minister of Justice is 

surprised, but NDP supporters are perplexed. Tommy Douglas 

supported gun registration, Alexa McDonough supports gun 

registration, the federal NDPs support gun registration. Is your 

opposition to gun registration personal and passionate and deep, 

or is it just a matter of political convenience and some political 

theatre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, normally it’s my task to 

answer questions, but today I’m going to ask. Have those 

people across the House changed their position in the last three 

or four weeks? I’ve been on the platform with some of these 

people, speaking in support of the Saskatchewan government’s 

position against the federal gun registration laws. And I think 

it’s very clear that there’s a further example of the “one day 

this, one day that” Liberal Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel Revenue Sources 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister in charge of SaskTel’s phone is about to ring again 

today and I hope someone’s home to answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister was questioned yesterday about the 

Crown company’s apparent plans to look at the possibility of 

higher local rates. She indicated SaskTel is not planning on   



746  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

hiking rates, and we’re planning to hold her to that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also noted that SaskTel must develop 

other income sources to replace the lost long-distance revenues 

normally used to subsidize local rates. She stated the Crown 

company has a plan to derive at least 40 per cent of its revenues 

from non-traditional sources by the year 2000. This comes as 

something of a concern, given the government’s NST Network 

investment failure which cost the taxpayers $16 million. 

 

Will the minister indicate what those other future sources of 

revenue will be and explain how many millions of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars she’s willing to put at risk this 

time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who the 

member opposite has been listening to. Maybe it’s Sprint or 

AT&T that’s planning to raise rates, I don’t know. He wants to 

pass legislation making the REDA (regional economic 

development authority) boundaries exchange area boundaries, 

raising the local rates in Saskatchewan by $46 a line, costing 

$73 million in long-distance revenue if the Liberals were in 

charge. 

 

I don’t know why he’s worrying about that because the position 

of his leader is that he’d privatize SaskTel and then he wouldn’t 

have any influence over any of those decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister answers the 

phone but she’s not willing to listen. I asked a question; she did 

not touch on the question. I will repeat the question. Will the 

minister indicate what other future sources of revenue will be 

and explain how many millions of dollars that you are willing to 

put at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker. I haven’t got a crystal 

ball, Mr. Speaker. I have no idea of what might happen 10, 20 

years in the future. What I have said is that we have, in our 

diversified portfolio now, we have some work in the 

Philippines, we have participated in the Chunnel . . . I keep 

getting a busy signal every time I try to talk to them, Mr. 

Speaker; can’t hear a thing. 

 

And we have sold the hospitality network and some of our other 

inventions worldwide. We have a whole range of diversified 

portfolios. We have strategic alliances with a hundred and sixty 

Mobility dealers throughout the province. We have a strategic 

alliance with Western Business Machines on Internet. 

 

We will keep looking for good, solid, businesslike 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to enhance the revenue stream of 

the telephone company which we manage on behalf of all the 

shareholders of Saskatchewan, being the owners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, myself along with the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan still have no idea how many dollars 

of their money is going to be at risk. I’ll try it another avenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if SaskTel is trying to generate more revenue by 

investing in ventures overseas, the people of Saskatchewan 

need to be assured their tax dollars are invested wisely. 

Following the NST fiasco, residents of this province are 

demanding better accountability. Clearly serious mistakes were 

made in this venture and steps must be taken to ensure that 

failed investments don’t become routine. 

 

Will the minister explain in the House today what measures she 

is undertaking to tighten the criteria for future investments and 

will she table that criteria? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to 

provide a response to that question. Of course we are very 

concerned as managers of the company owned by 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. And as usual when this happens, when 

business arrangements don’t go as you projected, you always, 

always do an internal examination, and this has been done. 

 

In addition I have instructed, as chairman of the board, the audit 

committee of the board to do an independent review with 

assistance from external sources and to provide me with a 

report based on all of the chronology, all of the events that 

unfolded from October of 1994 when this project was first 

initiated to its recent conclusion, Mr. Speaker. And when I have 

that report in hand, we will make decisions at that time. 

 

But we do act prudently at all times, Mr. Speaker, as caretakers 

of the investments that belong to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Youth at Risk 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Office 

of the Children’s Advocate released its 1996 annual report 

yesterday and in it . . . and in that report listed a number of key 

concerns that the Children’s Advocate has. Among these, the 

need to better protect children from sexual exploitation 

including child prostitution. Obviously this is a point that 

members of this House can all agree on. 

 

However it concerns me that the Children’s Advocate does not 

have the authority to conduct a formal review of broad social 

matters, such as the growing problem involving sex for 

solvents, which I have raised several times. Obviously having 

the Children’s Advocate spearhead such reviews would be an 

important first step in addressing this and other issues. 

 

Will the Minister of Social Services explain if this is a concern 

of his, and how does he plan on addressing it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, to point out to the member 

that the Children’s Advocate was a creation of this government, 

and that this Children’s Advocate has wide-ranging ability to 

comment and to recommend on many areas of government, as 

the member should know if she’s looked at the most recent 

report. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I could quote from the most recent report 

of the Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate where she says: 

 

Government, in Saskatchewan, has implemented a well 

recognized and highly respected Child Action Plan. 

Community advocates are being supported in their efforts 

to ensure that children are valued and protected through the 

provision of Prevention and Support Grants and other 

initiatives. There seems to be a sincere effort being made 

by politicians and community members to respect children, 

youth and families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, we believe that there is a clear option 

that this government could exercise if it is truly concerned 

about children, and it could ensure the Children’s Advocate has 

the ability to review social issues that are of concern to 

Saskatchewan residents and subsequently raised in this 

legislature. 

 

The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act provides the 

legislature with the power to create an all-party committee 

which may, and I quote from that book: 

 

At any time refer to the Children’s Advocate for review, 

investigation, and report any petition or matter relating to 

the interests and well-being of children that is before the 

committee for consideration. 

 

What we need is an all-party committee and it’s up to this 

government to provide for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems only reasonable that when Saskatchewan 

people bring serious concerns to the members of the Assembly 

there be an avenue to ensure important issues can be referred to 

the Children’s Advocate for proper review. Will the minister 

make a commitment in this House today to establish an 

all-party committee to address the need for reviews and 

investigations surrounding the issues of youth at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in some sense it’s an 

all-party committee sits in this House on a daily basis. And it 

would be very helpful if this House could join together in this 

Chamber and express the unanimous will of this House that we 

should move quickly as we possibly can as a nation in 

establishing the national child benefit. 

 

I want to report, I want to report, Mr. Speaker, what the 

Children’s Advocate has observed in the report delivered to this 

legislature yesterday. She said and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

“Saskatchewan’s Premier (Saskatchewan’s Premier) has 

become a champion of the rights of children to live without 

poverty.” That’s the Premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I 

invite every premier, I invite the Prime Minister of Canada, to 

move forward on the national child benefit much sooner than 

July 1998. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister in charge of SaskTel. Madam 

Minister, it’s now clear who the fall guy was in this whole 

botched-up NST deal. Our researchers have checked the timing. 

Early last year when you realized that this thing was going into 

the tank, you canned Fred Van Parys. Of course Fred got a 

much softer landing than the fellow that worked for Bre-X that 

walked out of his helicopter. 

 

Fred got a one-year paid vacation, paid for by the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. Nice little reward for losing $16 million, wasn’t it, 

Madam Minister? Well, Madam Minister, isn’t this the real 

reason that you got rid of Fred Van Parys? Because of this 

fiasco that he cost $16 million to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the musings of the 

member opposite are very interesting but the answer is no. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a subsequent 

question to the minister. Madam Minister, the timing of all this 

is very interesting. Fred Van Parys got you into this fiasco. 

 

Apparently that’s why he was fired, I suspect from the research 

that we’ve done, in January. Remember now, January 1996. But 

it wasn’t until April of 1996 that you decided to put the 

Premier’s buddy, Don Ching, the best guy you could find to run 

the outfit, you said, into position. 

 

In between those two events — in February of 1996, Madam 

Minister — cabinet pumped another $9 million into this fiasco. 

Whose decision was that, Madam Minister? Poor old Fred had 

already gotten the boot. Now you hadn’t hired Ching yet. And I 

can only assume that you then were the one that recommended 

this decision. 

 

Madam Minister, who was in charge of SaskTel in February of 

1996? Who made the decision to flush another $9 million down 

the toilet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I guess the member 

opposite has a lot of friends who lost a lot of money in Bre-X 

and he can’t help them out so he’s feeling very bitter about it 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That was in Alberta, yes. Tory 

friends in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we will have a report done. We’re 

asking the audit committee. In fact I’ll table the letter, the copy, 

the letter of direction to the audit committee which carries out 

actually a direction that was given on February 26 at a board of 

directors meeting. 

  



748  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

And in due course the report will be available and we will make 

known whatever details are available at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My subsequent 

question is to the same minister. Now you went in, Madam 

Minister, to your cabinet and you recommended throwing 

another $9 million down the drain even though, by your own 

admission yesterday, you hadn’t done any kind of analysis. 

 

Madam Minister, you’ve now had another day to think about 

this. Will you take responsibility for your actions? Will you 

resign and do the honourable thing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pornography on the Internet 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also for the Minister of SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, the other day the Minister of Justice was 

questioned about pornography on the Internet. He said it was 

difficult to stop this sort of thing because it comes from all over 

the world. That’s true. But it would be relatively easy for 

SaskTel’s Sympatico to monitor and block use-net news groups 

dealing with child pornography and other obscene and illegal 

materials. 

 

America Online does it. In Germany it’s the law — Internet 

providers are required to block obscene news groups. Madam 

Minister, why aren’t you blocking this garbage? Why is this 

sick material available to every one of your Sympatico 

subscribers in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll respond to that question 

as it relates to a number of the initiatives that we’re attempting 

to do in coordination with other provinces and the federal 

government as it relates to this insidious problem. 

 

And I appreciate the suggestions that are made and I know that 

SaskTel internally is looking at this as well. But a number of the 

issues as you’ve raised, for the countries in Europe where they 

have federal laws that govern this, makes it much easier for the 

operating companies to take steps like this. And all I can say is 

that because of the way our country is set up, it has to be 

examined carefully by all of the jurisdictions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 

minister responsible for SaskTel. America Online is not a 

federal government, it’s an independent company and they have 

taken the initiative. 

 

Madam Minister, the people who are putting this garbage on the 

Net are not trying to hide it. Here are some of the use groups 

available right now on SaskTel Sympatico: 

sex.pedophilia, sex.beastiality, sex.boys, erotica.urine, and 

sex.necrophilia, which includes several entries entitled “Dead 

Girls.” Sick, perverted, Madam Minister, is what this is. 

 

If someone was selling this kind of material at the corner store, 

your government would be charging them, and rightly so. Yet 

this garbage is available through SaskTel Sympatico right now, 

where it can be easily accessed by everyone, including children, 

Madam Minister. This material is not only sick, but much of it 

is illegal under the Criminal Code of Canada. 

 

Why isn’t SaskTel Sympatico blocking it as other corporations 

are doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would agree with the 

member opposite that however he’s found out about these 

various items on the Internet, that they are totally and 

inappropriate things to have available to especially children. 

 

And what I would say is that we are working very closely 

together with other jurisdictions, Conservatives in Manitoba 

and in Alberta, the people right across the country, to try and 

deal with this. As I said last week, the Criminal Code has very 

clear rules about this. 

 

There’s difficulties on enforcement, which is what we’re talking 

about. And if you do know of information like this, you should 

advise the police and make sure that they know about this. 

Because part of it, part of this is actually discovering where all 

of this kind of smut is. 

 

Prosecutions Review Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Martin report was highly 

critical of the minister’s directive regarding the treatment of 

women who refuse to cooperate in the prosecution of men who 

have assaulted them. In my own legal career I was often times 

disturbed with the number of times that women who had been 

assaulted and then did not wish to proceed with the prosecution 

ended up being charged, even thrown in jail themselves. 

 

Now I asked the minister about this two days ago. His answer 

was that he’s going to have to think about it. He’s had the report 

for six weeks. How long will he have to think about whether 

this is an appropriate way for our justice system to treat battered 

women? Surely, we’ve paid 150,000 for the Martin report, the 

time for action is now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, the question that I gave 

before is the same question I’ll give . . . answer I’ll give today. 

And basically what it is, is that in this report they’ve raised 

some questions about some ministerial orders, which I think in 

the one that the member’s referring to in this instance have been 

in place since 1982 or 1983. And what happens is, I need to 

receive advice from the competent workers within the 

department of public prosecutions and also in consultation with 

the various women’s groups in Saskatchewan to look at how 

this policy was initially implemented, what its history has been, 

and then where we should go from here. I don’t think it’s a   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

black and white decision and it’s one that we need to do with 

fairness and balance, as this government always does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is right. The 

directive has been there a few years and for all those years 

women’s groups have been critical, legal aid lawyers have been 

critical, women thrown in jail have been critical. They get 

charged with mischief and obstruction — their partners go 

scot-free while they sit in a prison cell with their black eyes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister did respond very quickly, the minister 

responded very quickly when the Martin report said buy 

computers, send prosecutors to media relations courses, beef up 

the staff. But the real issues that are going to restore public 

confidence in the administration of justice are to deal with some 

of those directives that the operational side of the Department 

of Justice . . . You’ve had it six weeks. What sort of time frame 

will it take for you to do this? It didn’t that long to decide to 

buy computers. Why does it take that long to deal with an issue 

that women have been critical about for years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate once again 

to refer to the fact that there aren’t all the facts available to the 

hon. member when he raises the question. This particular issue 

is extremely difficult. As many of you know who have been 

involved in the Saskatchewan community, the Canadian 

community, there was a very strong pressure to have an 

automatic charge as it related to spousal abuse. And basically 

the point was that there were many situations where women, 

primarily, were scared to lay charges. And so basically the 

government, through the department of public prosecutions in 

response to the public, said, we’re going to take over and lay 

those charges to provide a protection to women. That was the 

policy decision made at that time. 

 

What the member has raised here is that there are some 

instances where that has some other, adverse effects. That is the 

issue that we are examining. We have to examine it carefully. 

But we can’t throw out the other very important protection for 

women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

Minister of Justice . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 

Minister of Justice doesn’t see the need for immediate action on 

this issue, but we do. The seriousness of this problem is 

escalating and Saskatchewan women are not getting the support 

they deserve from this government. 

 

The minister said he is awaiting advice, but how much longer 

are battered women supposed to wait? Every year more than 

20,000 women are abused by their partners and their husbands. 

One out of every four women in this province suffer from some 

sort of abuse. 

 

This government has a Women’s Secretariat, Mr. Speaker, who 

has the responsibility to bring women’s issues to the attention 

of this government. Will the minister responsible for the 

Secretariat tell us what she has done, if anything, to lobby the 

Justice department to scrutinize this policy of charging women 

with mischief when they have chosen not to proceed with abuse 

charges against their partners? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, it’s very unfortunate that 

people who attempt to consult get such a narrow view of what 

this issue is. There are some problems that have been identified, 

and those have been discussed. What I would say, to make the 

kinds of comments that the member has just made about this 

government and their role in working with women is just 

unbelievable. 

 

One of the areas that we are very proud of in this government is 

our Victims of Domestic Violence Act. That legislation is 

legislation that leads in the country. We get calls and letters 

regularly saying, how is this legislation working? How can we 

emulate it in other parts of Canada and other parts of the world? 

 

We drafted that legislation in consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan, primarily the women of Saskatchewan, and we 

ask you very clearly to talk to the people of Saskatchewan 

before you make these kind of comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Transportation Strategy 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, I will make the 

following ministerial statement. 

 

Earlier this spring the Minister of Finance announced our 

government’s commitment to invest $2.5 billion over the next 

10 years to improve and upgrade our transportation system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That commitment was an excellent first 

step towards improving our transportation system and ensuring 

it meets our economic and social needs well into the future. 

 

Today our government is taking the next step. I am pleased to 

announce the government’s comprehensive transportation 

strategy. Investing in transportation is a long-term, 

comprehensive plan that will set the strategic direction for 

modernizing our transportation system. Our plan proposes to 

build on the successes of the past and ensure a safe, reliable,   



750  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

and efficient transportation system into the future. 

 

Many of the initiatives in our plan are aimed at enhancing our 

competitive position in the global market-place, and reducing 

the cost of doing so. We will be encouraging competition in the 

transportation system because competition means lower freight 

rates and better service. 

 

The grain handling and transportation system is currently 

characterized by duplication and inefficiencies. We will 

encourage the use of modern logistic practices, reduce 

duplication and activities that do not provide value added to the 

customer. 

 

In addition, we will be assisting local communities and 

businesses in the formation and growth of short-line railroads, 

Mr. Speaker — short-line railroads in Saskatchewan through 

our newly formed short-line rail advisory unit. 

 

We will be pursuing the development of strategic road and rail 

links to enhance the competitiveness of Saskatchewan exports 

in accessing expanding markets in the United States and 

Mexico. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  In the area of trucking, our plan 

proposes to make truck safety an overarching consideration. To 

this end, I am pleased to announce we will be working with the 

University of Saskatchewan to form a truck safety institute to 

examine all areas of truck safety and ensure that Saskatchewan 

is a world leader in this area. 

 

Our plan also proposes to make our truck sector more efficient 

and competitive by expanding the trucking partnership 

program, Mr. Speaker. Our plan proposes to work toward 

reducing the amounts of road damage we incur each year by 

increasing fines for overweight and over-dimension vehicles. In 

addition the legislation also empowers the government in 

certain instances to make the shipper of a commodity equally 

liable for overweight damages. 

 

We will also be introducing a new system of enforcement by 

rewarding exemplary carriers and allows the government to 

focus its enforcement resources much more effectively. 

 

Area transportation planning is an effective method of ensuring 

that the entire transportation system is considered when 

investing scarce resources into the infrastructure. As part of our 

plan, we will work with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) to facilitate the expansion 

of this concept to all areas of the province where there is local 

interest. 

 

Finally, I am extremely pleased to announce that our plan calls 

for the completion of Highway No. 1 twinning, border to 

border, and the twinning of the Yellowhead highway between 

Saskatoon and the Alberta border over the next 15 years. With 

meaningful cost sharing from the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker, we could accelerate that time frame. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

respond to this ministerial statement today by saying the hopes 

of Saskatchewan people today were let down. Sure, if we look 

at the report, there’s a few initiatives that I think you’re on the 

right track with; but to call it a comprehensive document, a 

comprehensive report, dealing with everything Saskatchewan 

people had waited for since it was announced in the throne 

speech — that’s just not the case, Mr. Minister. 

 

What they thought was coming down was a document which 

would paint a picture for Saskatchewan people, that would paint 

a picture that would fill in where we’re going with our highway 

and road system, and fill in all the blanks and paint the picture 

of what our rail line network, our branch lines, would look like 

5 years, 10 years down the road, 20 years down the road. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we take a look at this document, none of 

that is clear. You can read from cover to cover in this . . . Sure 

you’ve highlighted a lot of concerns, you took stock of where 

we are today; but to say that you have an overall plan here — 

that is just not the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  You should have, Mr. Minister, you 

should have touched on many more things. If we take a look at 

what you’re proposing as a solution for branch lines by having 

your short-line advisory unit in the Department of Highways 

and Transportation . . . I had high hopes not so long ago when 

you mentioned this in a response in question period. But to 

supply some advice to potential investors — if you think that’s 

as far as you should go in a province that is so dependent on 

agriculture and exports and the movement of those products, 

you’re not even on first base. Much more should have been 

done. 

 

Unless I am going to assume that you and your government are 

fully prepared to support perhaps the Bill that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Not a chance. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Two Bills. Not a chance, the Premier says. 

You should be supporting the Bill that deals firstly with what is 

recognized by SARM. And many of the investors are hopeful 

short-line regional operators. They are saying that we can’t have 

the kind of restrictive agreements, collective agreements from 

CNCP (Canadian National and Canadian Pacific), put onto the 

short-line operators. 

 

And it’s not that we’re opposed to the employees of these 

systems. The fact of the matter is there are too many restrictions 

there. We’ve got to have them . . . or allow them to work in the 

environment where perhaps the engineer can go back and fix 

the hitch on the last car or the flagman can repair the headlights 

on the train. 

 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

And this, Mr. Minister, should have been a first step in a 

process. You should have . . . That should have been the first 

step. 

 

Another thing I think what the people of Saskatchewan were 

looking for and you didn’t address were some of the overall . . . 

the broader issues — creating that environment, Mr. Minister, 

that is necessary out there. 

 

You have got to answer where you stand, where your 

government stands, as far as elevator closings and what you’re 

going to do about it. You can’t sit back and say, well we’re not 

going to touch that one, you know, because you’re friends of 

grain-gathering companies. 

 

How can you do that? What’s the use of standing in here and 

saying that you’re going to do something to protect branch lines 

and railroads and there won’t be any facilities out there to haul 

the grain to? It should have been dealt with. 

 

Issues such as ownership of rail bed, the rails, the role of the 

provincial government, the federal government, how you’re 

going to . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The minister was fairly 

lengthy in his ministerial statement and the hon. member has 

been provided equivalent time in response, and I’ll recognize 

another member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

today to start off by congratulating the minister and the 

government of this province for at last publicly acknowledging 

the need to double lane No. 1 and No. 16 highways in their 

entirety. I congratulate you for that. We need to do that. 

 

(1430) 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I may not be alive long enough 

to see it done. I want to know if the minister thinks that it will 

be beneficial for me when I’m driving to Maple Creek next 

week. If I get killed on the road, what good it’ll be to have the 

road double laned 15 years from now. 

 

Obviously this government has demonstrated that when they 

have long-term programs . . . and we encourage programs that 

are planned ahead because that’s how you get things done. 

However, when they plan them it is always to do the work at 

the end of the program or at the end of the time. We’ve seen 

that with the Highway budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reality is that this government only has two 

years left in their mandate. They’ll never be able to complete a 

15-year program because they won’t be the government any 

more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  They missed the important point, Mr. 

Speaker, here that has been discovered by the South-west 

Saskatchewan Transportation Committee that has sat in 

conference for the last couple of years. This process and this 

whole problem of transportation has been studied to death in 

this country and these people have clearly identified in their 

report all of the things that need to be addressed. We don’t need 

to study it any more — SARM, SUMA, the chambers of 

commerce, all of the agriculture-related industry have been 

involved in this process, and they have said there is one number 

one thing that is wrong and that is successor rights in terms of 

setting up short-line railroads. 

 

And the number one thing that has been identified, this report 

totally ignores it. And if you totally ignore the most important 

thing in it, what good is the rest of the fluff to anybody? It is 

that, only that — a whole document of fluff to cover up a very 

important issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Minister of Transportation to 

shorten up his 15-year plan to something realistic like a 5-year 

plan. I know he can’t do it overnight, but we can do it in five 

years. You’ve got Crow money coming, you’ve got GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) money that you took out of 

the farmers, you’ve got a bag full of money you don’t deserve 

to have — spend it on the farmers’ roads and on short-line 

railroads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order, order. All the appropriate 

participants have participated in that ministerial statement. 

Further ministerial statements? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 46  The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’m looking for it, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Is it first reading? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It’s first reading — it is first reading. 

And I know I have it here somewhere . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I have it, somewhere I have it. Oh, here it 

is — here we go, here we go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 46, The Highway and 

Transportation Act, 1997 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of cooperation, 

I would like to table the answers to questions 41, 42, and 43. 

 

The Speaker:  The Government Deputy House Leader   



752  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

requires leave to deal with all the items simultaneously. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  The responses to items 1, 2, and 3 are 

provided. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 39  The Multiculturalism Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 39 — The 

Multiculturalism Act, 1997 introduces a framework for 

promoting a new policy of multiculturalism in Saskatchewan. 

Adoption of this legislation will lay the groundwork for 

developing progressive multiculturalism legislation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The proposed legislation affirms Saskatchewan’s historical 

commitment to the promotion of multiculturalism policy and 

will reinforce the provincial motto, “from many peoples, 

strength.” 

 

A new Multiculturalism Act will continue to support cultural 

retention, heritage languages, and inter-cultural understanding. 

The legislation will also include principles which address the 

issues of anti-racism, creative expression, equity, and the 

welcoming of immigrants. 

 

The Multiculturalism Act represents a serious statement of 

principles which recognize that the diversity of Saskatchewan 

people is a fundamental characteristic of Saskatchewan society, 

one that enriches the lives of all Saskatchewan people. The Bill 

states that this diversity exists with respect to race, cultural 

heritage, religion, ethnicity, ancestry, and place of origin. 

 

This legislation encourages the celebration of human diversity 

as well, Mr. Speaker, and in so doing promotes harmony in a 

multicultural society. These principles offer an antidote to a 

society often troubled by intolerance and discrimination. These 

principles respect individual and cultural differences and assist 

in defining a provincial society which is proud of its diversity 

and whose strength comes from its diversity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our provincial motto — “from many peoples, 

strength” — speaks to this historical and current reality. 

 

The Multiculturalism Act, 1997, Mr. Speaker, will encourage 

respect for the multicultural heritage of Saskatchewan and 

encourage the continuation of our multicultural society. This 

new legislation encourages a set of principles which serves to 

promote and preserve multiculturalism in Saskatchewan and 

which includes all of us in the multicultural community — all 

of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation outlines principles which 

encourage a tolerant and respectful society, fostering a climate 

of harmonious relations between all people. Further, Mr. 

Speaker, The Multiculturalism Act will define the role of the 

minister responsible in ensuring the development of 

multiculturalism policy. There is no department currently in the 

Saskatchewan government which has a mandate to encourage 

greater government-wide cooperation and resource sharing 

among agencies working to ensure the preservation of 

multiculturalism and initiatives which counter cultural 

intolerance within the provincial government. 

 

Through this legislation, the Government of Saskatchewan will 

ensure that activities relating to multiculturalism policy are 

carried out within government, and particularly important, 

within the community. Our officials will work with community 

groups and organizations to promote multiculturalism 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Multiculturalism Act is being brought 

forward by our government at the recommendation of the 

Multiculturalism Legislation Framework Consultation 

Committee. Previously, extensive work was done by the 

minister’s advisory committee to develop a vision for provincial 

legislation, and this legislation is based in large part on the 

excellent contribution of many Saskatchewan citizens to this 

process. 

 

For 12 years, the multiculturalism community has been 

requesting new, updated legislation. The community was 

supportive of multiculturalism and the new role of 

multiculturalism legislation. In 1997, the definition of 

multiculturalism includes anti-racism, creative expression, 

equity, and immigration issues. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the 

multicultural community includes each of us and respects each 

of our unique and distinctive cultural heritages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995 the Multiculturalism Legislation 

Framework Consultation Committee was mandated to prepare, 

through public consultations, for the drafting of legislation for a 

new Multiculturalism Act. 

 

A series of focus groups were held in La Ronge, Prince Albert, 

North Battleford, Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, and Moose 

Jaw. Of these, four individual focus groups were held with 

representatives of Saskatchewan’s first nations peoples, Metis 

peoples, youth, and francophone communities. The people in 

these focus groups were supportive of the proposed new 

legislation and felt this legislation would be complementary to 

existing federal and provincial legislation protecting human 

rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s leadership in multiculturalism 

policy will inspire policy work within non-government 

organizations and agencies. Saskatchewan will provide 

leadership among provinces by embracing an expanded 

understanding of multiculturalism. Multiculturalism affects 

each and every one of us in this new definition. 

 

I’m confident that enactment of this legislation will lay a 

foundation of strong principles which strengthens existing 

provincial mulitculturalism policy in the areas of cultural 

retention, inter-cultural understanding, and heritage languages. 

It will begin to develop a framework for multiculturalism policy   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

for the province of Saskatchewan, policy which also addresses 

current concerns of our communities and including each of us 

in the scope of multiculturalism policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill — Bill No. 39, 

The Multiculturalism Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to speak on the second reading of Bill No. 39, The 

Multiculturalism Act. 

 

Saskatchewan traces its roots as a multicultural society to the 

beginning of European settlement in the late 1800s. Prior to 

that, aboriginal people had lived in Saskatchewan for 10,000 

years. In that the aboriginal people are made up of many 

nations, Saskatchewan can be said to have been multicultural 

for centuries, becoming more so with settlement. 

 

Beginning in the late 1800s and early 1900s, immigration grew, 

especially with the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway. 

In 1901 Saskatchewan’s population was about 91,000 residents. 

By 1931 the population rose to 920,000. Now slightly more 

than 1 million people live in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan’s population is culturally diverse and has a large 

aboriginal community of Indians and Metis. The largest 

non-aboriginal ethnic groups are British, German, Ukrainian, 

Scandinavian, French, Dutch, and Russian. Several 

non-European groups are also represented in small numbers. 

 

Multiculturalism is an inherent part of the history of Canada. 

Cultural differences among its population have resulted not just 

from the differing roots of the immigrants who have settled 

here. Regardless of where they came from, many times from the 

same country, depending on where they settled in Canada, they 

developed differences and forged their own distinctive cultures 

in adapting to the particular geography and prevailing economic 

and social conditions of the different regions of the country 

where they made their home. 

 

Cultural diversity characterized the earliest societies that form a 

part of our early history. The aboriginal people spoke a 

diversity of languages across the breadth of North America. 

 

(1445) 

 

Diversity was recognized and enhanced by the Bill of Rights of 

1960, the Official Languages Act of 1969, the Canadian Human 

Rights Act of 1977, and the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms of 1982. In 1971 Canada became officially 

multicultural following the recommendations of the Royal 

Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism. 

 

The multiculturalism policy introduced that year focused on 

four areas: assistance to cultural groups; overcoming barriers to 

full participation; cultural interchange in the interest of national 

unity; and assistance in official language training. 

 

Programs to implement the policy began with an initial 

investment of $1.5 million. In April of 1974, The Saskatchewan 

Multicultural Act, the first such legislation in Canada, was 

passed. It enshrined the recognition of the right of every ethnic 

community whose common history spans many generations to 

retain its distinctive group identity and to develop its relevant 

language and its tradition, arts, and sciences without political or 

social impediment and for the mutual benefit of all citizens. 

 

In its infancy, multiculturalism was a showcase for the cultures 

of the respected ethnic groups through song and dance, food, 

and handicraft displays, and demonstrations of all kinds. 

Multicultural festivities like Regina’s Mosaic and Saskatoon’s 

Folkfest are popular annual events and tourist attractions 

attended by thousands of people, and allow the different 

nationalities to proudly display their cultures and culinary and 

artistic prowess. 

 

These festivals are what most people experience and perceive 

multiculturalism to be. But today multiculturalism is much 

more than festivals. Multiculturalism is about education, 

heritage, languages, racism, discrimination, aboriginal 

concerns, immigration, human services, economics, 

employment, business potential, tourism, and media. 

 

Education can be said to be the great leveller or equalizer and 

eye-opener. It is a leveller in the sense that it provides a level 

playing-field for a career start regardless of race, creed, or 

colour. What a person does with his or her education, once 

received, is determined by individual preferences and initiative. 

Saskatchewan classrooms are a mosaic of cultures and 

nationalities. 

 

At last census count, there were people of 125 ethnic origins 

represented in our fair province. 

 

Education is an eye-opener. As an eye-opener, it comes in 

kindergarten, elementary, and high school where, when the kids 

are colour-blind and unprejudiced, things can happen equally. 

Acceptance and appreciation of diversity and differences is 

instilled and hopefully carries on through adult life. 

 

The importance of education in developing understanding and 

acceptance of others cannot be overemphasized. This should be 

reflected in curricula, which should be designed so that positive 

images are presented of the 125 ethno-cultural groups who have 

contributed to Saskatchewan’s growth and development. 

 

Nowhere is education more important than in combating the 

stereotyped and negative images of aboriginal people. 

Aboriginal people occupy a unique position within our 

province’s multicultural mosaic because they are the original 

multicultural society. 

 

The Cree, Dene, Saulteaux, and others are each distinct nations 

with individual languages, cultural traditions, and histories. The 

Metis also are a distinct group. Historically the Metis drew from 

both Indian and European traditions to create a new culture and 

a new identity. 

 

The traditional diversity of aboriginal society has been made 

even more complex by the effects of contemporary social   



754  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

change. Today people of Indian ancestry make up the fourth 

largest group in Saskatchewan’s population. The majority no 

longer live on reserves or in isolated communities; instead they 

live in both rural and urban settings in all areas of this province. 

 

From the beginning of settlement more than a century ago, 

aboriginal and non-aboriginal cultures have been in conflict. 

Traditional cultures have been eroded by an educational system 

which forces Indian and Metis children to learn not of their 

history and their successes but of their failures. 

 

Education is and can be the key to resolving this cultural 

conflict. Any vestiges of stereotyped and negative images of 

aboriginal people in instructional materials and in classrooms 

must be replaced with positive ones. Education programs must 

be adapted so that children whose learning styles are influenced 

by their cultural backgrounds are not at a disadvantage. 

 

Bill No. 39 empowers the minister to review and monitor the 

efforts of departments and agencies in performing their services 

and developing programs in accordance with the multicultural 

policy. 

 

I urge and I challenge the minister to work with the Minister of 

Education to ensure that the education system and the curricula 

accommodate the needs and aspirations of our aboriginal 

people. 

 

Not until aboriginal people feel like full and equal partners in 

the economy and in society can the multicultural policy be 

deemed a success. During Committee of the Whole 

deliberations, I will want to explore with the minister how this 

Act will contribute to that goal and how the minister intends to 

apply her powers under the Act to that end. 

 

Frequently, immigrants are depicted as a burden and a cost to 

the federal and provincial governments, and restrictions on 

immigrations are urged by individuals, organizations, and some 

political parties. Let’s look at the facts and keep in mind that, 

except for the aboriginal people, Saskatchewan is a province of 

immigrants, and has been since the late 1800s. 

 

The facts are that there are exceedingly few immigrants on the 

welfare rolls. As a rule, immigrants will take whatever jobs 

there are available, and more often than not, they are 

low-paying jobs that no one else will take. 

 

Immigrants contribute to the economy in a number of ways. A 

growing population generates greater demand for goods and 

services, resulting in increased investment and job creation. The 

maintenance of cultural customs and languages by ethnic 

groups through multiculturalism provides a built-in economic 

advantage in that there exists at our disposal a pool of 

Canadians with language and cultural skills which, if properly 

harnessed and utilized, can facilitate trade and diplomatic links 

with the rest of the world. 

 

An example of this, and the economic aspect of 

multiculturalism, is the immigrant investor program. Under this 

program, Saskatchewan has attracted over $500 million of 

investor capital, with almost $400 million invested into 

Saskatchewan small and medium-sized businesses, creating 

over 5,000 jobs. 

 

There are also the annual multicultural events that attract 

tourists; ethnic enterprises such as restaurants and small 

businesses, which make considerable contribution to the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

I have devoted considerable time on the economic benefits of 

multiculturalism because the focus has tended to be on the 

cultural and festival aspects. It is important to recognize the 

cultural and culinary pleasures that multiculturalism brings, but 

it is equally important to acknowledge its economic benefits. 

 

I am interested in pursuing with the minister how the new 

Multiculturalism Act will contribute to further economic 

opportunities and growth. 

 

The essence of multiculturalism is tolerance, acceptance, 

understanding, and appreciation by all of us for each other’s 

cultures, traditions, and beliefs. Perhaps our Saskatchewan coat 

of arms says it best: “from many peoples, strength.” 

 

On balance, I believe that Bill No. 39 reflects the realities and 

requirements for multiculturalism to flourish and contribute in 

the ’90s and into the next millennium. A Bill such as this, 

which will remain on the books for a long time, should reflect 

consultations, with a consensus within Saskatchewan’s 

multicultural community. And I look forward to discuss this 

aspect and other questions surrounding this Bill in Committee 

of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

listened to the minister as she’s outlined the reasons for the 

current Bill before the Assembly — The Multiculturalism Act, 

Bill No. 39. I’ve also listened to the member of the opposition 

in her discussions about the Bill and the fact that the opposition 

caucus suggests we could move immediately to committee. 

 

I think people in Saskatchewan are quite well aware of the role 

multiculturalism has in our province — the fact that we’re quite 

a diverse community and we have such an array I guess, a 

rainbow if you will, of individuals and racial backgrounds in 

our society that make this such an important and terrific 

province to live in. 

 

However, it’s also important, Mr. Minister, that time be given 

in the process of legislation to indeed review legislation 

appropriately and timely before we just move and pass it 

forward. 

 

And while I recognize the fact that we have a number of 

individuals in our Assembly today who are here representing 

the different multicultural groups — and we certainly welcome 

them and we’re pleased to have them here and we can certainly 

indicate that we will work on their behalf to address any 

concerns but also to work with the minister to make sure that 

this Bill receives the approval that is needed by this Assembly 

— I at this time as well though would suggest that we should 

adjourn debate on the Bill. 

 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

And we will certainly get into further debate in the very near 

future and follow the appropriate procedure in passing this Bill 

into law in the Assembly. So I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 4 amends The 

Municipal Board Act. There are only two amendments in this 

Bill. One follows an amendment made last year which reduced 

the quorum for the Saskatchewan Municipal Board from two 

members to one. The amendment carries forward the reduced 

quorum to apply as well to the Assessment Appeals Committee. 

It would make little sense to allow the SMB (Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board) a quorum of one while requiring a committee 

of that board to run a quorum of two. 

 

The amendment will also allow administrative efficiencies 

where a straightforward appeal is to be heard in a remote 

location and one member could adequately deal with the matter. 

The committee will always sit with more than one member on 

complex appeals. 

 

Secondly, an amendment is required to section 40 of the Act to 

ensure that a phrase is removed. The phrase in question gives 

rise to the possible wrong interpretations of the section and 

should not have been included in the amendment that was made 

last year. 

 

I hope that members on all sides of the House recognize the 

merit of these amendments and show their support for this Bill. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 4. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to speak on Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The 

Municipal Board Act. Once again the need for this new 

legislation seems to arise from the reassessment program now 

under way. Although this Act is quite brief and containing 

really only one significant amendment, it speaks to the larger 

problem that property owners across Saskatchewan are facing 

in terms of reassessment. 

 

I am sure that no one in this Assembly will disagree that 

reassessment was long overdue. But I for one am amazed at just 

how many complications and mistakes the government is 

managing to create while implementing the new program. 

 

The major amendment contained within Bill 4 is set out in the 

clause 3 which changes the number of Municipal Board 

members required for quorum on a committee. Currently 

quorum can be established with two members of the Municipal 

Board, but this Act will reduce quorum to one member. 

 

A quick look at the explanatory notes provide some admissions 

on behalf of the government that this is gravely mismanaged, 

the reassessment process. The minister’s explanation for 

reducing quorum states, and I quote: 

 

As the total number of members for all the committees and 

the budget are limited . . . while the workload is increasing 

. . . a reduced quorum will allow the board to hear more 

appeals and provide decisions in a more timely manner. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course when implementing a major program 

such as reassessment, I do believe that there will be a natural 

increase in the number of appeals the Municipal Board will be 

required to hear. But I also believe that the minister could have 

saved the taxpayers a lot of hassle, confusion, and expense if 

she had properly planned and implemented the reassessment 

process from the beginning. 

 

I think the minister’s major problems with this program are also 

symptoms found throughout her colleagues in government. The 

minister and her colleagues find themselves facing many 

problems because they fail to do a genuine consultation on 

major issues. We have seen this government use its propaganda 

techniques to water down the process of consultation on the 

future of Saskatchewan Crown corporations, education system 

restructuring, and of course, proposed utility rate hikes. 

 

To top it all off, when the government does find itself facing 

public uproar over poorly planned policies, it then waters down 

the review process by failing to give any independent inquiry a 

real mandate to get to the heart of the issues. This week’s 

release of the report on the justice review is a glaring example 

of the arrogance of government. 

 

The review on the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement is 

another blatant example. 

 

We can also not forget the dozens of parents now being forced 

to wade through the legal battles over babysitting wages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this government finally 

realize that ignoring the problems won’t make it go away. And 

if this NDP government thinks it’s somehow covering up its 

fatal flaws in government policy, it’s sadly mistaken. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are not being fooled by the 

watered down inquiries and reports. Not only are these 

ill-planned programs and policies costing Saskatchewan 

taxpayers millions of dollars, but the NDP continue to waste 

hundreds of thousands more by commissioning insincere 

reviews and reports. So much for open and accountable 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with the ongoing reassessment process we find more 

cracks in the government’s process. If the minister and her 

officials would have actually listened to suggestions from 

municipalities, from the school boards, and from the property 

owners, reassessment would not require as much ongoing 

tinkering. 

 

So while this Act to amend The Municipal Board Act may end 

up providing the Municipal Board more flexibility to hear 

appeals, I think it’s safe to say the board members may find 

themselves facing more work than they could even dream to 

handle. They are going to find themselves bombarded with   



756  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

assessment appeals because of the confusion the government 

has created throughout the whole reassessment process. 

 

First the minister passed down the unreasonable phase-in period 

of three years. She brought in the three-year phase-in despite 

pleas from municipalities to introduce the changes gradually. 

Then after some of the regions had already sent out their 

reassessment notices, she admitted that perhaps she had been 

too hasty — the phase-in period would now be extended to six 

years if the municipalities wanted it. 

 

Then once the reassessment notices started going out, the 

minister faced another barrage of criticism — this about the 

unfair shift in the tax burden onto rural property owners. Once 

again, she had to admit her department had made another 

mistake and that actually an agricultural property factor should 

be added to the formula in order to make the process more fair. 

 

Once again, although the admission of the mistake was 

welcomed by the municipalities, but the lack of foresight in the 

original planning created even more confusion about the 

reassessment process. Property owners who had already 

received their reassessment notices were now told that original 

new assessments no longer applied. 

 

Now municipal administrators are sending out another set of 

notices, and many Saskatchewan property owners are more 

confused than ever. So who picks up the tab for the 

government’s mistakes? — the Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government may näively believe that no one is 

keeping track of the growing costs these policy mistakes are 

costing in Saskatchewan, but we are, Mr. Speaker. And when 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are presented with the final bill before 

the next election, this NDP government will definitely not be 

paid back in kindness. 

 

However the most disturbing flaw in this reassessment process 

is the bitter feelings it is creating amongst neighbouring 

communities — RMs (rural municipality) and school boards 

who are left to administer the program. Saskatchewan is a 

province that was founded on the strength, determination, 

community spirit, and the goodwill of pioneers, but the 

government’s reassessment program is eating away at that 

goodwill. 

 

I have heard several stories about town administrators who have 

refused to speak with neighbouring RM officials after the 

government added the agricultural property factor. Now we 

have school boards placed at the heart of the battle simply 

because too much of the responsibility for education funding is 

coming at the expense of Saskatchewan property owners. 

 

The last time I checked, education was a provincial 

responsibility. But this government’s own figures prove that it 

has slashed funding for Saskatchewan education by $60 million 

since it first came to power in 1991. The percentage of 

education funding, Mr. Speaker, used to be 60 per cent 

government and 40 per cent property owner. Well now that it is 

completely, totally reversed. 

The Liberal caucus will simply not allow this NDP government 

to compromise the education of Saskatchewan children by 

offloading its responsibility. It is plain to see that the NDP’s 

chronic underfunding of the education system, coupled with the 

continual axing of the revenue-sharing grants to municipalities 

are the two main ingredients in a deadly cocktail Saskatchewan 

residents are being forced to swallow. It’s leaving everyone 

with a bitter taste in their month, and it’s a taste that people will 

still have fresh on their tongues when the next provincial 

election comes around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another concern I have about Bill No. 4’s 

amendment to reduce the quorum of the Municipal Board is the 

statement in the explanatory notes that say, it is intended that on 

major appeals there would always be more than one member 

sitting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to know who exactly is left with the 

authority to decide what constitutes a major appeal. Who has 

the power to decide if more than one board member is required 

at a hearing? What guidelines are in place to make this 

decision? 

 

Unfortunately our constituencies receive many complaints from 

people who are already frustrated with assessment appeal 

process. I am frightened to think about how many more phone 

calls we will be receiving about future appeals considering how 

confusing the government has made the reassessment program. 

 

By the time a Saskatchewan property owner is finally heard — 

the appeals committee — he or she has often spent a lot of 

money and time preparing a case. It’s extremely important that 

the integrity of the appeals process be at its highest level so that 

the applicant’s time and money is not wasted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because I believe there is not a high level of 

change in this Bill, I am willing to pass it at this time on to 

committee and answer a number of our questions at that point. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in regards 

to Bill No. 4, The Municipal Board Amendment Act, while it 

may be perceived as being a small change within municipal 

government, it would certainly be inappropriate for the 

legislature just to rubber-stamp, and just to move . . . (inaudible) 

. . . and quickly through committee and pass a piece of 

legislation. 

 

I think it’s appropriate that as opposition members we take the 

time to thoroughly review, to make sure — as we’ve heard just 

in some of the recent speeches, a number of the concerns 

regarding municipal government and the number of issues that 

municipal government has raised in regards to policies of the 

current government — that we take the time to indeed address 

these issues, and make sure we assess all of the concerns that 

are raised before we just can move and assist the government in 

moving pieces of legislation through the legislature and into 

law. 

 

So I think it would be appropriate at this time that we indeed 

take that time and we adjourn the debate on the Bill and allow 

for further discussion to take place before we proceed further.   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 25  The Gas Licensing 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 provides clarification 

of the scope and application of the licensing provisions to those 

specific activities which affect the safety and integrity of 

gas-piping systems. The Bill removes the potential for 

misinterpretation which could potentially extend licensing to 

non-safety-related activities. 

 

The Bill provides consistency between the definitions of gas 

installation and the defined activities of a gas fitter, for which a 

licence is prescribed. 

 

The Gas Licensing Act incorporates words and phrases which, 

through their generality and absence of definition elsewhere in 

legislation, are open to misinterpretation. The Bill in addressing 

the issue creates the authority to make regulations defining and 

enlarging or restricting the meaning of the words and phrases 

used in the Act, or the regulations when necessary, to further 

clarify their scope and intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 

first looked at Bill 25 when it received first reading a few days 

ago, I didn’t think there would really be much to say about it. 

After all, Mr. Speaker, it really only changes one word in the 

entire existing Act. And in reading the Bill it seems this change 

does make some sense to a certain extent. 

 

Clause 3 of the Bill moves to strike out the word 

“maintenance.” According to the government, this word is 

simply too broad and causes ambiguity in the application of the 

legislation and, I would guess, some uncertainty for those who 

work around gas pipelines as installations but are not involved 

in the installation itself. It’s thought that the inclusion of the 

word “maintenance” could apply to something as simple as 

painting or cleaning of pipes, something that obviously you 

don’t need the expertise of a professional gas fitter to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this change does seem to make sense and does 

nothing to make gas installation any less safe in Saskatchewan. 

However, this Bill goes beyond that simple change of word and 

that’s where my concern began — and admittedly, its a very 

familiar beef on our part over here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clause 4 of the Bill that’s before us that causes 

me great discomfort. Time and time again members on this side 

of the House have stood here in debate of the legislation that is 

put before us to raise concerns about what we see as this 

government’s overuse of regulations to do the business of this 

province. And it appears that’s the case once again with this 

seemingly straightforward Bill. 

Once again, in Bill 25 we are greeted with a very familiar 

phrase, and that is, I quote: 

 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or phrase used in this Act or the regulations but not 

defined in this Act; 

 

In the 160-or-so new Bills that I’ve seen come across my desk 

since being elected an MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), and the many other existing pieces of legislation 

I’ve looked at, I’ve seen this phrase or similar phrases, Mr. 

Speaker, far too often. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there’s a regulation to be made, this government 

will make it. If there’s a way to avoid bringing issues into this 

House, this government will find it. If there’s a way to ensure 

the people of Saskatchewan don’t have a clear picture of all of 

the government activities, this government will do it. 

 

Too often we see these Bills before us are simply bare-bone 

sketches of what might happen down the line once the 

government sets to work crafting its regulations in private, 

behind closed doors, away from the prying eyes of the 

opposition, and more importantly, out of view of the 

Saskatchewan public. 

 

And yes, the government members can argue that a clause like 

this is included simply to avoid having to bring in new 

legislation when ambiguities such as the inclusion of the word 

“maintenance” in The Gas Licensing Act are found. And yes, 

that’s true with Bill 25. 

 

(1515) 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s also true that the use of regulations can 

have a much greater effect. With the overuse of regulation that 

we’ve seen by this government, much greater harm can be done. 

Many more controversial decisions can be made behind closed 

doors, decisions that can’t be flagged by anyone before they’re 

made. 

 

Obviously the best example of this, and my hon. colleague 

alluded to this earlier, was when they came up with the labour 

standards regulations from a couple of years ago. That Bill was 

controversial enough, Mr. Speaker; however once the 

regulations were written and adopted, without the input of 

anyone, then the real trouble began. Nearly two years after The 

Labour Standards Act was passed, parents began to telephone 

the media and their MLAs about a little-known regulation that 

was written after the legislation’s passage. Unknown to anyone, 

babysitters were now covered under The Labour Standards Act, 

something that was not the case before. 

 

Without so much as informing parents — or babysitters, for that 

matter — this regulation was quietly slipped into the law like a 

ticking time bomb, a bomb that has only recently gone off in the 

laps of parents and in the lap of the current Minister of Labour. 

This change, which wasn’t presented to this House for debate, 

was simply a stroke of the pen decision made by bureaucrats 

and this government — a seemingly simple decision that ended 

up costing parents thousands of dollars in   



758  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

back pay. All done by regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over and over again, I hear about this government’s openness 

and accountability. Unfortunately, I never hear about that 

openness and accountability from anyone who has to deal with 

the crew opposite. I only hear it from the government members 

themselves. 

 

This is a government that has no use for this legislature. If there 

was a way they could avoid coming here at all, I’m sure they’d 

take it in a heartbeat. Because, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite only see this Assembly as an obstacle. Those members 

don’t like being questioned by the opposition or by the people. 

They think it bizarre that anyone might have even the slightest 

concern over some of the things they’re doing. Just trust us, 

they say. Just trust us and everything will be just fine. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to trust. I don’t trust everything 

will be just fine if we just allow them to do their thing. And 

with clauses like we see in Bill 25, that’s exactly what they’re 

saying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the passage of this Bill with the inclusion of 

clause 4 will not be the end of western civilization as we know 

it. In fact it probably won’t even have a great effect on anyone’s 

life. However, the inclusion of such a provision in Bill 25 is 

only the latest act of government by regulation. 

 

Unfortunately I don’t expect it to be the last. I’m quite certain 

that nearly every piece of legislation we pass in this House this 

session will include one or more regulations that no one ever 

saw before or expected. That’s the way this government 

operates, and it doesn’t appear to want to change its ways any 

time soon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I do want to say that we have done our 

work on this Bill. We have reviewed it and studied it. And we 

are prepared to move it to Committee of the Whole where we 

can discuss it in further detail because we see no need to hold 

up legislation at this stage, having done the necessary work to 

ensure that we are aware of the effects that this new legislation 

will have. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it 

interesting, after listening to the hon. member from Melville 

and all the reasons why indeed this Bill should be addressed and 

the number of concerns, that the member would now just allow 

it to go into committee. It would seem to me that with the 

arguments that were presented — there were many arguments 

that have been already presented — that would suggest that it’s 

. . . that we need more time to indeed address the concerns put 

forward in the Bill. 

 

And the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that while the 

Bill itself may look quite innocent, there are a number of issues 

in the Bill even that need to be certainly looked at, and 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, need to be addressed even more 

carefully. And if we’re going to be responsible opposition, I 

think you need to take the time. I think it’s easy . . . they stand 

up and say, we’ve got all the information we need and we can 

just move on and address it. 

 

The member talked about . . . the member from Melville talked 

about regulations. Well, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

regulations . . . And I think he certainly raises a good point 

because a constituent of mine, and I’m sure many other gas 

connectors in the province of Saskatchewan, have a number of 

concerns. 

 

And how regulations can be used and put an onus on them to 

indeed . . . and in this case, the increase in fees. And we’ve see 

this government on many occasions use the fee structure, use 

regulations, and offload, if you will, while they talk about not 

increasing taxes directly to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

People themselves have found that every time they turn around 

they end up paying more out of their pockets because of the 

offload. And much of that is accomplished through regulations, 

through the regulatory process. 

 

And when I come to the gas licensing issue, a concern that was 

raised with me was the fact that the licence fee has now I 

believe gone from 40 to $100. 

 

Well as the individual who raised this said, who gets left to 

being blamed? When I go in to hook up, I now have to inform 

the customer that it’s $100 now, and they say, well it was $40 

six months ago or a year ago, how come you’re soaking me? 

How come you’re asking me or requiring more money from 

me? 

 

And I guess those are some of the concerns that are raised by 

the professionals out there. They are perceived as being the 

person guilty. It’s like the municipal governments are perceived 

as offloading or gouging the taxpayer when they have been 

forced through the licensing, through the regulatory process, 

through legislation, to pass on the costs that they are associated 

with because of the offload from the provincial government. 

 

And so it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, it would be only 

appropriate to take more time to address what would seem to be 

a very minor change, but is something that would create a major 

concern and create major problems across this province, 

especially in the area of licensing. I do like the fact that the 

government talks about addressing safety features; I think that’s 

very important. 

 

It’s certainly important that we take the time and we make sure 

that we’ve got in place regulations that would address any 

possible safety features to protect the public of this province. 

But as I’ve already indicated, I think it’s appropriate that we 

even take more time to make sure that when the issue is 

addressed and debated at the end of the day, that indeed public 

safety is addressed, that the public of Saskatchewan aren’t 

going to be left to be gouged through more regulations and 

more regulatory process that passes the buck. 

 

And so therefore at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan has served the retirement needs of Saskatchewan residents 

since 1986 and now has almost 30,000 members and $135 

million in assets under trusteeship. 

 

The Saskatchewan Pension Plan is open and accessible. 

Members do not need employment or business income in order 

to join, and it is the only tax-deferred plan available to people 

who don’t qualify for an RRSP (registered retirement savings 

plan). 

 

Member funds are professionally managed and the plan has 

generated on average a return of 10.2 per cent over the past 11 

years. Contributions are voluntary and members decide what to 

contribute and when. Member funds are protected from seizure, 

claim, or garnishee by creditors of any sort. 

 

This Bill introduces changes which will bring the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan in line with recent changes to the registered 

retirement savings plan. The age limit for contributing to the 

plan will be lowered as will the mandatory retirement age. In 

addition this Bill will provide the plan with a regulatory 

authority to react quickly to amendments to the federal Income 

Tax Act. 

 

Another amendment to this Bill will allow spouses to transfer 

death benefits from an SPP (Saskatchewan Pension Plan) 

annuity to their plan account. 

 

Other amendments included in this Bill are of a housekeeping 

nature consistent with the announced changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the second reading of this Act. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today to make some remarks in regard to this Bill that was 

introduced into the House on day 3, and today being day 23, the 

official opposition over the past month has done its homework 

and actually prepared information, talking to the legal 

profession and stakeholders so that we could actually do some 

intelligent work on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note that this Act of amendment will bring the 

age of eligibility for contributions to the pension plan down to 

69 years of age from the present 71 years of age. That’ll bring 

the plan in line with the guidelines for RRSPs. It also lowers the 

age of mandatory retirement to 69 years of age as well. 

 

We are generally in support of the provision which allows for 

transfers of a surviving spouse’s plan account in addition to 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At first glance, it appears that allowing the plan to have the 

regulatory authority to quickly react to amendments to the 

federal Income Tax Act will be a good step that will eliminate 

some of the unnecessary paperwork. And while we have general 

concerns about the emphasis on regulations, sometimes they 

indeed do make sense. A cynic might go so far as to 

suggest that governments sometimes were created by the pulp 

and paper industries, but that, Mr. Speaker, is a matter for 

another day. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can 

appreciate the reasons for Bill No. 5, and I understand from the 

minister that this Bill is bringing the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan in line with a number of the changes that have been made 

by the federal government in addressing pension plans. 

 

I guess the concern we have regarding the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan is the fact that the government has moved away 

from supporting low income people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. When the pension plan was first introduced, 

when the pension plan was first introduced, Mr. Speaker, and it 

wasn’t a great commitment, but gave people who did not have 

access to RRSP plans or other pension plans, the ability to at 

least start to build for their future and plan for their retirement. 

 

And in view of the developments that have taken place 

regarding the Canada Pension Plan and the suggestions that it 

can’t sustain itself, as a result we’re going to be facing further 

reduction in off . . . any wage earner is going to face further 

reductions as more and more money is going to be required to 

run the Canada Pension Plan, it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government felt they had to change the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan that was dealing with individuals . . . in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, I believe somewhere in the neighbourhood 

of 72 or 75 per cent of the people involved were actually 

women. And over the last number of days and weeks, we’ve 

heard talk of pay equity and what’s the government doing with 

it; its commitment to pay equity. 

 

It would seem, Mr. Speaker, here was a clear example of where 

this government could have affirmed its commitment to 

supporting low income earners — specifically women in this 

province. Individuals who, on many occasions may choose to 

maintain a home or look after a family, be a housewife for a 

period of time, therefore are out of the employment field where 

they would directly have access to a pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also saw as a result of this pension plan — it 

wasn’t just something that the government had committed itself 

to and worked with — but many employers grabbed a hold of 

the idea, worked together with their employees to support them 

and help them put money aside to address retirement years. 

 

And as I said earlier, I think it’s very important as we view the 

cut-backs and the claw-backs taking place in the Canada 

Pension Plan . . . and also there’s another piece of information I 

just received regarding the claw-back that is being proposed to 

come forward and taxing seniors’ pensions over a certain limit 

— something that I believe the federal Liberals complained 

about, about five years ago, when the federal Conservative 

government were talking about clawing back from the higher 

income seniors so that the lower income group could indeed 

maintain . . . they could preserve the pension plan for those 

individuals. 

 

  



760  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

And so it’s . . . I think it’s very important, Mr. Minister, that 

this be looked at very carefully and that we take the time and 

that we review it appropriately. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, while I understand the intent, I 

think it’s appropriate that we indeed address it appropriately. 

And therefore I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act pertains to the following seven 

defined benefit pension plans: the Anti-Tuberculosis League 

superannuation plan; the Liquor Board superannuation plan; the 

Power Corporation superannuation plan; the Public Service 

superannuation plan; the Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

superannuation plan; the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company employees superannuation plan; and the Workers’ 

Compensation Board superannuation plan. 

 

(1530) 

 

In total, approximately 5,000 employees continue to contribute 

to these pension plans on a regular basis. The plans have been 

closed to new members since 1977 with the inception of money 

purchase pension plans. Although most of these pension plans 

have their own pension legislation, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act addresses issues common to 

these pension plans. 

 

Participating employees of the pension plans are requesting the 

opportunity to set contribution rates by agreement. This 

provides employers with an increased latitude for compensation 

planning and labour negotiations. 

 

With the proposed amendment, members of the aforementioned 

pension plans will contribute 7, 8, or 9 per cent of their regular 

salary to their pension plan as prescribed by legislation or as 

otherwise provided by an agreement. 

 

The proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker, signifies the continued 

importance of pension plans to both employees for their 

retirement planning purposes and to employers for the purpose 

of compensating planning and labour relations. 

 

Increased flexibility in the design of pension plans enhances the 

opportunity for the pension plan to meet the ever changing 

needs of employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

before you today to respond to the minister in regards to The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

We’ve been talking with groups about the implication of this 

Bill, and although at face value it rather appears innocuous, 

after a thorough and rather careful examination of these 

amendments it is only fair to say that we do have some 

concerns. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, after consultation with stakeholders in the 

areas of pension and superannuation, they too have raised some 

initial concerns with us. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important things that 

working people have left after a lifetime of toil is their pension. 

And as you can well imagine, any possible changes to this very 

valuable personal asset causes a great deal of consternation. Not 

just consternation, Mr. Speaker, but fear as well. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, many people do not truly understand 

their pensions as well as they could, and any proposed change is 

unsettling. Unsettling because over the years the people of this 

province have become very wary of government. Every time 

they turn around they’re having another pocket picked by this 

socialist government who holds itself up as the saviour of the 

seniors, the saviour of the working class, and the saviour of the 

poor. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has managed to combine 

all of those groups into one; one group who is made up of 

seniors who are both poor and required to stay in the working 

class longer and longer because they simply cannot afford to 

retire on their pensions. 

 

And the reasons, Mr. Speaker, the reason they cannot afford to 

retire with dignity are many-fold. The main reason, Mr. 

Speaker, is that many of our seniors simply do not have the 

pension accumulated through their working careers that would 

allow them to retire and maintain a comfortable lifestyle. It is 

not that people expect to live in lavish luxury, Mr. Speaker, but 

neither do they wish to see their savings ravaged by the disease 

we know as inflation. 

 

This piece of legislation that has been introduced before us 

today proposes to amend the superannuation Act in regard to 

supplementary provisions. It would allow employees eligible 

for benefits under a number of Acts and collective bargaining 

agreements to negotiate with their employers as to the 

contribution rate to be paid by the employees. 

 

Some of these employees would be in agreement that they fall 

under a number of different Acts. For example, Mr. Speaker, 

The Liquor Board Superannuation Act would be one. Another 

would be The Power Corporation Superannuation Act. There’s 

also a substantial number of employees under The Public 

Service Superannuation Act as well. The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act employees could also be affected by 

this proposed amendment. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, we are talking about many thousands 

of employees. But not just employees; we are also talking about 

them as people. Real people. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

something the Liberal Party cares about very much — people. 

And one thing we’d like to talk about is the collective 

bargaining agreement and certain Acts and amendments in the 

grandiose terms. 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

We know that in the end it is everyday people who will be 

affected by these changes. And as I referred to earlier in my 

speech, Mr. Speaker, to many of these grass roots people their 

pension is a very important asset. Such changes as those that are 

being proposed here today are worthy of detailed examination. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, within this agreement there is a shift 

from the existing legislation that sets out specific percentages 

for contribution rates that employees pay. Those contribution 

rates are dependent on the employee’s age when they 

commence employment under the Acts, and collective 

agreements I mentioned earlier. Benefits under this Act are not 

calculated according to the employee’s contributions. They are 

based on the years of service and the average salary earned over 

a six-year period representing the employee’s highest earnings. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we examine this proposed amendment 

and sort through the implications of it, we have serious 

concerns about the shifting sands of the collective bargaining 

process. You see, Mr. Speaker, there is two sides to the 

collective bargaining process — the employer and the 

employees. 

 

Now in this case the employees are represented by various trade 

unions who have been sanctified by their respective certification 

orders as approved by the Labour Relations Board. These 

unions have been in place in the collective bargaining process 

for a number of years and are very seasoned negotiators. A 

number of these unions have representation in the private sector 

as well, or they’re affiliated with unions who are in the private 

sector. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, some of these unions have 

members either outside this province and country or they are 

affiliated with other unions who are also outside of 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Some examples of those affiliations, Mr. Speaker, would be the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the Canadian Labour 

Congress. One more example would be NUPGE (National 

Union of Public and General Employees), which is a body 

representing provincial government employees from all across 

Canada. The Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, for 

example, is a member of that organization. 

 

The point I’m making in this, Mr. Speaker, is that a change in 

pension legislation, while on the surface may only appear to 

affect certain groups of employees, in reality it may affect many 

more employers and employees. You see, Mr. Speaker, in 

today’s environment, the age of information technology, what 

happens in one jurisdiction will often happen in another 

jurisdiction as well. 

 

If this turns into a substantial benefit for these groups of 

employees, rest assured this type of language will be 

strenuously argued for in another collective bargaining 

agreement. But to be fair, Mr. Speaker, if it turns out to be very 

detrimental for these groups of employees, it may be lobbied for 

by other employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the big picture of the collective bargaining 

process, patterns and model language are sought after and 

duplicated by both sides of the process. The key word, Mr. 

Speaker, is precedence. People on both sides of the table across 

from many respective organizations search far and wide for 

precedence. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we feel this piece of legislation 

needs further review and input from stakeholders on both sides 

of the issue. Many of them are not directly affected by the 

amendment today, but down the road, if precedence and 

patterns are set, many other parties will be directly or indirectly 

affected by this legislation. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this Act. 

 

Debated adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 3 — The Urban 

Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

want to talk a little bit about Bill No. 3, an Act to amend the 

urban municipal’s Act. Like the other two municipal Bills 

before us today, this Bill contains many housekeeping matters 

as we note, Mr. Speaker. And further, it contains some 

provisions that are quite positive. In this vein, I would 

particularly note the section that clarifies that off-reserve, 

band-owned land will be subject to property tax. 

 

This has been a source of great anxiety, Mr. Speaker, for many 

municipalities that have gone through the treaty land 

entitlement process. And we of course in the south-west have 

gone through that process to a large extent over the past few 

years. It hasn’t been as controversial there as in other areas 

though, I want to emphasize, but we still do have an 

understanding. And we think that we do need to look at this as a 

real serious matter that needs to be dealt with. 

 

This move will not only ensure that municipalities maintain a 

secure revenue base, but it will also go a long way in securing 

public support and acceptance for the treaty land entitlement 

process. Obviously maintaining harmony between our native 

and non-native communities is in everybody’s best interest in 

Saskatchewan. However there are a number of controversial 

matters in this Bill which prevents me from giving it support in 

a blanket manner at this time. 

 

For starters, the requirement that all communities have 

administrators certified by the urban municipal board is 

unnecessary in our opinion. I know this sounds like a mom and 

apple pie kind of clause, and why wouldn’t you want to have 

well-trained staff would be the argument. But from my 

experience in local government, the business of being an 

administrator for a small town is a job that is a fairly basic   



762  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

bookkeeping type of process, and an ordinary accountant can do 

it and do it well. And in fact in some of the small towns in our 

locality, the administrator may from one municipality do it for 

the small town, but if that’s not possible, they may simply have 

somebody from the community that’s good at bookkeeping 

come in and do it. 

 

And any questions that may arise about compliance with 

municipal legislation can be easily resolved by a phone call to 

Regina for those kind of people that don’t have the total 

training. And my experience has also been that some of the 

people that have the full training also find that they don’t know 

things and have to phone Regina for help anyway. So reality is 

that that process is available and we might as well use it. 

 

On the other hand, my own experience with urban municipal 

board administrators has not all been positive. I have found 

them at some times to be bureaucratic in their extreme ways and 

not in touch with the realities of small town life. 

 

Now in discussions with urban municipal board administrators, 

I have often felt like I was in the middle of an episode of the 

British political sitcom, Yes Minister where the bureaucrat is 

constantly leading the elected official by the nose and winding 

him in red tape. 

 

They are expensive to say the least, Mr. Speaker. They do not 

serve the needs of small towns well at all times, and I do not 

think that we should be binding the hands of our local leaders 

by forcing them to hire such individuals when we can clearly 

demonstrate that people of other backgrounds and other work 

natures can do the job just as well. 

 

Further to the topic of red tape, the amendments to section 65 

require municipalities to prepare their own financial statements 

rather than relying on the auditor. Well, Mr. Speaker, this really 

is just another example of government duplication. In spite of 

the provisions of this Bill, the auditor is still going to do a 

detailed tally of the finances of the town in question. The 

provincial government does not need two sets of financial 

statements from one town. This amendment just creates more 

paperwork for our already overworked municipal officials. 

 

But on this topic I’m going to do a little bit of a flip-flop, Mr. 

Speaker. While we don’t want to see municipal officials more 

overworked, we should be ensuring that there are procedures in 

place to protect the public against possible abuse of the office. 

On this scope I’m talking about the amendments to section 242. 

These amendments give the assessor . . . the unilateral rather, 

and apparently unquestionable power to determine if someone 

is using their home for business purposes. 

 

So in other words if an assessor walks into someone’s house 

and finds the baba, or a grandmother in my case, making a 

batch of perogies to sell to the neighbours, he can jack up their 

assessment and no one can argue with him. 

 

And that simply, Mr. Speaker, frankly I think is a little bit scary 

when you give the government board, or somebody from a 

government board that kind of power over people’s lives based 

on the subject . . . objective or judgement of just one person. 

The judgement of one individual in this matter might very much 

vary from that of another because they don’t really have, as 

judges do, some background that is similar. Therefore their 

decisions may not necessarily always be the same. 

 

I think this section needs to be clarified to ensure that at the 

very least there are avenues for appeal. And perhaps I am 

overlooking something, but perhaps the existing Bill already 

provides for such an appeal. Nonetheless, I think it is important 

that we dwell on this subject a little while in the committee 

stage, because we have to clarify whether or not that ability to 

appeal is there. 

 

(1545) 

 

I don’t believe that government members in the back bench 

would want to have a Bill go into place that doesn’t have some 

mechanism for an appeal for people that need to have 

something else done than just the normal that is written in the 

legislation. So if that’s in there disguised somehow, fine and 

dandy, we’ll reveal that. And when that’s revealed, it’ll be fine. 

 

In the meantime though, we need to have an opportunity for 

people to look this over from the outside — people who are 

going to be affected by the Bill. And that always is the process 

of debate and the process of the democratic system that we’re 

in, is that if we take a little time, other folks can look things up 

and check it out. 

 

Indeed, most of the points that I’ve brought up are perhaps best 

dealt with in committee, as I’ve said. And I certainly would not 

want to see this Bill defeated before we get a chance to examine 

it at that level. 

 

In other words, we don’t want to just come out and say, we 

don’t understand it, we don’t think it’s right, so therefore we 

have to defeat it. We may be able to correct it, or maybe we can 

find out that the things that we have said are necessary are 

already in there. If that’s the case then, fine and dandy, we’ll go 

ahead. 

 

And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, folks out in the country now 

are hearing about this debate; they’re studying it. They’ll take 

the Bill, they’ll go through it. Behind the scenes SARM, 

SUMA, those folks will have an opportunity to call the minister 

and say, how do you clarify this thing; will you get up in the 

legislature and say the intent of the legislation is to provide for 

those avenues of appeal that are necessary or those avenues that 

need to be looked at? 

 

And so while I repeat that our caucus has some concerns with 

this Bill and we do want those answered, we do not want to 

have the Bill passed or defeated until we have a chance to make 

sure where it’s going. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I would move that we 

give this a little more time and I would move that we adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

On my left is Ken Pontikes, my deputy minister. On the next 

row, Brij Mathur, who is the associate deputy minister of 

culture and recreation; Ron Styles who is the associate deputy 

minister for the housing division. Behind Ron is Bill Werry, 

director of sport and recreation. Larry Chaykowski is behind 

Ken Pontikes, being the director of finance and administration. 

And right behind me is Ron Davis, the assistant deputy minister 

of municipal services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I would first of all, Mr. Chairman, like to 

welcome the minister and her officials today and thank them for 

their attendance. 

 

Now I think though that . . . I was one of those who was not in 

favour of delaying reassessment in the sense that of course 

Saskatchewan has delayed it for a very, very long time, and I 

feel that many of the problems we are experiencing are simply 

in the fact that our base year of course is 1965 while every other 

province in Canada is working on a base year of 1990 or newer. 

 

Nonetheless, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that a lot of the 

chaos and disorganization caused by this year is that 

municipalities still do not have the assessment figures on which 

they can then deal with the issues of tax tools, and of course the 

ultimate issues of setting the mill rate. 

 

Or maybe that’s not entirely correct. Maybe it’s not that they 

don’t have the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency) figures, they keep on getting different SAMA figures 

on what seems to be a weekly or biweekly basis. 

 

I would like to ask the minister if she doesn’t agree that this 

process could have gone a great deal more smoothly with 

reassessment if, prior to the commencement of the reassessment 

year of 1997, municipalities had had the final figures; and can 

she tell us, do municipalities now have the final figures? Are 

there still more figures coming out of SAMA? Where do we 

stand on this? 

 

I’m hearing from municipality after municipality that say 

they’re on their fourth, fifth set of figures from SAMA and they 

still don’t know if they have in fact the final figures. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, most 

of the figures from SAMA, or the bulk of them, was transferred 

to municipalities last fall. As the member opposite will know 

having been a member of an urban council himself, there are 

always changes. I mean a tax roll is an elastic thing and there’s 

always development and different types of 

vacancies. And I mean things happen. It’s a very dynamic 

environment and there are always pick-ups and changes in the 

assessments right up until the very last minute. 

 

So it’s true that in a year like 1997 where we’re overhauling the 

system after 30 years of neglect, that the reassessment of the 

whole province on the 1994 base is a huge undertaking. There 

are as far as I’m aware, except for municipalities that are asking 

SAMA to review certain assessments which they feel might 

need correcting, that sort of thing, there’s only the question of 

regional parks that have residences which have never been 

assessed before so there’s no base to go on. 

 

 The assessor physically has to have access. Some of these 

places are served by — they’re seasonal — they’re served by 

roads that aren’t open in the winter. So there’s some assessment 

of buildings in regional parks that, as I understand, is not 

complete. But basically all the rest of the information is 

complete, has been transferred to municipalities some time ago. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that 

answer. But saying that assessment is a fluid process doesn’t 

explain for example that Swift Current, I understand, received 

four different sets of figures, and after they received the fourth 

set of figures, they called for the resignation of all of the top 

leadership of the SAMA board and organization. 

 

This is making the reassessment process unnecessarily 

complicated, unnecessarily divisive. And why did the 

municipalities not all have the final figures before December 

31, 1996 from which they could then prepare to make the 

difficult decisions that had to be made? I trust the minister 

agrees with me that the municipalities simply cannot make 

decisions until they have the final figures from assessment. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly would 

acknowledge that a reassessment of this magnitude is a very 

difficult job. I know that SAMA tried to meet the deadlines to 

the best of their ability, and I know that figures were given to 

all municipalities well in advance of the year end in 1996. In 

fact most municipalities, if not all, had their figures in hand at 

the time when the workshops were held throughout the province 

conducted by . . . with Municipal Government and SAMA. 

 

There are bound to be last minute changes and most 

municipalities have a very good capacity. They’re very capable 

in their administration function. And while there might be some 

minor changes from the time the figures were released last fall, 

this is not a matter that local councils or local administrators 

wouldn’t be in a position to cope with. 

 

And I was hearing that; I was hearing letters to that effect in the 

early fall of 1996 — like when will we get our numbers, and are 

these the final numbers? But I attended the SAMA convention 

recently, within the last few days — last week, I believe it was 

— and I’m not getting that kind of indication to my office at 

this point, that people are waiting for figures at this time. 

 

So whatever adjustments will need to be made I think will be   



764  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

minor, and I know that administrations at the local level have 

the capacity to cope with this. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, of course one of the issues is 

that we use different per cents of values . . . percentages of 

valuation, and this has a long historic precedent in the province 

— commercial versus residential. And of course farm land has 

historically and continues to be at a lower per cent than other 

lands. 

 

I think most people in Saskatchewan can get their mind around 

that, but I’ve had numerous phone calls from condominium 

owners who cannot understand why condominiums would be 

treated different than other residential property. I believe it’s a 

differential of 10 per cent — 85 versus 75. 

 

And it’s maybe one thing to understand the difference between 

commercial and residential or residential and farm, but it’s 

simply not easy for people out there living in condominiums to 

understand why there would be a different per cent of value on 

condominiums as opposed to other forms of residential living. I 

wonder if the minister could address what’s the underpinning 

thinking there — that condominium living would be treated 

different than other residences? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s quite a 

range of rationale that goes into this decision. 

 

First of all, I think at the provincial level where we set 

percentages of value for condominiums at 85 per cent and other 

residences at 75 was to make sure that there was not an 

incentive for owners of apartments to convert to condominiums 

thereby creating a poor rental market for people who are not in 

a position to buy. So that’s the 75, 85. 

 

Then at the local level, councils — and many councils have, 

although assessment is based upon the use of the property not 

the ownership mode of the property — but some councils have 

moved the condominium rate down to 75 so that it’s equal to 

other residential properties. 

 

Some smaller communities have condominiums, but for the 

most part the majority of them would be in cities, and cities 

have the facility to apply for subclasses if they feel that there’s a 

way of having more fairness within their market-place and 

whatever the configuration of their real estate sector is. 

 

(1600) 

 

So that’s basically the rationale, Mr. Chairman, and I think . . . I 

know I’ve heard from some condominium owners . . . It would 

seem that some condominiums that are newer probably were 

not assessed high enough. And so some of them are seeing 

increases of larger proportions than older, more established 

buildings. 

 

But by and large, I think that cities have the tax tools to make 

sure that there’s fairness to home-owners versus condominium 

owners. It seems . . . And then of course with condominiums 

we’re not talking about any particular type of housing. Like it 

could apply to row housing, it could apply to like the 

townhouse type, could apply to apartment-style condominiums. 

 

But the tax tools are there for municipalities to end up with a 

fair tax regime. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m having condominium 

owners tell me that they actually feel discriminated against. 

And I’m wondering if you can say anything to them that . . . 

They actually use the word “discrimination.” They’re simply 

home-owners, that’s all they are. And I realize you’ve brought 

in some legislation to pass the buck to municipalities, but what 

can you say to people who tell me they’re being discriminated 

against here. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well Mr. Chairman, the percentage 

. . . As you know, this is a transition phase and the goal is to 

reach 100 per cent of market value for all property. So we are in 

this transition phase, and we did, as I said, at the provincial 

level ascribe 85 per cent of value to condominiums and 75 per 

cent to other residences. Some municipalities have mitigated 

that. 

 

I have heard that the discrimination . . . I mean I’m a 

condominium owner myself in Regina. And I think it varies of 

course from one condominium to another, but I would pay taxes 

on my . . . or be assessed on the value of my apartment. 

 

But then there’s the common areas where there might be 

facilities that I may never use. I bought it because it had a 

swimming pool and I’ve never been in it — never had time. But 

then you also pay taxes on your portion of the common areas, 

which in some cases in some of the newer condominiums have 

quite nice facilities and so forth. 

 

So I don’t really see that the system itself discriminates against 

condominium owners of whatever style. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The minister has been discussing tax tools. The 

most recent tax tool to come in, of course, is the six-year phase 

in. And frankly, I have a lot of problems understanding what 

this is all about. 

 

First of all, the fact that this tax tool comes in when we’re 

already a third of the way through the tax year. Why did that 

have to come up at the last minute? Why wasn’t it part of the 

major reassessment Bill last year? 

 

What I’m told, too, is that few if any municipalities are likely to 

use the six-year phase in. I wonder if you could give us an 

indication of how many municipalities will in fact be using it. 

 

But last and most serious of all that I simply don’t understand is 

that, of course, we hope that we will never again in this 

province get in the ridiculous situation of going 30 years 

without reassessment. So you brought in the rolling 

reassessment of three years, and I’d like to say, Madam 

Minister, I’m in agreement with that. 

 

But how do you square a three-year rolling reassessment with a 

six-year phase-in. Like, like, it sounds like the faster we run the 

further behind we get, and I just do not understand how we can   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

square those two provisions. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, on the phase-in, it 

wasn’t announced . . . a third of the year, it was announced in 

January at the time of the SUMA convention. And what we had 

. . . The three years was originally . . . Through all the 

consultations, the three-year that was originally provided for 

was a compromise. SARM for instance indicated that, for the 

most part, they didn’t want any phase-in at all. 

 

And I’m not aware of any rural municipalities that are using a 

phase-in. There may be some that are looking at it in terms of 

some large rural industry that they have, or some feature like 

that, but for the most part they’re not phasing in. They wanted 

zero phase-in; some industries wanted more. We finally 

compromised on the three. 

 

Then we had some representations from chambers of commerce 

and some industries and the two larger cities who wrote to us 

about the beginning of December, when they were working on 

their tax policy, and asked for a longer phase-in. And we had 

requests for five years, for ten years. The reason that six was 

chosen is that, when some people said three wasn’t adequate, 

we wanted it to somehow be concurrent with the cycles of 

reassessment, so six years is two complete cycles of 

reassessment. 

 

Now we don’t believe this will be very widely used. It seemed 

to be, for those who made representations that they wanted an 

extended period, was mostly on behalf of the commercial and 

industrial sector of their tax base. So we’ve seen some other 

variations of that recently. 

 

But as with all of these things, we said at the very outset, and as 

we were consulting with all the different interest groups and 

municipal organizations throughout the process of trying to 

develop the framework of legislation, that it would be enabling. 

That any municipality who doesn’t see any advantage in a 

phase-in does not have to use it. It’s enabling. It’s a tool that 

they can use. If they don’t want to see fit to use it, fine. Same 

with all the other tax tools — they’re all enabling. 

 

And we also said that, look this is very complex; we understand 

that. We will be listening to people, watching how it goes. 

When it starts to be implemented we will be anxious to hear 

from administrators, politicians at the local level, people who 

handle the appeals; so that if there are any amendments that 

need to be made; so we can be more helpful; so that we can 

make the transition easier — then we will stand ready to do 

that. 

 

And indeed we do have a package of amendments to the urban 

and rural Acts that have been introduced in the House to 

accomplish exactly that. And we will continue to be open, to 

listen to people and make amendments to the legislation or 

regulations as we’re requested to do so, if it will be helpful. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, can Madam Minister 

indicate though what indications you’ve had from 

municipalities in Saskatchewan as to how many may avail 

themselves of a phase-in of longer than three years and whether 

that would be in the commercial or residential sector. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we don’t . . . obviously 

all the municipalities have not yet made all of their tax 

decisions. We have some indication . . . well there were press 

reports of Regina just the other night, city council making a 

decision for a five-year phase-in for some classes of property. 

 

We know that there is some consultation going on with some of 

the larger municipalities and their clients in their industrial and 

commercial base. And so the information isn’t complete yet 

because all the decisions haven’t been made at the local level 

yet. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And I guess one of the reasons those decisions 

have been slow at the local level is because SAMA was so slow 

in producing the assessment figures. But, Madam Minister, is it 

not fair to say that many of the tax tools you provided 

municipalities and much of the enabling legislation has turned 

out to be more in the principle than in the practice. 

 

Specifically I’d ask you about minimum tax, that you provide 

that for the municipal side. Are any municipalities in fact using 

minimum tax? Are any of the tax tools in fact proving to be 

useful to municipalities in dealing with the shifts of 

reassessment? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there are . . . this 

is a time of year when even in a what you would call a normal 

year where there’s not a reassessment, these decisions would be 

being made. Usually rural municipalities, the date is a little bit 

later, but it would be a very rare rural municipality even in a 

normal year that would have their tax roll complete for instance 

on March 1. 

 

So we’re not that . . . municipalities are not that far behind. I 

mean you have to give SAMA credit for doing the work. You 

have to give municipalities credit and their administrators credit 

for the work that they’re doing in making their way through this 

enormous transition. And we must bear in mind that these 

provisions are put in the legislation not just for this year. As 

people, administrators, become more familiar with it and as 

ratepayers begin to get their actual tax notices and they’re more 

sensitive to what the system . . . how it’s affecting them and 

they make representation to their councils who then make 

representations to us, there will no doubt be more changes, 

other tools, and a municipality that decides not to use a certain 

tool year this year because it’s unfamiliar and they want to ease 

the transition for their own ratepayers, they may avail 

themselves of that provision next year, or the year after. 

 

It’s a transition, I repeat, and it’s a learning experience. We 

know most municipalities at some point have studied and 

considered using some or all of the tools that we’ve provided, 

but a lot of the final decisions haven’t been made yet and they 

certainly won’t be all made this year. 

 

And with respect to the minimum tax, I know of a number that 

are exploring using that but I’m not — at this point — I’m not 

aware that any have decided to implement. But certainly it has 

raised a great deal of interest and a lot of municipalities have   



766  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

done considerable analysis on how their ratepayers will be 

affected if they did use it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, would Madam Minister explain 

for the House what the position of her government is regarding 

policing costs. As you know, there is considerable division in 

the province on the issue of larger municipalities paying a 

portion of their policing costs, smaller municipalities and RMs 

not. And I’d like the minister to comment on what she thinks is 

the fairness of this and what she sees as the policy of her 

government. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Last year in about October of 1996, a 

task force which had been studying this issue reported to the 

government. They reported in a format where the ministry of 

Justice and our ministry was present. The task force members 

drew representation from SUMA and SARM. And indeed in the 

development of their recommendations members of the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and members of the task 

force have made representations to successive annual meetings 

of SUMA and SARM on the proposals. 

 

We feel that the issue is not so much who pays and who doesn’t 

pay, but who gets service. And that’s the rub. Because it’s one 

thing to say, well everybody should pay. But people in rural and 

remote areas, for example, who don’t ever see a police car for 

instance drive by, or don’t perceive that they get service, are 

reluctant to offer to pay. The other problem is the arbitrary 

cut-off, I think of population, 500, where an urban community 

— according to The Police Act — a population over 500 must 

pay. If you have 498 citizens, you don’t have to pay. 

 

And then of course we all know of towns that are under 300 

where there is a physical detachment and a very strong visual 

presence of the RCMP in the community, and that community 

doesn’t pay. Further, just a few miles down the road, there 

might be a much larger community that doesn’t have a 

detachment or you know a visible presence at all, and yet they 

pay a great deal based on their population. 

 

So we appreciate the problems, but we think that the 

distribution of costs is perhaps not as important as the delivery 

of service. And the RCMP has recognized this. They are 

developing what they call their community policing model, 

where they are removing some of the . . . or dispatching, if you 

like, in a different way, people out of their middle management 

structure to have a stronger presence in the community. And I 

think that when we reach the point where communities feel that 

there is a presence, that it’s something viable, then their 

reluctance to contribute to the cost would likely be diminished. 

 

At the moment we haven’t taken a position on the distribution 

of costs. We’re still studying it. We’re still trying to find . . . or 

I guess watching what’s happening with the community 

policing model. So the jury is still out. We’ve received the 

report, but we haven’t taken a position. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So is the minister prepared to indicate when on 

earth there will be a firm decision on whether or not villages 

and RMs ought to be contributing towards the police services, 

or is that a decision which you’ve decided to defer far into the 

future? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, we’re not in a 

position at the moment to say when we will take a decision on 

that matter. For the time being, the status quo is what is in 

force. There’s no move to change that. It would require a 

change in The Police Act, which is where the 500 population 

threshold is prescribed. We haven’t made that change and we 

haven’t made a decision. 

 

There are some other factors here as well, is that there are a 

number of communities — some urban communities and a few 

rural communities — that actually engage their own private 

police force. They are somewhat supervised now by the Police 

Commission, but if you went to a different model of financing, 

you would have to account for those who already provide their 

own policing. 

 

The other mitigating factor in all of this is that as quality a work 

as the RCMP does from a municipal standpoint, the needs in a 

small urban or even a rural municipality might include a bylaw 

enforcement officer, an animal warden, for example, a policing 

detail that would supervise activities that don’t come under the 

Criminal Code but are certainly nuisances in terms of municipal 

affairs, like people dumping garbage on the outsides of town 

and so on. And the RCMP doesn’t fulfil those functions. So if 

you’re paying for the RCMP, you still have to provide for those 

other functions where in some of the smaller forces that are 

private forces, those people will do those functions. 

 

So it’s not easy. It’s not black and white. It’s a difficult, 

complex decision and it’s one that we’re not at this time 

prepared to make, to change from the status quo. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand Saskatchewan is 

one of only two provinces in Canada where there are no grants 

in lieu for payment of property taxes to local municipalities. 

Now this seems unfair. It creates quite a burden on 

municipalities which must service provincial buildings and 

must service them for free. And this is particularly so in those 

municipalities in which there is a significant portion of their 

commercial property base is covered by provincial buildings. 

 

And it’s certainly a significant enough irritant to the budget of 

the city of Regina that if I may in passing say I find it strange 

that the hon. member from Regina South and other members 

from Regina have not raised this as a problem. And I would 

think that their diligence for their constituents and for their 

home city would compel them to raise this problem. 

 

Is the minister thinking of changing this? Is it an embarrassment 

for our government that we are one of only two provinces in the 

whole of Canada that doesn’t pay municipalities this? How do 

you intend to rectify this injustice, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I might have to ask the 

member opposite for some clarification, because it is simply not 

correct to say that we are the only province, or one of two or   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

whatever, in Canada that don’t pay grants in lieu, because we 

pay municipal buildings . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s true. 

Provincial municipal buildings do not, as a rule, pay tax, 

although municipal offices in rental space of course do, through 

their lease. 

 

Crowns pay grants in lieu, including in the city of Regina. 

SaskTel, for instance, on its office building, pays full property 

taxes. So you can’t make a blanket statement of that sort. 

Crown buildings do pay grants in lieu. 

 

I think what you might be talking about is federal buildings. For 

instance post offices, for example. A large number of provinces 

— I can’t say for sure which ones, but I know many provinces 

— charge federal buildings; they do not exempt federal 

buildings. In Saskatchewan we still do. That may be something 

that we could look at, especially when you think in terms of the 

post office which now is in a competitive mode in many ways 

with couriers and so forth who do have to pay taxes. But yes, 

that would be the federal government that would pay those 

taxes. 

 

But I think, you know, when you analyse that, when you think 

we’re all the same taxpayers and so if we charge . . . if an urban 

municipality charges a rural municipality property tax for an 

office in their town, for example, and then the provincial 

government charges the federal government, and so on, well I 

mean, it increases the operating costs, and in the end it all 

comes out of the same pocket. 

 

So first of all it’s not fair to make that blanket statement 

because it’s not accurate. And I guess the rationale is what I’ve 

given you, and I think it’s fair enough. Just the same as schools 

don’t pay . . . I mean a number of public buildings are exempt. I 

mean, sure, a school could pay a tax to the town and that 

increases the amount that people have to pay to support the 

education sector and it all comes out of the wallet of that 

individual that is a ratepayer in that town. It makes sense to me. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if this is a scary 

situation, but it actually makes sense to me too; that why would 

one level of government pay taxes to another level of 

government because it’s the same taxpayer that has to pay them. 

 

However, Madam Minister, at the same time as provincial 

office buildings are not paying property taxes, that your same 

provincial government is charging taxes to the municipalities. 

The issue of sales tax for buying a fire engine. You’ve had the 

petitions here saying, if it’s unfair for the provincial 

government to pay taxes, unfair for the provincial government 

to pay taxes for their office buildings to the municipalities, why 

do the municipalities have to tax their citizens in order to pay 

sales tax on fire equipment? And . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and members 

opposite. Sorry for the interruption. I just noticed that we have 

some guests in the gallery. An old schoolmate of mine, Sinclair 

Harrison, the president of SARM — we just celebrated our 30th 

anniversary as Ag grads together; Don Taylor, a board member 

of SARM; and Ken Engel, the executive director. Welcome to 

the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  To ask to have leave to join the member to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like to 

join with my counterpart to welcome Sinc and Don and Ken 

here today and hopefully they . . . I imagine they’ll find this 

very interesting. They get to watch someone else trying to grill 

the minister and I hope they enjoy it. Welcome to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Ditto. Also by leave, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Members of the 

Assembly, I certainly want to join with you in welcoming the 

people from SARM. We want to join with the government, the 

official opposition, and let you know that the official alternative 

is still here fighting on your behalf. And as this debate 

continues, we will certainly be taking up the challenge of your 

cause. 

 

We’re glad to see that you’re taking an interest in how the 

process unfolds at this level of government. We also respect 

very highly the level of government that you people represent 

and we certainly hope that we can continue to work together 

and bring benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. Welcome to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’m sorry, we are back to the estimates now 

and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Now tell us where you stand. 

  



768  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

Mr. Hillson: — Where I stand is, what’s sauce for the goose 

should be sauce for the gander. And, Madam Minister, I would 

like you to explain to this House why the provincial 

government should be tax exempt to the municipalities but the 

municipalities have to pay taxes to the provincial government. 

Can you tell something that would help me get my mind around 

that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I take great umbrage at 

the member opposite making these sweeping statements about 

government property that’s tax-free. It’s wrong. It’s simply 

wrong. And I would like to know what his position is. In the 

Maritimes, you’re harmonized, you know. Just think of the 

impact . . . think of the impact on the provincial budget or on 

municipal budgets if we didn’t pay this. 

 

This is the following, Mr. Chairman, of how much each Crown 

pays on an annual basis while the member opposite says that 

government property is exempt. Sask Telecommunications 

Holding Corporation, 1995 grants in lieu, $4,894,005 — almost 

$5 million. SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 1995 

grants in lieu, $1.822 million. And the list goes on. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it is simply not true to make those sweeping 

statements. 

 

Then we also have . . . and it’s different in different cities. I 

don’t know what the case is in North Battleford. In Saskatoon, 

for example, where there’s a strong government presence but 

not very many government owned buildings. So all of those 

offices, all of those government departments, in leased space, 

pay full property taxes through their triple net lease. And it’s a 

little bit different in Regina, but then again the Crowns pay full 

property taxes. 

 

So I don’t know where the member opposite is coming from, 

but I wish he would tell me what he would do. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Madam Minister, I’ll be quite . . . I’m sure in a 

couple of years time when my colleague from Saltcoats is 

sitting over there answering questions in Municipal estimates, 

you’ll get forthright and immediate answers to all your 

questions. 

 

Now the most serious . . . there’s no question though . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. All members could join in a 

debate, but they will have to be recognized by the Chair, and I 

would wish that members would wait until they are. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, while the issues I have raised so 

far are significant and important, they all pale in comparison to 

the issue of revenue sharing, or the disappearing ink of revenue 

sharing. 

 

Now first of all, I would appreciate, Madam Minister, if you 

could give me some of the basic information. How many 

villages, towns, and cities in this province are facing 

revenue-sharing cuts of 40 per cent or more in fiscal 1997? 

 

(1630) 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the list 

with me, but obviously the size of the pool available for 

revenue sharing this year over last — or should I say this year 

under last — is reduced by 42 per cent approximately. 

 

So what we have done in the distribution of the remaining pool 

is we have changed the criteria somewhat. We do not recognize 

administration costs. We do . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  The pool is so small there’s no room for 

any more fish. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well it’s true that we needed to come 

up with a new distribution formula or a new criteria around it, 

because as the size of the pool reduces, the old formula is very 

skewed and hasn’t been used for a number of years. 

 

But we don’t recognize administration. We do recognize 

service. We recognize all revenue. And we put in a safety net so 

that based on those criteria no community would lose more than 

50 per cent. But many . . . or obviously all communities are 

receiving less because of the reduction in size of the pool. 

 

But no municipality is receiving reduction of more than 50 per 

cent. Some, based on growing population and so on, lose quite a 

bit less than 10 per cent. It’s not even. It’s not the same 

percentage across the board. 

 

Mr. Hillson:  Madam Minister, I trust you understand that 

when we’re dealing with an average of 42 per cent cut that 

that’s an almost intolerable figure to try and plan around in one 

year. And what the municipalities are telling us is it isn’t even 

entirely just an issue of how much or how little as the total lack 

of predictability which makes planning all but impossible. 

 

What they need is stable, long-term funding that shows this 

province’s ongoing commitment, and then even if it is paltry 

and niggardly of this government, then at least the 

municipalities know what they have to plan around. 

 

Now what can you tell this House and municipalities in this 

province about stable, long-term funding that will allow them to 

properly plan rather than have 42 per cent lopped off in one 

year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, maybe the member 

opposite could convey that same message to the federal 

government so that we could have long-term, stable transfers 

from the federal treasury as well. 

 

But I would like to say that we did give a year’s notice. It’s not 

correct to say that all of a sudden everybody’s got this problem 

to deal with. We gave notice in the budget of March, 1996 that 

in the year 1997-98 there would be a 25 per cent reduction in 

the size of the revenue-sharing pool. 

 

Then last year in September we communicated to municipalities 

that we intended to pick up or transfer the health, public health, 

hospital, and social assistance levies from the local tax base, 

make a corresponding cut in the revenue-sharing pool, which 

leaves them that tax room. 

  



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

However at budget this year we did mitigate that by some $5 

million and we committed to pick up all of the costs of the 

public health levy and the social assistance levy and transfer 

that money directly from the treasury to the Health and Social 

Services department and to add that amount back into the 

revenue-sharing pool. 

 

So they’ve had notice of the original cut now for a year — more 

than a year; they’ve had notice of the health levies since last 

September. So with the additional tax room . . . because they 

can now, if they had a 2 mill hospital levy before, for example, 

they can retain that amount in their mill rate and keep the 

money for municipal purposes without . . . They may have 

preferred to pass along a decrease to their ratepayers, but they 

can have that additional money for municipal purposes without 

an increase. 

 

Factoring in the tax room, the average reduction to urban 

municipalities would be about 15 per cent and the average 

reduction to rural municipalities about 20 per cent. And of 

course this varies in its effect because there’s a great disparity 

in how much the proportion of the local budget revenue sharing 

makes up. 

 

For example, in Regina, by the time you factor in the tax room, 

the public health levy which you no longer have to pay, and so 

on, their reduction is about three and a half per cent in revenue 

sharing. In Saskatoon, it’s about 4 per cent and then you have to 

bear in mind that the revenue sharing previously, like in last 

year’s revenue sharing, only formed 4 per cent of Saskatoon’s 

total revenue. 

 

So what you’re really talking about in terms of a reduction is 4 

per cent of 4 per cent of their total revenue. That’s much less 

than what they will save by the reduction of 2 per cent in the 

PST (provincial sales tax). So on net, on balance, they’re better 

off. So it’s not the Draconian type of cut that some would like 

to cast it to be, and they did have notice, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the Madam 

Minister and her officials. I assure you I have many more 

questions and issues I would like to discuss with you; however 

my colleagues from Athabasca on behalf of the North, and 

Saltcoats on behalf of rural Saskatchewan, are also anxious to 

get in here, and I’m sure their questions will be far more 

pointed than mine and so I will for now sit down. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

I’d like to take the opportunity to welcome your officials here 

today, and I would also like to take the opportunity to thank you 

for the information you provided me today. The information 

comes in handy for me to try and do my job, and I know you 

want me to do my job well. So thank you. 

 

I don’t think time will permit me today to use your figures 

against yourself so we’ll go off on a different area here. Madam 

Minister, just starting off here — the $12 million that you have 

cut to rural municipal government this year once again 

reiterates that you’re picking on one of the most efficient levels 

of government that this province has ever seen. 

 

These people are being punished for not deficit financing 

because that makes them an easy target to dump on. And for the 

first few years that you were in power, I guess I could 

understand somewhat what you were doing, but we’ve gone 

from 1991 through . . . now we’re at ’97 and we’re still cutting 

rural and urban municipal governments very heavily. In fact 

this is one of the biggest cuts we’ve had. 

 

When health has got a few dollars put back into it after all the 

cuts, education’s got a few dollars put into it, why do we still 

have to seem to be downloading on municipal governments 

when they’ve been taking the brunt of the hits all these years? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s very true that there 

have been substantial cuts to revenue sharing, the size of the 

revenue-sharing pool in the ’90s. But as the member opposite 

knows, when you’re faced with a situation where you pay $17 

million a week in interest on the debt that you inherited and you 

want to have a balanced budget — which the Liberals in Ottawa 

haven’t achieved yet — you have to reduce spending. 

 

And we’ve asked . . . when we consult with the people of 

Saskatchewan, their priorities are health, education, social 

programs. And we listen to . . . we are sensitive to what people 

say, and when we have to get the money from somewhere to 

back-fill the federal cuts in health and education, that’s one of 

the sources. 

 

But they did have a year’s notice. This year we’ve also, being 

sensitive to the need for cash flow, we’ve paid out $16.4 million 

in the futures. We know that municipalities carried it as an 

account receivable; it’s no kind of a gift, we owed it to them. 

But they have it in hand. We have allocated all of the 

infrastructure money that is available to municipal projects. 

And we know that the people at those levels of government are 

very capable, very able, and very innovative. And we know that 

they will come through these difficult times and still be able to 

provide a reasonable level of service to the people that they’re 

elected to serve, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well thank you, Madam Minister, but I 

don’t believe because you’ve balanced your books and you’ve 

got everything rosy according to you in here that the taxpayer 

out in the country is going to be too happy when municipalities 

of all kinds have nowhere to pass it on. They’ve done all the 

cutting they can do and I think we’re going to start to see very 

drastic increases in mill rates, whether it’s in the country or in 

towns or wherever it is, and I would say by ’99 someone is 

going to pay the price very heavily and I would suggest it’s 

going to be the people on that side of the House. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked . . . I talked about the $12 million 

that . . . the rural cuts and the $17 million of urban cuts, and it’s 

no money, and it’s the federal government’s fault because 

they’re downloading. But I would suggest that there was a $130 

million of gaming money that the Minister of Finance said that 

we have put away for a rainy day. 

 

Why couldn’t you have maybe just had a little less rainy-day 

money put away and you could have had the $30 million you 

needed and really not have cut municipal governments? How   



770  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

can you have a slush fund starting to build and at the same time 

cut municipalities to the extent you have? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure just 

exactly what it is of which the member opposite speaks when he 

talks about a slush fund, because there is no . . . if he’s talking 

about the gaming revenue, it goes straight into the consolidated 

revenue fund. It’s not in a dedicated fund. It goes to help 

back-fill those federal cuts in health and education. 

 

And I think it’s very important to remember this, Mr. Chairman, 

that communities — whether they’re rural communities, urban 

communities — communities are made up of people. We know 

that municipalities are not institutions. Municipalities are 

communities made up of people in this province. 

 

If we were to maintain the size of the revenue-sharing pool for 

instance in the face of everything else, well then would we have 

to have a health premium that people would have to pay? If 

we’re going to keep revenue-sharing dollars intact, then would 

we have to make cuts to Education? Would we have to make 

further cuts to Highways? 

 

And when you mention, you know, putting a little bit of money 

in, that’s the problem — that a little prosperity is a very 

dangerous thing because . . . So we had a good year last year, 

resource revenue was strong, the farm economy was strong. We 

did . . . we had revenue so we put $40 million that was 

identified as a need into health. Well this is what I mean, then 

people say, oh well you found it for that, well how about me, 

and how about me, and how about me. And there just isn’t 

enough to go around. We’re still in very tight circumstances. 

We’ve turned the corner, it’s getting better . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . There’s a guy that’s costing us $17 million 

dollars a week and he’s chirping from his seat . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes. 

 

And then there’s all these little surprises like $85 million to 

fight forest fires. This year we’re looking at some potential 

damages for floods. And I just . . . It’s responsible financing 

that we’ve been doing and we’ll continue to do. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I agree 

with you, the third party is costing us a lot of money a day. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked a few minute ago about $16.4 

million for the futures program, and that’s a program that was 

very near and dear to my heart when I was a member of council 

out there and a reeve. And when your government came in in 

’91 and ’92, the previous minister cut the futures from four 

years to two years. Now that was bad enough. But as a past 

reeve, Madam Minister, you should and I know you understand 

the extent of what completely doing away with the futures is 

doing to road building. 

 

The cost to the future . . . Take for an example, Madam 

Minister, a number of miles of road by your farm say, for an 

example or your neighbour’s farm where the municipality 

involved may want to build four or five miles in a one-year 

project so that it’s only ripped up at one year. They put tenders 

out and the contractor bids at a certain price because he’s 

building four or five miles. 

 

Now that you’ve done away with the futures program, we know 

what’s going to happen — we think we know. Number one, the 

contractor is going to bid much higher because all that can be 

built is possibly a kilometre a year. That doesn’t end there. The 

farmer, if it happens to be a five-mile project, will have his road 

ripped up five years in a row, if he doesn’t shoot the councillor 

and the reeve before that happens. I mean people out there are 

going to be furious when they see what’s happening. Again 

we’re going to cost people more money because the contractor 

will not move in for 1 kilometre for the same charge he would 

have for the other. 

 

So, Madam Minister, when the futures program really was not 

costing your government any money, why would you cancel a 

program? I can see your reasoning that you’re giving me for 

cancelling projects like the main farm access. I don’t agree with 

it but I can see why you did it to save money. But the futures 

program was not costing you money. And politically I would 

suggest that cancelling the futures program is going to be a 

disaster for your government. Would you like to comment on 

that? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, some of us are old 

enough to have been around longer than the futures and we 

managed before. The futures — that particular program — 

hasn’t been around for ever. It saved municipalities money and 

saved the government money while it was used because, as you 

know, the criteria were that it had to be that kind of a project, 

that you had to save money by spending more than what your 

. . . your annual budget on this project. 

 

So money was saved but it did have a serious design flaw in 

that the pay-back schedule wasn’t fixed. So what we had was 

this liability that was sort of rolling around approximately at the 

$16 million level. It was up to 18 at one time. And we’re not 

saying that we will never ever have such a program again. We 

recognize some of the merits in it but we just felt at this time 

that we wanted to clear the decks and pay out that liability that 

was a liability to the province and an account receivable to 

municipalities. 

 

And this year I think that in fact that there’s a danger even of 

overheating the construction industry. When we talk about $20 

million in the Crow offset coming into rural municipalities, you 

talk about the 16 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s half 

and half. It’s half ours. This other half comes from somewhere 

else. But it’s only a one-shot deal. This is the problem. 

 

You know, the member opposite — now where do you stand? 

He was talking about revenue-sharing being long-term, 

sustainable, dependable, you know, and all this. And now his 

federal cousins come up with a one-year infrastructure program. 

Big deal. You know, what about next year? What about the year 

after? What about the year after — talk about futures. 

 

So there will be the infrastructure money; the $16 million in . . .   



April 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

the regular revenue-sharing; the infrastructure money; the $16 

million in futures; and the $20 million in the Crow offset — 

that’s about 20, 30, almost $50 million to rural municipalities in 

this year that is available for road construction and other 

infrastructure that municipalities might find the need for, Mr. 

Speaker. I mean, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. You actually 

touched on another really good area that I wanted to bring up. 

The infrastructure money is great. I mean there is nobody in the 

province that figures this isn’t good money, and I don’t care 

where it comes from — it comes partly the federal government, 

partly provincial government. The problem being here, with all 

the downloading that your government has done to 

municipalities, is where do they get the money to cost-share 

their part? Up goes the mill rate again. That even is it worse . . . 

it adds a worse problem than you even had before. 

 

Madam Minister, another area I would like to get into is the 

main farm access program. The main farm access program has 

been a great program out there, and RMs were very much, I 

believe, unaware that this was coming. Now a number of . . . 

Could you maybe start with . . . Might be the question to be 

asked here is, how many miles of main farm access are going to 

be dropped now because of the funding cuts that you have made 

this year? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is a very important 

point that the member raises. And this was a point of some 

difference in our discussions with SARM — I think it’s fair to 

say — is that most of the other provisions there was general 

agreement about. 

 

But we do feel at this stage — and our Minister of Highways 

today made a ministerial statement on the new proposed . . . 

well, the transportation strategy — that at this point in time, 

with railroad abandonment, the very rapid reconfiguring of the 

grain collection system in this province, that it is very important 

at this time to take pause and not to add to the main farm access 

. . . new miles to the main farm access network at this point. 

 

I mean municipalities can, if they feel it’s a need to build that 

class of a road, they can certainly do it with their own money. 

But we’re trying to send them a message, I guess, that we do 

not want to cost-share in extending the length of the network at 

this point. That is, it’s more important to get focused, as the 

transportation strategy will help us do, to make sure that the 

dollars that are put into road infrastructure or transportation 

infrastructure in this province be dedicated to those roads that 

are going to be there for — if you’ll excuse the pun — for the 

long haul. 

 

And so that’s the principle behind it. People may or may not 

agree. We did leave the re-gravelling grants in place for existing 

miles of farm access classes of roads. But new . . . just for the 

time being, we don’t want to do anything to encourage new 

construction in that road class. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I would 

suggest that you’ve probably accomplished what you set out to 

do, because you haven’t sent much encouragement to the RMs 

of this province. 

 

Madam Minister, if I understand what you’re saying, why the 

main farm access construction of the roads was dropped, then I 

would’ve thought that probably you would’ve wanted to put 

more into the grid road system. And correct me if I’m wrong — 

because a lot of this is new stuff just coming out and I may be 

wrong — but we have the basic funding for the grid road 

systems, whether it’s primary or grid, plus a percentage. And 

am I right in my understanding that the percentages have been 

also cut for the grid road system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, obviously the amount, 

the size of the pool, has been reduced — the amount that’s 

available. And I’m given to understand that there has been some 

change in the percentage that’s matched too. And I haven’t got 

that with me but I can undertake to get it for you and I will do 

so. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d just like 

to go back to the main farm access system for a minute, Madam 

Minister. And many of these projects, I would believe they 

would have been engineered by the point at which the dropping 

of the main farm access funding had come in. 

 

Do you have any idea of the number of roads that were already 

engineered ahead of the cuts? And if so, have you considered 

giving any assistance to these RMs? Because if I understand it 

right, the RMs that have gone out and spent money on 

engineering and now can’t afford to build it on their own are 

actually . . . have wasted their money. Have you given any 

consideration to at least cost-sharing the engineering that has 

already been done because these RMs have to outlay that 

money, and I mean it’s of complete no value to them if they 

can’t afford to build the road on their own. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

makes a valid point in this respect in terms of the work in 

progress that’s there, in terms of whether it’s engineering or 

partial construction, but some investment that has been made by 

municipalities. So we are . . . We don’t have all the data yet, but 

we are reviewing that situation. We are aware of the difficulty it 

will cause for some rural municipalities and we will be making 

some decisions on that within reasonably short order because 

we know that the construction season is almost upon us. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think 

another of the concerns that RMs must have out there and I 

know it’s definitely a big concern for the building contractors, 

road-building contractors throughout the province. And I think 

we have saw this before. When the futures were dropping four 

to two, the contractors really got very shaky out there about 

how their industry was going to survive. 

 

Well now, Madam Minister, I’m sure you’re getting the same 

calls as I am. These people are really worried now because it’s 

the little projects that are going to be able to take place under 

the new futures program that isn’t there any more. 

 

Do you not agree that in the end this is going to end up costing   



772  Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 1997 

us all more money because we’re going to end up with less 

contractors? And we’re going to get to a point where the 

competition is not there anywheres near like it is now, which 

we need as taxpayers out there to keep a level playing-field, I 

guess if you want to say, when our tenders go out so that we get 

five or six contractors bidding. If the work is not there and we 

end up with one, maybe two bids on a job, we’re going to be at 

the mercy of the contractors. 

 

And I mean I feel for these people too because as RMs out 

there, we have to have these people to build roads. We cannot 

survive without them. So do you agree with me that we’re 

actually defeating our own purpose here to an extent with what 

we’re doing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t agree 

with the member opposite at all. 

 

In addition to the almost $50 million that will be going to rural 

municipalities this year from various sources, there’s also the 

infrastructure money that’s going to the urbans which is close to 

$20 million or over 15, and a lot of that will be spent on 

transportation in terms of overpasses and highway connectors 

and so forth. And then we’ve got an increase in our Highways 

budget this year, Mr. Chairman, of $30 million. So that’s well 

over $100 million incremental money this year to go into road 

construction. 

 

So I think that the contractors, contrary to the member’s view 

opposite that they might have a tough year, it’s going to be a 

banner year for contractors. In fact there’s more a danger that 

we won’t be able to get enough contractors to do the level of 

construction that this amount of cash available in the system 

this year would allow to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 741 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 741 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 742 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 742 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 743 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 767 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 767 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Sale of Channel Lake Petroleum Ltd. 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 743 

 North Battleford North Stars Win Northern Division 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 743 

 Saskatchewan-made Film Debuts in Germany 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 743 

 Passing of Mr. Fred Heal 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 743 

 Saskatchewan Country Singer of the Year 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 744 

 Congratulations to Speed Skaters from Melville 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 744 

 Bed and Breakfasts Part of Our Growing Tourism Industry 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 744 

 Edam First Responders Win Skills Competition 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 745 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Gun Control Legislation 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 745 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 745 

 SaskTel Revenue Sources 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 745 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 746 

 Youth at Risk 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 746 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 747 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 747 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 747 

 Pornography on the Internet 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 748 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 748 

 Prosecutions Review Report 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 748 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 748 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 749 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Government Transportation Strategy 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 749 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 750 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 751 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 46  The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 751 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 751 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 39  An Act to promote and preserve Multiculturalism 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 752 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 753 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 754 

 Bill No. 4—The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 755 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 755 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 756 

 Bill No. 25  The Gas Licensing Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 757 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 757 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 758 

 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 759 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 759 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 759 

 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 760 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 760 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 3 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 761 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Municipal Government Vote 24 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 763 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 763 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 769 

 


