



















































Hansard: March 10, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 35 

 March 10, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan and 

particularly the city of Regina with respect to the increasing 

criminal activities. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations and other 

organizations committed to fight against youth crime. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 

petitions signed by concerned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

I so file. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present a petition on behalf of people across 

Saskatchewan as well: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 budget, and table a long-term plan 

for further reductions in the PST in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are coming in from across 

Saskatchewan. These particular ones are from Saskatoon and 

Regina. I’m pleased to present on behalf of the people today. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today 

with petitions, a number of them, from people throughout 

Saskatchewan in regards to the big game damage that has been 

caused. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the Saskatchewan 

big game damage compensation program so that it 

provides more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers 

and townsfolk for commercial crops, (a) silage bales, 

shrubs, trees, which are being destroyed by overpopulation 

of deer and other big game, including the elimination of 

the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control measures to 

prevent the overpopulation of deer and other big game 

from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the pages and pages of names on 

these petitions, most of them are from my own constituency of 

Wood River and the towns of Mankota, McCord, in through 

that area where a lot of devastation has occurred. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan this 

morning. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reductions and commit to stable revenue 

levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 

property taxpayers. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to develop a program 

to compensate people who are affected by the 

government’s failure to properly inform parents and 

babysitters of changes to the labour standards regulations; 

and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reduce the PST by 

two points in the 1997 provincial budget; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reverse the 

decision to force hunters to pay the entire cost of big game 

damage; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

make an exemption under The Labour Standards Act 

respecting agreements between Saskatchewan families and 



36  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

their care-givers. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Health: how many Saskatchewan 

residents were under government and/or district 

health-funded treatment for gambling addictions in the 

years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996; and what was the 

average cost per patient to the Department of Health and/or 

district health boards in each of those years? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Health: how many air ambulance 

transports were conducted in the province of Saskatchewan 

in the years 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker:  Now as the hon. members will know, today is 

Commonwealth Day and the House will be diverting from its 

usual procedure in order to give special acknowledgement to 

Saskatchewan’s involvement in the Commonwealth. 

 

Seated in the Speaker’s gallery are several Saskatchewan 

residents who have come to our province from other 

Commonwealth countries. It is now my pleasure to introduce 

these special guests to you. 

 

I ask each person to stand as the name of your country is called 

and to remain standing until all are introduced. And I’ll ask all 

hon. members of the Assembly to welcome them as a complete 

body at the conclusion of my introductions. 

 

If you would stand then in this order: from Australia, 

Bangladesh, Barbados, Botswana, Cameroon — and please 

remain standing — Dominica, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, 

Guyana, India, Jamaica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, South Africa, 

Kenya, Malaysia, Mauritius, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, 

Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda. 

 

From the United Kingdom, introduced separately; from 

England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Wales; and Zimbabwe. 

 

Would members please join with me in welcoming the 

representatives of these 26 Commonwealth countries to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It is a privilege on behalf of the Premier and the government to 

join you in welcoming our visitors to this special 

Commonwealth Day. 

It’s gratifying to see how many Commonwealth countries are 

represented by guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. A number 

of organizations, especially those involved in international 

affairs, have also sent representatives today, and we welcome 

them. 

 

All too often we take the Commonwealth for granted, perhaps 

in part because it has been there for 70 years. It often goes about 

its business quietly without the same publicity or fanfare and 

becomes a normal part of our cultural and political heritage. 

 

The Commonwealth is an active, busy place with an intricate 

network of multilateral connections in health, in education, in 

agriculture, in development assistance, human rights — of 

which I’m going to return in a second — the status of women, 

and the environment, to name only a few. 

 

Indeed the Commonwealth has been one of the prime 

instruments by which the problems in south . . . the challenges 

which South Africa faced have been resolved as they have been. 

I was telling the ambassador earlier when I met him that I was, 

and I think we were all very, very impressed with the way 

South Africa has developed. It just shows how much the world 

has changed. 

 

When the ambassador came into my office I was reminded of 

an incident which occurred when I was a teenager and just 

beginning to take an interest in world affairs. The country had 

elected its first prime minister from the Prairies, John 

Diefenbaker, who was born in the Prairies . . . John 

Diefenbaker. 

 

On attending his first Commonwealth conference — and I’m 

going here entirely from memory but I think this is accurate — 

on attending his first Commonwealth conference, he took strong 

exception to the presence in the Commonwealth of a 

government — not a country but a government — which had an 

openly avowed policy of apartheid. 

 

To the chagrin of the British, almost the entire membership of 

the Commonwealth supported Canada, and for a period of time 

South Africa was out of the Commonwealth affairs. 

 

We’re, I think, all . . . we all I think can take pride in the role 

that this Saskatchewan politician played as an early advocate of 

universal brotherhood of mankind and equality of rights for all 

people. And I think it’s an illustration as well of the role the 

Commonwealth has played in promoting the ideals of equality 

and the brotherhood of all mankind. 

 

The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, of which we’re 

all members, promotes democratic governments and political 

rights and freedoms to elected representatives of all 

Commonwealth countries. In fact we all belong to the 

association, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

branch is going to host the Canadian regional meeting here in 

July. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Commonwealth is not only a forum for 

discussion, it gets a number of things done, and I think we as 

Saskatchewan people can be proud of the leadership role which 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

Canadians and Canadian prime ministers have played over the 

years. 

 

Saskatchewan has its own special connection with one member 

of the Commonwealth — South Africa. Since 1993, we have 

been closely involved with the province of Free State in 

developing institutions of governance. The new South Africa is 

not only a parliamentary democracy, it is a federal state as well. 

And it’s been our privilege to host many representatives from 

South Africa and elected officials and government officials 

from this province have gone to South Africa. 

 

I want to again conclude by welcoming all members, all our 

special guests today from all parts of the Commonwealth. The 

Commonwealth is very much alive. It is around us in Canada 

and here in Saskatchewan. It’s an organization which I’m sure 

all members of this House would join with me in saying we 

treasure. It makes the world a better place for us to live. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition caucus, allow me to also 

welcome the many representatives of Commonwealth countries 

we have here with us today. 

 

It’s also my pleasure to welcome, on behalf of caucus, the High 

Commissioner for South Africa. I certainly hope you find your 

visit to the Assembly very beneficial, sir. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the people who have been 

responsible for putting together the display and all of the 

articles that are contained in the rotunda, an excellent 

educational display, and I hope everyone takes the time to view 

what’s out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today 53 nations around the globe join together 

through their common history to mark Commonwealth Day. All 

Canadians should be proud of our continued links with the 

Commonwealth under the reign of Her Majesty, Queen 

Elizabeth II. 

 

The Commonwealth is comprised of people of varied races, 

faiths, languages, and cultures. They are linked through shared 

traditions and the belief that their interests are served by this 

partnership. Mr. Speaker, I think the theme of this year’s 

Commonwealth Day describes very well what we are 

celebrating — talking to one another. 

 

The great advantage of an organization like the Commonwealth 

is that it gives us a common backdrop to talk to one another. 

Through this communication, we can go far in emulating what 

we think right in the Commonwealth, and correcting what we 

think wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Commonwealth, we take our democratic 

principles, the very principles that allow me to stand here today 

as Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. And this legacy 

of freedom is worth remembering, Mr. Speaker, and it is worth 

celebrating every day of the year. So once again, I welcome all 

our guests to this Assembly on this very special day. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 

to add my remarks to the observance of Commonwealth Day. 

For those who are cynical of tradition or ignorant of history it is 

very easy, I’m sure, to dismiss an event like the Commonwealth 

Day as an obsolete carry-over from colonial times. However I 

think it is the Commonwealth Day that provides us 

parliamentarians with an opportunity to reflect on the 

tremendous gifts we have in this country, thanks to our 

connection to Britain and its former empire. 

 

Many members of the Commonwealth share with us, British 

style parliamentary system which is quite an awe-inspiring 

institution. It has evolved and grown over eight centuries, it has 

been exported to the four corners of the globe, and it has 

become the standard of democratic government for cultures as 

diverse as the East Indian, the Australian, the Hong Kong 

Chinese, and of course our own. It is a tradition of flexible, 

adaptable, yet effective government that deserves the deepest 

respect from all the members of this Assembly and indeed from 

all members of our society. This is one of the gifts that we have 

received from being part of the Commonwealth. 

 

We also gain from a sense of brotherhood and community with 

53 nations. Surely if we look at the strife that confronts many 

countries these days, such an opportunity for cooperation and 

mutual benefit should not be taken lightly. Mr. Speaker, once 

again, on behalf of the Conservative caucus I would like to 

welcome all of our Commonwealth guests and ask all members 

to join with me in honouring Commonwealth Day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I referred to 

this individual by name in my earlier comments, but I want to 

take a special opportunity to introduce to the House the High 

Commissioner for the Republic of South Africa to Canada, His 

Excellency, Billy Modise, if he’d stand and be recognized. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This, Mr. Speaker, is His 

Excellency’s third visit to the province. Mr. Modise had a 

distinguished career in teaching, in international development, 

in the United Nations, and the African National Congress. He’s 

been a High Commissioner here for approximately two years. 

 

I had a visit — altogether too short — with Billy Modise this 

morning. He talked very thoughtfully about the challenge in a 

federal state which has a multi-racial population. I thought to 

myself as I was listening to him, there’s a great deal Canadians 

could learn from what the South Africans have accomplished 

over the last few years. 

 

My congratulations to you and your country and we’re 



38  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

honoured by your visit here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  If the minister would like to introduce his 

school group that is visiting then he may continue, and then I’ll 

recognize other hon. members who have visiting school groups 

as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I then will have two more 

introductions with that indulgence. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to introduce to the House as well, in the same vein, the 

chairman of the Saskatchewan Branch of the Royal 

Commonwealth Society, Dr. Ralph Cheesman, who is seated 

behind the bar at the moment. I would ask the House to 

recognize him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Finally, and certainly not least, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce a group of grade 4 and 5 students from 

St. Gregory School in my constituency whom I had the honour 

to visit with a little before the House convened today. They’re 

here with their teacher, Mr. Ignace Minja, who also represented 

Tanzania in our celebration today. 

 

The St. Gregory students have contributed to the 

Commonwealth display in the rotunda in the Legislative 

Building. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

students here on this special day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure as 

well to introduce Ms. Hilary Ibbott and her grade 7 class from 

Lumsden High School. They are seated in the west gallery. It 

was our pleasure, Mr. Speaker, you will recall, to visit with this 

group earlier in the year and we were most impressed with the 

work they have done in understanding how government works. 

I also want to commend them on the fine Commonwealth 

display that they brought to the school and the rotunda. 

 

So thank you for being here, and please join me in extending a 

warm welcome to them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to take 

the opportunity to introduce through you to everyone assembled 

here this afternoon, a group of 61 grade 8 students from Lindale 

School, sitting in the east gallery here, accompanied by their 

teachers, Ms. Fysh and Ms. Campbell. I also would like to 

recommend to everyone assembled here today to take the 

opportunity, if they haven’t yet, to look at the displays out in 

the rotunda. And I certainly enjoyed looking at the display that 

the class did on Australia out there and it was a very interesting 

one. So I would just like you all to join in a round of applause 

for them this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce someone to colleagues in the Chamber and everyone 

that’s here today — a lady that has an interest in youth crime, 

having fallen victim to youth crime herself. And she’s seated in 

the gallery behind me so she could face the government and 

keep an eye on the Justice minister. 

 

I’d like everybody to welcome Ms. Lil Schroeder, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 

and members of the House this afternoon, seated in the west 

gallery, an individual, a young man by the name of Jason 

Dubois. Mr. Dubois has been the past president of the 

Saskatchewan Students Against Drinking and Driving. As you 

well know, today, Mr. Speaker, is in fact Impaired Driving 

Awareness Week and Mr. Dubois and students from across 

Canada have been . . . or across Saskatchewan have been very 

instrumental in putting together the legislation that we have in 

this province today. 

 

Later this day my member from Meadow Lake will be making a 

further statement on this, but I want to ask all members of the 

Assembly to join with me today and to congratulate the work of 

students across Saskatchewan in making this legislation 

possible. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister just 

referred to, today marks the beginning of the Impaired Driving 

Awareness Week. As a member of the select committee on safe 

driving, I’m proud to see that the legislation we worked on with 

the Saskatchewan people to develop is achieving its goal and 

that is to reduce the incidence of impaired driving and 

alcohol-related fatalities by 20 per cent within the first five 

years. 

 

Since you too were a member of that all-party committee that 

helped develop the legislation, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you will 

be especially pleased to hear that since August 1, 

alcohol-related traffic convictions have decreased by 9 per cent 

— that’s compared to the same five-month period in 1995. 

 

The legislation, combined with other factors such as safety 

campaigns and enforcement, are making a difference. I am 

proud to have participated in this landmark process that led to 

such innovative legislation. Not only, Mr. Speaker, are we 

working to reduce drinking and driving, we are in fact saving 

lives. 

 

I ask the members of the House to join with me in 

congratulating everyone who was part of the team responsible 

for developing the toughest drinking and driving legislation in 

this country. Thank you very much. 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture and Food Week 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

though you can hardly tell it from looking out the window, in a 

few short weeks Saskatchewan farmers will be back out on the 

land in what’s being called the most of Saskatchewan’s 

megaprojects. I’d like to take this opportunity to note the start 

of Agriculture Week in our province. 

 

Though this special week began yesterday and runs through 

March 15, in reality every week in Saskatchewan is agriculture 

week. There’s not a single person in our province who isn’t 

affected by the fortunes of our farming community, and this 

year’s theme: Agriculture and Food: Saskatchewan’s Economic 

Foundation, probably sums it up best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Agriculture does remain our economic background and it will 

remain so. Despite the fact there are fewer farmers today than in 

the past, that doesn’t lessen the importance that farming plays in 

all our lives whether we farm ourselves or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I ask all 

members to join with me in recognizing all farmers in 

Saskatchewan and acknowledge their continuing importance in 

all of our lives. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the PC (Progressive Conservation) caucus I would like 

to join with other members of this Assembly in acknowledging 

the Impaired Driving Awareness Week. We extend our 

welcome to Jason and ask him also to say hello to his father 

who I happen to have attended school with. 

 

Every year our province is witness to countless deaths and 

injuries due to impaired driving. This waste of precious human 

life is tragic, deplorable, and just downright unacceptable. For 

many years, a wide variety of groups have worked to educate 

the public on this issue. SADD (Students Against Drinking and 

Driving), students against drunk driving, MADD (Mothers 

Against Drinking and Driving), mothers against drunk driving, 

and SCARED, Saskatchewan Citizens Advocating Responsible 

Educated Drivers have done tremendous work in this regard. 

They and other groups like them deserve society’s profound 

thanks. 

 

Yet in spite of all of this effort Saskatchewan still has the same 

shameful distinction of having amongst the highest drunk 

driving rates in Canada. Clearly, this is an area where we as 

legislators can do better. 

 

In acknowledging Impaired Driving Week, I think that the 

members of this Assembly must also renew our commitment 

and our responsibility to fighting this senseless crime. Mr. 

Speaker, we were also included on the safe driving committee, 

and we’re very happy to have served there and we hope we will 

be able to improve this situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture and Food Week 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to join 

with the opposition members in reminding people that . . . of 

this Assembly that March 9 to 15 is Agriculture and Food Week 

in Saskatchewan. Agriculture has always played a primary role 

in our economy. Today we are facing a rapidly evolving 

agriculture and food industry that is producing tremendous 

growth, innovation, and opportunities province wide. 

 

The agricultural industry is a major contributor to 

Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product. It employed 

approximately 72,000 people in 1995. Additionally our 

ag-biotech industry in Saskatoon contributes 30 per cent to all 

ag-biotech activity in the country and is projected to have 

commercial sales of over 300 million by the year 2000. 

Furthermore, sales from farm equipment manufacturing reached 

411 million in 1994, and our food processing sector is close to a 

billion dollars in ’96. 

 

With over 60,000 farms in Saskatchewan, most people are 

generally aware of the importance of agriculture to the 

province, but may not fully realize the impact of the ag and 

food industry in their community’s economy and future 

well-being. Today we are trying to increase the awareness and 

understanding of an industry that has elements which, until a 

few years ago, were virtually non-existent. 

 

This year’s theme, Mr. Speaker, is: Agriculture and Food — 

Saskatchewan’s Economic Foundation. And appropriately 

enough it gives us an opportunity to focus on how the industry 

is changing and its importance to our economy’s well-being. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

90th Anniversary of St. Paul’s Hospital 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

marks a very special anniversary in the city of Saskatoon. It was 

on March 10, 1907, that St. Paul’s Hospital was established by 

the Grey Nuns. 

 

The hospital was opened as a response to the typhoid epidemic 

that raged through the area at the time. Ninety years later the 

Grey Nuns’ legacy of hope carries on with St. Paul’s doctors 

and nurses continuing to provide a high quality of health care, 

despite the sometimes difficult circumstances that exist in 

health care in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as guests gather at St. Paul’s today for a special 

celebration, I ask members of this House to join with me in 

marking this occasion and acknowledging all those who have 



40  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

come and gone through those 90 years, who have helped build 

St. Paul’s Hospital into what it is today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As noted by the 

official opposition, right now as we speak, there’s a very 

significant birthday party taking place in Saskatoon. St. Paul’s 

Hospital, formerly Grey Nuns Hospital, is being fêted right now 

for 90 years of outstanding medical service to the people of 

Saskatoon and area. As we know, Saskatchewan as a province 

is only 91 years old, so we are talking about a venerable 

institution that has practically coexisted with Saskatchewan. 

 

A couple of interesting facts about St. Paul’s. In the early days, 

doctors often came to work by sled and helped the nurses with 

chores around the hospital. When St. Paul’s was founded, 

Saskatoon was in the midst of the typhoid epidemic. The St. 

Paul’s Nursing School opened in 1909, nursing recruits to be 18 

years old and having a grade 8 certificate. 

 

Between 1909 and 1995, over 80,000 babies were born in St. 

Paul’s. And I might add that Ruth and myself’s four children 

were also born in that hospital. Closer to our day, the first 

hemodialysis treatment in Saskatchewan was performed at St. 

Paul’s in 1960. 

 

Mr. Speaker, St. Paul’s has had a significant role in health care 

for 90 years. It continues to be significantly involved in the 

health care of the residents of the immediate community, the 

health district, and the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all members will want to join me in 

wishing — not singing — happy birthday to St. Paul’s and 

thanking doctors, nurses, and administrative staff, past, present, 

and future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join with the members from Meadow Lake and Cypress in 

drawing all members’ attention to Impaired Driving Awareness 

Week. Mr. Speaker, there is no more senseless a tragedy than a 

person who is killed by the thoughtless action of someone who 

climbs behind the wheel of a vehicle drunk. Drinking and 

driving is a criminal act that we all have to do more to stamp 

out. 

 

Drunk drivers cause more than 50 deaths on our road every 

year; 1,000 more people are injured because of drinking and 

driving. Between 35 and 50 per cent of all traffic accidents are 

linked to drinking and driving. And, Mr. Speaker, impaired 

driving costs the province $35 million each year in health care, 

loss of income, and property damage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rate of impaired driving in Saskatchewan is 

too high, even though there was a considerable improvement. 

Last year this House passed legislation which makes 24-hour 

licence suspensions more common and toughens up other laws. 

This is the legislation the opposition supported. The House will 

also remember we put forward an amendment asking for zero 

tolerance policy for 16-, 17-, and 18-year-olds. Unfortunately 

that amendment was not passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fight against impaired driving is far from over. 

We, as legislators and citizens, must do everything in our power 

to get these people off the streets. The time for talk has passed; 

the time for action is now. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture and Food Week 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would like 

to also acknowledge Agriculture Week which runs from March 

9 through to the 15th. This is an annual observance sponsored 

by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association and we 

would like to commend SWNA for their ongoing commitment 

to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I hope that all members of this Assembly, and all members of 

the public, take this time to reflect on Saskatchewan’s most 

important industry. Whether you work in a hotel in Regina or in 

an elevator in small town Saskatchewan, you can see your 

fortunes rise or fall based on agriculture. 

 

Businesses across Saskatchewan, be they on Main Street in 

small towns or in the big city, all have agriculture as their centre 

of gravity. 

 

In addition to, and perhaps more important than, the economic 

contributions of agriculture, are the social and moral 

contributions that our Saskatchewan rural culture makes to our 

way of life. We all support values of hard work, persistence, 

honesty, belief in the family, a kinship with nature, and a host 

of other values. These are the traits for which Saskatchewan 

people are known and respected wherever they go, and we owe 

them to the agricultural spirit that built this province. 

 

Again, in closing, we would like to thank the people of rural 

Saskatchewan for their undaunted persistence in these tough 

times and we would like to thank SWNA for providing us with 

this opportunity to show our respect to agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Property Tax Reassessment 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when this government introduced its tax reassessment plans, we 

heard how home-owners and farmers would be protected from 

the full impact of reassessment. But today we see the results of 

this government’s incompetence. They have driven a wedge 

between our small cities, towns, villages, and rural 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

municipalities. What I find truly amazing is that this is the 

government which tried to force amalgamation on 

municipalities last year and may now have made any form of 

shared services on a volunteer basis virtually impossible. 

 

Will the Minister of Municipal Government or her designate tell 

us how this government intends to put out the fire it has created 

amongst our urban centres and RMs (rural municipality)? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as the House will know, over 10 days ago our 

government announced that we were going to mitigate the shift 

of education tax from farm land. And we have done that with 

the approval of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities and the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association. 

 

As the members will know, we had an assessment system in the 

province of Saskatchewan that was 30 years out of date. This 

legislature and Municipal Government, along with the 

Department of Education, have introduced tax tools that will 

allow the various municipalities to deal with some of the shifts 

that have taken place as a result of reassessment. 

 

We think that the farmers in this province are extremely happy 

that this government recognizes that farm land has gone up 

significantly in value and we’ve made sure that farm land 

across the province will experience no more than a 5 per cent 

increase in educational taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the 

minister that all she has done is poured gasoline on an open fire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government could have headed off these 

problems by absorbing the shift to agriculture land and now a 

subsequent shift back to towns and villages. Instead, the 

minister appears to be satisfied with adding to the anxiety and 

frustration among local governments and pitting one against the 

other. As Humboldt Mayor Doug Still notes in the recent press 

release, “Pitting urban residents against our rural neighbours is 

a poor way for the province to build partnerships.” 

 

Will the minister tell this House if her government will consider 

picking up the original education shift on agriculture land and 

grant this back to rural taxpayers instead of dumping it on their 

urban neighbours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as the member may know, we 

collect, through property taxes, over $500 million a year to pay 

for the K to 12 system in the province of Saskatchewan. What 

the member is asking us to do is somehow find hundreds of 

millions of dollars. This province is well on the road to 

economic recovery, but I can assure the member, as a result of 

decades of mismanagement by the Conservative Party, we’re 

not going to find $500 million to do what the member wants us 

to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we have made a reasonable decision. Farm 

land in this province will receive no more than a 5 per cent 

increase in educational taxes on average across the province. 

The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association support the 

government with this measure. The Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities supports the government with this 

measure. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to change what we 

did, because we want to support farmers, contrary to what that 

group over there wants to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the minister is 

talking in hundreds of millions of dollars because, as everyone 

knows, the government has downloaded its responsibility for 

education funding from 60 to 40 per cent. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Government hinted recently that this 

government may be prepared to reverse that trend by picking up 

as much as $300 million that school boards are presently raising 

through local taxation. Will the minister explain that if the 

Minister of Municipal Government was serious about this issue, 

when can we expect a formal announcement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You know, Mr. Speaker, I find this line 

of questioning absolutely incredible. It’s bizarre. This is the 

beginning of Agriculture and Food Week, and what is this loyal 

opposition arguing for? A bigger tax increase on Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the opposition and all of the 

people in this province that this government is not going to 

increase people’s personal income taxes or sales tax or any 

other tax in order to give the members what they’re asking for. I 

can assure you of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Youth Crime 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, the Minister of Justice has 

claimed that he’s dedicated to rehabilitating our youth, many of 

whom have addiction problems. One must question then why 

his government shut down the Whitespruce youth addiction and 

drug treatment facility. This facility was set up by the 

Conservatives, proof that at one time they didn’t always believe 

in chain gangs and locking away our youth as the only way to 

solve our problems. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice admit that his decision to shut down 

Whitespruce was a short-sighted one, and will he commit to 

reopening the Whitespruce youth alcohol and drug addiction 

centre in order to deal with the problems facing some of our 

young people? 



42  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 

the member’s concern about Whitespruce, he will be aware that 

the Whitespruce program has not been shut down. The 

Whitespruce program has been moved and consolidated at the 

Calder Centre in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Whitespruce has not 

been closed. 

 

But in addition to that, in addition, Mr. Speaker, the member, 

while he’s new, I hope would be aware from his own 

experience that in health districts across this province there 

have been a rebirth of drug and alcohol facilities on a 

community basis and young people, and adults for that matter, 

are accessing those services not in distant communities but in 

their own community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, that is indeed a surprise that there 

has been a rebirth in youth addiction services. 

 

However, I wish to ask the Hon. Minister of Justice, I was 

surprised recently to learn that prosecutors in this province are 

being sent to media school for a two-day course in media 

relations. I wish to ask him if sending prosecutors to school to 

become better spin doctors is the government’s way of 

responding to the crisis in public confidence that faces our 

justice system today over youth crime and other issues, and if 

media training courses are really the way to deal with these 

difficulties in our justice system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that I 

want to make it very clear today that the Department of Justice 

and the Department of Social Services are working very 

carefully with the Regina Police Service to identify and deal 

with approximately 35 youth who have been identified as 

serious habitual offenders and who are primarily responsible for 

the rash of car thefts in Regina. For these serious habitual 

offenders, this means the use of jail. We’ll continue to be tough 

with these young people and to use the full force of the law to 

respond to their unacceptable behaviour. 

 

Also, as it relates to the whole justice system, it’s very clear that 

the media focus on all aspects of the system includes the 

prosecutors, and on a continuing basis over quite a number of 

years, senior prosecutors have received media training as part of 

their job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the Minister of Justice as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, on Friday we heard more evidence of the latest 

crime spree in Regina is a result of our revolving-door justice 

system. Two of the suspects arrested in the serious incident 

Thursday were arrested just one month ago for auto theft in an 

incident which resulted in a seizure of a stolen shotgun. They 

also tried to steal a police car in that same incident. Yet one 

month later they’re back on the street, free to steal another 

 vehicle and jeopardize the lives of police officers and the 

public. One of them has now been charged with escaping lawful 

custody. 

 

Mr. Minister, incarceration of young offenders in your 

responsibility not the federal government’s. How is it that a 

teenager was able to walk away from custody and go out and 

steal another car? 

 

And don’t you think that young offenders when they do escape, 

that police should be able to publicly identify them and warn 

the public, contrary to the Young Offenders Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are a 

number of issues set out in this question. And practically, what I 

would say is that we are working very carefully with the city of 

Regina police to deal with these issues. The whole matter of the 

Young Offenders Act changes . . . there have been some 

changes made that will increase the ability of the police to give 

information to appropriate parties. So that has been dealt with. 

 

As it relates to the charges against these people, the prosecutors 

work with the police, the matters are presented to the court, the 

judges deal with the evidence that’s before them, and they have 

the final say on the length of sentence. It’s very clear under the 

Young Offenders Act that the sentences that the judges give 

cannot be varied in any way by the Department of Social 

Services who actually administers the incarceration of the 

young people. We have these sentences set by the judges and 

those sentences are followed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you say 

that you’re working with the Regina police department. Police 

Chief Langgard says that repeat offenders need to be locked up 

for a long time yet the minister continues to say that jail isn’t 

the answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, I agree that rehabilitation must be the goal of our 

justice system, but the primary goal has to be the protection of 

the public. Mr. Minister, over a hundred vehicles were stolen in 

Regina last week. I suspect many of them were stolen by repeat 

offenders. I can guarantee you that not one of them was stolen 

by a young offender who was in jail at the time. 

 

Mr. Minister, why aren’t you helping by telling these kids that 

there will be serious consequences for dangerous criminal 

behaviour? Mr. Minister, will you join us today in publicly 

calling for changes to the Young Offenders Act that provide for 

serious consequences for serious offences — restitution, public 

identification, and stricter sentences for repeat offenders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll only repeat 

my answer from before. These matters are being treated very 

seriously, and for those serious habitual offenders that means 

jail. There’s no other term for it. 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

We’ll continue to be very tough with these young people and 

deal with them through the appropriate measures that we have 

in the court system. The Young Offenders Act sets out some 

very clear penalties and those are the penalties that we will be 

enforcing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Grain Handling Delays 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier or his designate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday as we in this House unanimously joined 

forces in a vote condemning the federal government’s handling 

of our grain transportation system, the Premier was in 

Saskatoon meeting with Jean Chrétien, the Prime Minster of 

this country. So we ask: did the minister stand up for 

Saskatchewan farmers and deliver that message to the Prime 

Minister? No, instead the Premier said he is satisfied with the 

commitment that Chrétien is making to grain movement. And I 

quote: 

 

I think that’s about as good as it gets when you get the 

prime minister identifying the importance of . . . this 

economic commodity (the Premier said) . . . 

 

That’s about as good as it gets. Mr. Premier, that’s not what this 

House said in its vote and that’s not what farmers are saying or 

demanding. The grain is not moving. Demurrage is still being 

charged. Farmers need action not more commitments from Jean 

Chrétien and Ralph Goodale, the kind we’ve seen in the past. 

 

Would someone care to tell us why your Premier is acting as an 

apologist for the federal Liberals instead of standing up for 

Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m glad at least one party, Mr. 

Speaker, spoke up about agriculture on the week that honours 

agriculture in this province of Saskatchewan. I don’t expect the 

opposition, perhaps, to have a question. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite, we have a grave 

concern about the freight handling in the province of 

Saskatchewan. While we were discussing that important issue 

in this House on Friday, the CTA (Canadian Transportation 

Agency) was meeting, deciding that perhaps the railways 

should in fact have more money to carry the farmers’ grain to 

market. It wasn’t enough that the farmers had to pay $15 

million or $16 million in demurrage, but now they’re going to 

in fact . . . maybe . . . I don’t know if it’s because the railways 

are doing such a good job that we are going to reward them now 

for the job that they’re doing in getting our products to market. 

 

This government is going to take every step to make the federal 

government aware and to make the railways aware of the 

problems that farmers face in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

not only is the federal government refusing to impose penalties 

on the railroads, which we talked about in our vote last Friday, 

but on Friday, that very same day, they announced from the 

federal government a $15 million increase in freight rates. And 

that’s the first time I’ve ever heard of a performance bonus for 

poor performance. It happened on this very same day. 

 

And to his credit, the Minister of Highways over here did 

condemn this latest cash grab from the prairie farmers. But at 

the same time, his Premier in Saskatoon was saying that’s about 

as good as it gets. The Premier is in Saskatoon thanking Jean 

Charest for putting the boots to Saskatchewan yet again while 

we here in this Assembly work hard to try to change that 

opinion. 

 

I hate to paraphrase Murray Mandryk, Mr. Speaker, but, earth 

calling Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, on our planet, grain isn’t 

moving. Farmers are demanding action. And the Premier is 

supposed to stick up for Saskatchewan farmers, not agree with 

the federal government. 

 

Why did you not demand an immediate action from Mr. 

Chrétien, Mr. Premier, when you had him by the throat last 

Friday, or should have had him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to say I agree with the 

member opposite that putting Mr. Chrétien in charge of rail 

transportation or at the interests . . . ahead of the interests of 

farmers is like putting Colonel Sanders in charge of the chicken 

coop. It certainly disturbs me as well. 

 

But what we are doing on this side of the House, and I would 

hope with the acceptance and the partnership of the third party 

and the partnership of the official opposition, is to in fact tell 

Mr. Goodale, tell Mr. Chrétien, tell the railways we believe that 

Alberta and Manitoba and British Columbia will be joining us 

in this fight. Why don’t you join us because it’s very important? 

 

Farmers are doing reasonably well right now. The part that 

they’re having difficulty with is input costs, and when you 

attach $15 million of demurrage to a situation that’s no fault of 

their own and then tack on or give the CN (Canadian National) 

and CP (Canadian Pacific) a $15 million raise to haul their 

product to market, it just isn’t fair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Group Homes Funding 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is for the Minister of Social Services. It has 

come to my attention the Saskatchewan group homes which fall 

under the umbrella of community living division are struggling 

to provide adequate services for their residents under the current 

budgets. Time and time again this problem has been brought to 

the attention of this government. To date nothing has been 

done. The needs of some of our most vulnerable citizens 



44  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

have been ignored by this government. For example, the food 

service budget in an average group home is $4 per resident per 

day. Mr. Speaker, would the Minister of Social Services tell me 

if he believes that $4 for food per adult resident in a group 

home is adequate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for her question. I thank her for raising this issue. It’s 

an important issue and it faces many of the funded agencies in 

our province, including the group homes, all of the 

community-based organizations. She is absolutely correct. 

Those organizations have been raising this with the government 

for some years. I know they have met with herself and other 

members of her caucus. 

 

We’re in the circumstance, Mr. Speaker, in this province, of 

trying to balance all of the many, many demands upon the 

public purse. And they are many, particularly in the field of 

human services; particularly in social services the demands are 

many. She will know that we’re handicapped in meeting all of 

these demands by the significant withdrawal of funding from 

the federal level. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure that 

member that these concerns are very deeply felt by members in 

government and they are very actively being concerned. 

 

And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, just to wrap up. I have had 

an opportunity to visit many of the group homes, many of the 

community-based organizations, and these groups, these 

individuals, people that work there, are doing a tremendous job 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess to that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would reply that the value placed on our most 

vulnerable citizens is reflected in the policy of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the manager of Mackenzie Society Ventures in 

Preeceville indicates that he cannot offer residents a 

well-balanced menu because of the $4 limit for their food 

budget, and I believe that most people would agree. 

 

To get a feel for just how difficult it is to eat on $4 per day, 

tomorrow the Liberal caucus will be doing just that. Members 

of our caucus will be able to spend no more than $4 for meals 

all day. Will the Minister of Social Services, the Minister of 

Finance along with their party colleagues, and our colleagues 

from the third party be willing to taste their budgetary measures 

by accepting our challenge to do the same and eat on a $4 

budget tomorrow? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the intent, I 

think, of the member’s comments. I would hope these are not 

somehow for political grandstanding, but to raise an important 

issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier comments, we’re 

struggling, struggling in this province. And we’re not the only 

province struggling with this issue. On the one hand, the  

significant need that exists in our community, whether it be a 

community-based organization, whether it be in the homes of 

some of our families in this province, the needs are great, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On the other hand, the resources have been dwindling, 

dwindling primarily as a result of Liberal policy in Ottawa, Mr. 

Speaker. If you want to make a significant dent in many of 

these issues, I’m going to invite the member, I’m going to invite 

the member to join us, join us in communicating with the 

federal government, their Liberal colleagues in Ottawa, a 

protest of what they’ve done to the funding of social programs 

in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

My challenge holds firm and I challenge you tomorrow to join 

the Liberal caucus to eat for $4 a day, if possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also growing concern about the wages and 

benefits provided to the community living employees working 

in these residential group homes. SARCAN’s review of their 

wage structure shows that those who provide residential and 

vocational services for persons with disabilities earn 30 to 50 

per cent less than the workers who provide the same services to 

clients who are not cognitively disabled. 

 

Is the Minister of Social Services reviewing this funding and 

will these concerns be factored into the upcoming provincial 

budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, to speak to the member’s 

question very directly, yes indeed, we are reviewing all of the 

issues of funding around community-based organizations, as we 

have in past. We’ve not cut that funding. We’ve not been able 

to add to it as we would have wished, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course it’s under review. 

 

But again, I point out to the minister, and I understand . . . point 

out to the member, and I understand just following, just 

following the most recent federal budget, her caucus got up and 

saluted that federal budget. Well that federal budget, most 

recent, Mr. Speaker, took another $90 million from the people 

of Saskatchewan for social programs in our province. 

 

How can they get up and salute, salute that federal budget and 

then come into this House and implore this government to 

provide more funding for social programing in our province. 

How could they do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Compensation for Parents Affected by Labour Standards 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

provincial government has demonstrated in the last few months 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

how truly out of touch it is with people in this province. A year 

after amendments were made to The Labour Standards Act, 

parents learn that care-providers were entitled to their minimum 

wage. 

 

After weeks of pressure, the Minister of Labour finally admitted 

that the government has made a mistake and care-providers 

shouldn’t have been subject to the legislation. However, he 

stopped short of announcing compensation for parents who face 

bills totalling thousands of dollars. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 

provide compensation for those parents who face substantial 

bills because of this government’s mistake? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

will know, of course, the answer to his question. We announced 

it publicly. The Premier announced it. I confirmed it on a 

number of occasions and it is as follows. 

 

We will monitor this situation very carefully. We will try and 

keep track of how many claims there are and what the 

settlements are. Any decisions on this question is going to have 

to be made down the line when we have a lot more facts in our 

possession than we have now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, a number of 

parents are facing substantial bills because of a mistake that the 

Minister of Labour has admitted to, and that of his government 

as well. These parents are now examining the possibility of 

having to take legal action against the government to get 

compensation. 

 

Will the minister indicate if his government plans to do the 

honourable thing and compensate those affected, or does he 

plan to force them to take court action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it’s the same question. We 

will monitor the situation, and any decisions that have to be 

made will be made at a time when we are in possession of 

enough facts to make a sensible decision. If someone in the 

meantime wants to take court action against the government, 

that of course is their right. It’s the right of any citizen who 

feels that a wrong has been committed, to go to court. I 

wouldn’t deny them that right for a moment. 

 

But in the meantime we’ll do our job, which is to try and 

accurately assess what this situation is about, how many claims 

have been made, what the settlements have been, and make any 

decisions that are appropriate at the appropriate time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Goohsen:  To give notice of a Bill. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member is out of order — we’ve 

passed that point in the order papers — and may submit it either 

in written form or orally tomorrow. Order. 

 

Before orders of the day then, hon. members will all be aware 

that we will recess just momentarily for our Commonwealth 

Day ceremony, which will include the reading of Her Majesty’s 

Commonwealth Day message, and an address from the floor, of 

the Assembly by the High Commissioner of South Africa. 

 

Having said that, I’ll recognize the Government Whip. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Recess for Commonwealth Day Ceremonies 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move, seconded by the member for Regina Northeast: 

 

That this Assembly do now recess to observe 

Commonwealth Day and reconvene at the call of the 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker:  Hon. members, we will now recess and begin 

the Commonwealth celebration ceremonies in just a moment 

from the floor of the Assembly, and so I’ll ask everyone to stay 

in the room, not to leave, and we’ll begin just shortly. 

 

We’ll reconvene at 4 o’clock following the Speaker’s tea and 

I’ll ask that the bells will ring at 5 minutes to the hour to 

summons members back to the Assembly. The House now 

stands recessed. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

(1600) 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Prorogation Speech Error 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I would like to 

present the House with the Speaker’s ruling. On Friday, March 

7, 1997, the Leader of the Opposition raised a point of order 

concerning the accuracy of a statement made in the prorogation 

speech which ended the first session of the twenty-third 

legislature. 

 

The statement in question referred to the passage of the service 

districts Act which was before this Assembly as Bill No. 33 

during the last session. Since reserving my decision on this 

point of order, I have reviewed the text of the prorogation 

speech and the status of the legislation in question. 

 

I concur with the Leader of the Opposition and the Government 



46  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

House Leader that the speech was in error by stating that the 

noted Bill was implemented when in fact it was left standing on 

the order paper. 

 

For this reason I order that an editor’s note be placed in both the 

Journals and collective Hansard Debates and Proceedings of 

the first session of the twenty-third legislature to identify the 

error made in the prorogation speech. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The great baseball 

pitcher Satchel Paige and I have two things in common — one, 

we became rookies at an age when most of the players have 

hung up their spikes. After pitching for decades in the old 

Negro leagues of the pre-integration ball, Paige made the bigs 

in his ’50s, he said. No one was ever quite sure of his age. And 

he acquitted himself very well for a season or two. 

 

And here I am, more or less a rookie MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), after decades in the trenches of public 

education, with the great honour of moving the motion in 

support of the second throne speech of the twenty-third 

legislature. I hope to acquit myself with the grace and 

composure that some say come with age, as did Satchel Paige. 

 

The second thing we have in common is a blazing fast ball, but 

this is not the arena for me to demonstrate this hidden talent of 

mine. 

 

Before I begin, I want to say how pleased I am to see all of my 

colleagues on both sides of the House from the last session. 

And I’m happy to be one of the first to welcome the new 

member from North Battleford. You will find, I think, that the 

proceedings in this House are spirited, informed, and 

unashamedly partisan, which is the nature of our system. 

 

But they are also collegial, because at the end of the day we all 

realize that we work, each in our own way, for the good of the 

people we represent. And all of us represent all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I will have a few more words to say on this topic 

a little later. 

 

I also want to commend the new Leader of the Liberal Party for 

giving the new member from the southern city the critic 

responsibility for Northern Affairs. After all, what does a first 

nations person from the North know about the area he 

represents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I am honoured that the Premier 

chose me to move the Speech from the Throne because it puts 

me in line behind a number of my colleagues who since 

December of 1991 have set high standards. 

 

From the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood to the

member from Battleford-Cut Knife, members on this side of the 

House have spoken with elegance, passion, and vision. They 

supported with vigour the actions of this government, acts 

which have given back a future to the people of our province. 

They excoriated with force the shameful and felonious 

derelictions of the previous government which put that future in 

jeopardy. 

 

I have a big act to follow, but like my colleagues, my job is 

easy because like them I am speaking on behalf of a throne 

speech which offers a positive plan of eternal virtues of 

cooperation, community, and compassion, a plan that meets the 

challenges of these final years of the 20th century, one that 

prepares us for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st. 

 

I am honoured as well to be delivering this address to you, the 

keeper of the keys of decorum in this House and the guardian of 

the recess bell for those of us who get our work done on time. 

 

There are difficult jobs, Mr. Speaker, but few as difficult as 

yours. You have to be above the fray when everyone in this 

House knows that you would like to be in the middle of it. You 

have to be apolitical in the most political of all arenas. You 

must keep your head when all about you people are losing 

theirs, to quote Kipling. And you must perform these duties 

with the full knowledge that in history your predecessors often 

had a brief and sometimes bloody tenure. I congratulate you and 

I say, with all the sincerity I can muster, better you than me. 

 

As movers before me have said, I am honoured and humbled by 

the knowledge that I am part of a centuries-old continuum. In a 

time when too many traditions are devalued or ignored it is 

good I believe, to remind ourselves that we did not invent the 

world. There were people before us just as there will be people 

following us, and we have a duty to both. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Swift Current is home to some 

of the finest scenery and most independent voters in 

Saskatchewan. We are comfortably distanced from the major 

centres of government and commerce — a wise decision by our 

pioneers, we feel. These pioneers were innovative and 

self-reliant, as they had to be, and that spirit is alive and 

flourishing today. 

 

Mr. Palliser, one of the first Europeans to pass through our area, 

reported back to England that the triangle which still bears his 

name could not support human habitation, an observation that 

got him elected to the Royal Geographical Society. Because of 

ill-advised judgements like his, our people’s sense of 

independence has always had a healthy dose of defiance 

attached to it. 

 

Ours is a beautiful but an imposing landscape, and one has to be 

a self-sufficient problem solver to live there. That landscape has 

produced the Governor General award-winning poet Lorna 

Crozier, a member of the cultural renaissance His Honour 

mentioned. 

 

Swift Current sent to the political legislature one of the first 

woman cabinet ministers, and it produced the first woman 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

leader of a political party in Saskatchewan. Swift Current also is 

the home place of statesmen like Harry Gibbs, Everett Wood, 

John Penner; the seat of championship sports teams; and the 

location of the famous Frontier Days rodeo. Something for 

everybody. I am honoured to be its representative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a tangible and lasting tribute to the spirit 

of our people, Swift Current Health Region No. 1 was a 

successful trial run for the medicare system we have today; the 

system that became the model for Canada in 1962. The system 

in turn has become the prototype for the world in 1997. Canada 

knows where medicare began. Saskatchewan knows where it 

had its trial run. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

know what party fought to introduce medicare. As well, they 

know what party fought and failed to stop it. That party, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Liberal Party, the party with the new member, 

the new leader, and a renewed commitment to yesterday. The 

party with one idea which can be expressed in a number of 

ways — stop; don’t; back up; you can’t; leave it alone; not yet; 

not here; not us. 

 

The Arkansas poet, Maya Angelou, wrote of her home state, 

“Today is yet to come to Arkansas.” She might well have been 

speaking of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. Sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, just like a Liberal, I got a little side-tracked there. 

 

As I said earlier, I am pleased to be speaking in support of His 

Honour’s address because it outlines the continuation of our 

plan to meet the challenges and opportunities of the 21st 

century, the second phase of our renewed mandate from the 

people of Saskatchewan given in June of 1995. This speech, as 

last year’s, is a forward-looking document suitable to the 

singular time in human history, the countdown to a new 

millennium, and two and a half years till all of the numbers on 

the odometer roll over. 

 

It is interesting to note that one consequence of our cultural 

fascination with the millennium is a renewed interest in the past 

book, in the first book of our civilization, the Book of Genesis. 

There have been a number of public re-examinations of this 

first account of our beginnings, both in the national media and 

in numerous study groups of one kind or another. I suppose that 

as we prepare to make a big leap forward it is reassuring to go 

back to the beginning to check our antecedents, so to speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am far from a biblical scholar. I suppose I have 

the same comfortable familiarity with the Old Testament as 

most practising Jews and Christians, in that I think I know more 

than I really do. But I think one reason for this renewed interest 

in Genesis lies in the fact that even in our mythical beginnings 

our defining stories are of individuals striving to become a 

people, of a people striving to become a nation, and of a nation 

attempting first to maintain its existence and then to create laws 

and institutions which will benefit its people in their relation 

with their God and with each other. 

 

In the relation these people, from Adam through Abraham to 

Joseph and his brothers, were sometimes larger than life, often 

heroic, by turns abrasive and humble, occasionally heroic, and 

always deeply flawed; capable of great good, prone to the 

reverse. In short, the Book shows our ancestors to be just like us 

— two steps forward, one step back; progress one day, 

regression the next. But, and this is what has always fascinated 

and inspired me, even though the Deity’s influence is never far 

removed, all of God’s creatures are shown ultimately to be 

responsible for their own destiny. They are granted the 

opportunity to succeed or to fail, to act in the image of their 

Maker or to turn their back on that image. 

 

From the beginning they were human like us and — without 

immersing myself in a theological argument way above my 

head — the stories are inspiring because nothing is predestined. 

Hope is an ingredient of faith. Optimism — very cautious 

optimism — seems to be our original theme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may be drawing a long bow to tie the second 

session of the twenty-third legislature to Abraham and Isaac, 

but I don’t think so. Because in a small sense what we are doing 

here is simply continuing their efforts to use our imperfect 

characters and our limited skills to shape a society which 

reflects our highest impulses and keeps at bay our darker side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  As many speakers in this Assembly have noted, 

government by itself is neither good nor bad. Like a hammer 

which can be used to build or to destroy, government is simply 

the people’s tool to do collectively what they cannot do 

individually. We on this side of the House have a shared 

philosophy of government which was best expressed by the 

Premier. He said, and I quote: 

 

A province or nation represents a moral commitment by its 

members to share a future, a commitment to act together to 

build fairness and equality, and to establish the basic 

conditions and structures of our social and economic lives 

to achieve those goals. 

 

While we believe that this idea of shared opportunity and 

shared responsibility is the tap root of the Saskatchewan 

character, and we also believe that there is such a thing as the 

Canadian identity, it is to be found in this characteristic. Our 

commitment to this idea we believe is part of the historical 

condominium I mentioned. As His Honour said, it is manifest in 

our promise to invest in our province’s people and our future so 

that “We can meet the challenges and opportunities of the 21st 

century.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  The 21st century is not going to sneak up on us. 

It’s been coming for a few years. Planning for it did not begin 

yesterday. We began in November, 1991 by hauling off the 

Tory rubbish of the 1980s, rebuilding the foundation of fiscal 

integrity, and designing the plan which led to our ability to 

make the investment in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



48  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Wall:  Our investment portfolio has six pockets, each 

distinctly important on its own, each intimately connected to the 

others; each, Mr. Speaker, achievable because the people of 

Saskatchewan have the will, they have the vision, they have the 

experience, and they have the leadership in the government of 

Roy Romanow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Now the hon. member will know that it’s not 

proper to refer to hon. members of the Assembly by their proper 

names but only by the offices they hold or the constituencies 

they represent. And I know that the hon. member will want to 

avoid doing that and he’ll want to continue his address. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First, during this session 

we will continue to invest in jobs and the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our economy is robust. The evidence is present for 

all to see. For instance, retail sales increased by 8 per cent 

during the first 10 months of 1996 to 5.7 billion, a rate higher 

than Manitoba’s and — guess what? — higher than Alberta’s. 

This, according to our friends at the Winnipeg Free Press. 

 

Housing starts were up by 56 per cent in the first nine months of 

1996. Oil sales increased by almost 25 per cent in the first nine 

months of 1996. And as a further buoyancy of this particular 

sector, the February sale of Crown petroleum and natural gas 

rights brought the total for the fiscal year to 140.8 million, the 

second highest total ever; 2,840 oil and gas wells were drilled in 

1996. Oil production increased by 10 per cent to approximately 

127.5 million barrels. All that is particularly good news for my 

constituency, but also for a few of the other ones, including the 

member from Kindersley. 

 

There’s more, Mr. Speaker. Farmers harvested many tonnes of 

major grains. Sales of recreational motor vehicles increased by 

21 per cent. Uranium sales increased by 64 per cent. Potash 

sales were high for the third year in a row. Manufacturing 

shipments rose by 8 per cent. 

 

This growth was not achieved by robots, Mr. Speaker. They 

were achieved by Saskatchewan people working in 

Saskatchewan jobs. Our unemployment rate is consistently the 

lowest in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  And because Saskatchewan people are working 

to make the economy grow, the number of Saskatchewan 

people is growing as well. Our population has increased 

steadily since January, 1993. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these jobs are coming not just from our 

traditional industries, but from the industries which have been 

identified as the growth areas of the future — ag biotech, 

communications, tourism. In ag biotech alone, sales are 

expected to grow to 307 million by the year 2000. 

As I said, evidence for all to see, except the opposition. Mr. 

Speaker, I have never heard such a sorry bunch of 

despairmongering Jeremiahs in all my life as I hear from the 

Liberal caucus. 

 

To hear them talk, there is no good news in Saskatchewan. 

There is no one working. For that matter, there is no one here; 

everyone has left. Those that remain weep by the cold evening 

light of the candle stubs donated by their rich relatives who 

have moved to Alberta. It’s a sorry picture they finger paint. 

 

Funny thing though, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals like to brag that 

there were a thousand or so delegates to their leadership 

convention in November where they got together to bemoan the 

sad state of our province. These thousand poor souls stayed at 

the finest hotels, ate the best food Saskatoon has, met in very 

comfortable surroundings, and reports state that there were 

more $500 suits in one place than ever before in Saskatchewan. 

Somebody is working. 

 

And the reason they are working is not an accident. This 

government knew from the beginning that the way to economic 

recovery, growth, and prosperity was the way of cooperation 

and consultation with workers, with businesses, with 

communities, and with cooperatives. We launched the 

Partnership for Renewal in 1992 and followed it with a 

Partnership for Growth a year ago. 

 

Unlike the megalomaniacal megaproject mentality of the ‘80s, 

this partnership is a bottoms-up reasonable strategy that 

unleashes the resources and entrepreneurial talent of 

Saskatchewan. It is built on three simple goals with 21 

objectives, all of which are progressing or on schedule. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  The partnership provides for a positive 

environment for growth which will allow Saskatchewan to 

build on its traditional strengths and new growth opportunities 

and develop programs and partnerships to create full 

employment. While the new Liberal leader and caucus research 

officer cries woe, his traditional friends in the chamber of 

commerce and the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business are full of optimism for Saskatchewan. Their members 

overwhelmingly expect improvement in employment and 

revenue for 1997. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Globe and Mail says Saskatchewan is 

prospering. The Winnipeg Free Press says we are doing well. 

The chamber of commerce is optimistic about our prospects, 

and the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) is 

yelling whoopee. I’m pretty happy myself. It’s sadly obvious 

that the only thing that will make the opposition happy is total 

economic collapse so the rest of us can be as miserable as they 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly happy with the announcement of 

the Southwest Centre for Entrepreneurial Development which 

recently opened its doors in Swift Current. This centre will 

provide business advice, information and resources for our 

area’s youth, potential entrepreneurs, and also for existing 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

businesses. 

 

The SCED (Southwest Centre for Entrepreneurial 

Development) will integrate business, community development, 

and education. It will provide a bridge between the region’s 

high schools and community college and specialized 

entrepreneurial skills needed by the next generation of business 

owners and operators in our area. 

 

The Southwest Centre for Entrepreneurial Development is 

another example of cooperation and consultations between 

regional economic development groups, private sector business, 

and government agencies from the federal and provincial level. 

It could well be a prototype for other centres throughout the 

province investing in our province’s people, Mr. Speaker, to 

meet the challenges of the future. 

 

Part of the mandate of SCED is training — training based on 

the identified needs of the business leaders of the future. 

Education and training is the second pocket of our investment 

portfolio. Mr. Speaker, there was a time not long ago when the 

target of education for many was a high school diploma; for a 

few, a university degree; for most, a strong back. 

 

For good or ill, these times are gone. We still need the three 

R’s, perhaps more so than ever, because there is now so much 

knowledge to pile onto the basics. Changing knowledge, 

knowledge that was revolutionary one day, obsolete the next, 

particularly in science and engineering. Graduates today can 

expect to be back in school during their career almost as much 

as they are on the job. 

 

It is in this context that we are designing our education system 

so that our people remain the best educated and most highly 

motivated anywhere. That is why we initiated our highly 

successful JobStart and Future Skills program, to make sure 

lifelong learning is a reality for our workforce and to make sure 

that learning is tied to the demands of the job market. 

 

In that light, Mr. Speaker, I was interested to read that one of 

the new Liberal leader’s proposals for saving us from outer 

darkness was a plan to tie training to job demand. Brilliant! And 

only a year or two after we had initiated our plan. Yesterday has 

almost come to the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the strong economy with educated workers is not 

an end in itself. It also provides the means by which society as a 

whole may improve the lot of those set aside by poverty and 

neglect, especially the children of our nation who through no 

fault of their own are denied the things we take for granted. The 

most glaring example of our imperfect human nature is the fact 

that society we have created ourselves, a society built in a land 

of plenty, still has the blight of child poverty in its midst. 

 

We can do no better than we have . . . we can do much better 

than we have, and in Saskatchewan we pledge to do so. As a 

government and as a society, we can only use the instruments 

we have to minister to the problem. I’m happy to see that this 

government is working with the other provinces and with the 

federal government to protect children from a life of poverty 

which only perpetuates itself. 

I am proud, as all Saskatchewan’s people should be, that our 

Action Plan for Children was given an award for outstanding 

commitment to children by the Child Welfare League of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  I am also proud that at the urging of the New 

Democratic Party governments here and in B.C. (British 

Columbia), a national action plan to attack child poverty has 

been initiated. Although it’s worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that the 

federal Liberal government announced it will not contribute one 

new dime until 1998. This is one way Liberals are looking 

forward: they invest tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for our children left out of the blessings of our 

culture, tomorrow is not good enough. The author of the Psalm 

said, “Although they have no words or language and their 

voices are not heard, their sound has gone into all the lands and 

their message to the ends of the world.” 

 

It is our duty to make their voices heard, and I believe our child 

action plan along with other welfare reforms announced by the 

Minister of Social Services will do so. And by the way, we will 

do it without giving bus tickets to Alberta or B.C. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, let me speak plainly in words of one 

syllable. Medicare is here to stay. Our health system is stronger 

than it has ever been. Its five principles are intact. The first 

phase of universal accessibility is completed. The second phase 

of revamping and reorganizing the delivery system is well 

under way. It is positioned to serve us into the 21st century. 

Saskatchewan’s health system is the envy of the world. 

 

Saskatchewan still has the highest number of hospitals per 

capita in Canada; 99 per cent of our people live within 50 miles 

of a hospital; 80 per cent of our people live within a 10-minute 

drive of a nursing home. Simply put, if someone needs access to 

a hospital or to a nursing home, they will get it. And any survey 

will show, Mr. Speaker, that if a Saskatchewan person has had 

personal experience with the health system in the last while, 

they are almost unanimously satisfied. 

 

If on the other hand they listen to the irresponsible, fright-wig 

scare tactics of the Liberals, they might think that there is 

something of a problem. 

 

There is a problem, and it’s twofold. One part is 

misrepresentation by the opposition; the other part is the typical 

Saskatchewan Liberal desire to march us smartly to the past. In 

this case, back to a health care system that threatened to sink 

under its own inefficiency. A system which inevitably would 

have lead to the destruction of medicare, which is what the 

Liberals have wanted since 1962 anyway. 

 

Surely the most bizarre spectacle in Saskatchewan public life 

today is the sight of Liberals scurrying about the province 

announcing that they have come to save health care. And 

leading this crusade of the counterfeit saviours is their new 



50  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

leader, the good doctor with salt and aspirin in his bag and a 

vision of medicine as it was practised 50 years ago. A truly 

amazing sight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What do the new Liberals propose for the health care in the 21st 

century? Well first of all they propose an end to the people 

having a say in how it’s practised and administered. After all, 

the 20th century, the century of democracy, is almost over and 

it’s obviously time to end this messy experiment. 

 

The new leader says health care is too important to be left to the 

democratic process. We need highly educated and highly 

knowledgeable people governing the system, he said. After all, 

democratically elected health boards bring health care too close 

to the people it serves. 

 

What next, Mr. Speaker? Education is pretty important too. 

Let’s get rid of those school boards and turn the system over to 

highly educated people who know best. Certainly we don’t need 

civilian police boards. Get rid of them. 

 

Of course the most important sector where we need these 

educated and knowledgeable people is in government. And we 

can’t trust the people with choosing the people who will run it, 

can we, Mr. Speaker? 

 

A highly knowledgeable person like the Leader of the Liberal 

Party would have, he says, kept open the 50 small hospitals 

converted to health centres. A highly educated person like the 

good doctor would have kept the 500 local boards because 30 

health boards are too many. Don’t ask me to explain the logic, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m just reporting what he said. Of course, the 30 

local boards have to go, he says. 

 

Here’s the one I like. We need, he says, the highly 

knowledgeable people to run our system, but he would overturn 

the opinion of three studies by highly knowledgeable and 

educated people which said the Plains hospital in Regina should 

be closed. He cannot even trust the highly knowledgeable 

people. 

 

(1630) 

 

He is opposed to province-wide computerized health data 

resource system. I suppose because it would be up to date. And 

he, his health critic, and his caucus are for a two-tiered system. 

What else can they term their call for pay-as-you-go medical 

clinics? 

 

It’s perfectly clear that Liberals and their Tory clones want to 

return to the top-heavy system of bricks and mortar illness care, 

an out-of-date and expensive system that would be prelude to 

American style privatized health care like we had before 1944. 

 

The answer from this government and the people who support it 

is never. Never again a time when the quality of your medical 

care depends on the depths of your pockets. Never. 

 

Mr. Speaker, others in this debate will go into more detail, but 

what we are doing in this, the second phase of medicare, is 

shifting money and emphasis from institutional care to

 community-based services and home care, because this is 

where many services performed by hospital and nursing homes 

should be. 

 

We are investing the same number of dollars — no thanks to 

the federal governments, by the way — but investing them 

smarter, investing them in new, more effective and 

cost-effective services. Again, in words of one syllable, a New 

Democratic government introduced medicare in Saskatchewan 

in 1962. Liberals and Tories fought it with some of the most 

despicable, underhanded tactics ever seen in this province. A 

New Democratic government saved medicare in 1992 and after, 

by introducing the second phase. Liberals and Tories oppose the 

reform of medicare, just as they opposed its inception. Today is 

yet to come to the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is also committed to improving 

the transportation system in our province. Here I’m tempted to 

turn the floor over to my good friend from Saltcoats because he 

knows better than we how to go about improving the grain 

handling system in Saskatchewan and, by extension, the whole 

transportation network of roads and railways in our province. 

 

What we should do, he said, is to admit with him and the caucus 

the complete superfluousness of the federal Liberal 

government. Although a federal responsibility, the province 

should stop rail branch line abandonment. We should, I 

suppose, rescind the federal Canada Transportation Act of 1995 

which allowed the railroads to move quickly and abandon 

branch lines without consulting the public. This is the Act we 

fought before a House of Commons standing committee and 

before a Senate committee. The provincial Liberal Party said 

nothing then. Now, nearly two years later, after the fact, the 

same Liberal Party wants us to spend more money on roads 

being damaged by the consequence of this branch line 

abandonment they did nothing to stop. More, more of the 

bizarre Liberal world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of our dollars can only be stretched so many 

different ways. But we are investing wisely and planning 

carefully to maintain our roads. I remind us all that we have 

more roads per capita than any province in the country and that 

90 per cent of our traffic is on about 6 per cent of those roads. 

 

We are improving our roads where it is most needed, and we 

are putting together a comprehensive transportation plan to 

address the long-term sustainability of our highways. What we 

need, and what we have been urging, is a national, cost-shared 

highways program — a program that every country in the 

western world has, except Canada. That would be a Liberal 

government showing leadership, and that would be a first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the sixth part of our plan to invest in the future of 

Saskatchewan is to continue our commitment to a fiscal 

responsibility and frugal, good government. 

 

Here I simply say that this government, under the leadership of 

the Premier and with the guidance of two of the ablest Finance 

ministers ever to wield an abacus, we have done exactly what 

we said we would do. 



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

One of the enduring images of this legislature is the Premier 

waving the 1991 election card which begins by promising and I 

quote: “The first things first — common sense financial 

management.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  We promised a balanced budget in our first term, 

and a long-term plan to eliminate the Devine debt, while 

managing our finances frugally and responsibly. We kept that 

promise as we kept all the promises of that card, as we are 

keeping the promises made in 1995. We are keeping our 

financial promise for at least two reasons: one selfish, one not. 

 

First, a government in debt is a government enslaved to the 

financial moguls from the mysterious East and from off-shore. 

We want to manage our affairs as the people want us to manage 

them, not as these outsiders would have us. 

 

Secondly, money going in interest to someone else’s pocket 

cannot go to health care, to education, to highways, to tax 

reduction. A dollar, like everything else in this world, cannot be 

in two places at once. Simple logic, not understood by the 

members opposite. As Lord Buckley, the 1950’s comedian, 

said: “It was just like the jitterbug; it was so simple it evaded 

me”. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, simple logic is our strong suit over here. 

Simple logic that says the way to build a strong, sustainable 

economy is through cooperation and consultation with all the 

players. Simple logic, saying education and training should be 

matched to the realities of the world. Compassionate logic, what 

tells us if some are left out of life’s opportunities, the quality of 

all of our lives is reduced. 

 

Common sense which announces from the mountains that 

quality health care for all is the right of all, not the privilege of 

the few. Simple logic that says society’s infrastructure is the 

business of all governments. Common sense that says in our 

imperfect world, we must be able to pay for what we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the six points in this government investment 

strategy as outlined yesterday by His Honour made sense. They 

represent a marriage of practicality and vision — what we can 

do on the one hand, what we dream of doing on the other. If we 

work, if we cooperate, if we allow free reign to our noble 

impulses, we can move ourselves another small step forward to 

that perfect society we can never achieve but keep as our goal. 

 

We can almost, as Saskatoon songwriter and poet Joni Mitchell 

says, “get ourselves back to the garden.” The garden with which 

the Book of Genesis begins. This is where I began, I believe. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by reaffirming something I said 

last year during this debate. For many years I was a teacher and 

I am proud of my first profession. I don’t want to call it a noble 

profession because those are the ones that are automatically 

underpaid. Now I am a politician and I have no hesitation 

calling it a noble profession — for that reason I just mentioned, 

and for others. 

I am proud to be a politician. I am honoured to be a public 

participant in our democratic process which is, as Churchill 

said, “the worse system of government in the world except for 

all the other kinds.” I am humbled but frankly more than a little 

pleased to realize that my constituents voted for me to be their 

representative. And I am more than willing to put my beliefs 

and principles and party’s policies up for public scrutiny in this 

or any other forum. 

 

And should the time come, I will accept a different verdict from 

my constituents. I do not believe, as a member opposite was 

quoted as saying, politics is a necessary evil. I don’t believe 

that. I do not agree with the House of Commons . . . with the 

member from the House of Commons who said that the House 

of Commons has a poisonous atmosphere. I don’t believe that. 

 

These attitudes and these assumptions have their basis in the 

third-rate, thoughtless clichés appropriate to late-night 

talk-show hosts, attitudes which ignore the parade of fine men 

and women who have served in parliaments and legislatures 

through the centuries; men and women whose footsteps we 

humbly follow. I would not want to speak for others, but I 

believe Tommy Douglas is a much better model than David 

Letterman. 

 

We are human, yes. We make mistakes, certainly. Some of us 

fall pretty far from grace, and when we betray the public trust 

the response must be swift and severe. But I reject the idea that 

there is a disease which we contract at the drop of the writ. 

 

I am proud to serve with you, Mr. Speaker, and with all the hon. 

members of this legislature. Because I am a proud member of 

this Assembly, because I am a joyful member of this 

government, and because I believe in the policies of this 

government as outlined in the Speech from the Throne, I am 

happy to move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable John E.N. Wiebe, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of this present session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to address 

a few preliminary remarks to the House. I am very mindful that 

we will obviously be coming back to continue the important 

work of this session this evening, and so what I want to do right 

now is to address a few preliminary remarks on the subject of 



52  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

And I would like to start out by commending the mover of the 

Speech from the Throne, the member for Swift Current. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  It was obvious, listening to him giving his 

speech, that he has a rich vein of oratorical talent, Mr. Speaker. 

Indeed, I might say he has a rich and a large vein of oratorical 

talent . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Rhetorical too. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Rhetorical too, probably, yes. It is so obvious 

that the people of Swift Current have benefited from his 

tutelage over the years. And it is so obvious that the people in 

this legislature will benefit from his oratory and his rhetoric. 

 

I will be happy to second his motion for approval for His 

Honour’s speech because, quite frankly, the programs, the 

themes, and the policies outlined in the throne speech are 

extremely easy to defend and extremely simple to defend, 

because they make sense. And it is time in this country that we 

had government that made sense. 

 

We have right now a government in one of the provinces of this 

country that talks about common sense, but quite frankly I don’t 

think they’re making any sense at all. And I think that we will 

find, as this session proceeds, that the Saskatchewan way is far 

more the sensible and common sense way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, I listened as the member from 

Swift Current was addressing his remarks. And he talked about 

the great black baseball player, Satchel Paige. And he compared 

himself to that baseball player. 

 

I then listened and I heard the Leader of the Third Party, and I 

must emphasize that’s the third party — that’s not the Leader of 

the Opposition; that’s the Leader of the Third Party — talk 

about perhaps there is another way that the member from Swift 

Current is like Paige, and that is that he would be having no 

hitters. 

 

Well quite frankly I have to say, Mr. Speaker, he is extremely 

wrong. Because what we’re going to see in this session of the 

legislature is a lot of home runs from members on this side of 

the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Unlike the Leader of the Third Party, Mr. 

Speaker, who won’t even get to first base with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think when he decides that he wants to tackle us on either 

baseball analogies or on politics, he’d better take a look at the 

record because, quite frankly, the record of his party with 

respect to their fiscal irresponsibility is not something that  

anyone on this side of the House would ever want to emulate. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the fact that we have a 

fiscally responsible government. I believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan are proud of that fact as well. You can tell by 

virtue of the fact that we form an overwhelming majority in 

government, by virtue of the fact that we are consistently doing 

well on anyone’s polls, and by virtue of the fact that, unlike 

with the members opposite, we have a clear and consistent and 

concise message to deliver to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that message, Mr. Speaker, is a message . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I hear some chirping from the 

members opposite. It’s a little difficult for all those guys in suits 

to chirp, but they’re doing it. Oh, Mr. Speaker, I apologize. I 

was not aware of the member from Humboldt. I didn’t see her 

sitting . . . The member from Kelvington-Wadena, I apologize 

to her. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the Chair is very 

pleased to recognize that there is a great deal of enthusiasm for 

the debate on the Speech from the Throne. And as good news 

. . . as good luck will have it, there’s lots of time and all hon. 

members will have the opportunity to put their remarks on the 

record and I’ll encourage them to put their remarks on the 

record when it’s their turn. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your 

wisdom and for the intelligent perspective you’re bringing to 

this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that reminds me that I would be remiss if I didn’t 

compliment you. It is obviously traditional to compliment you 

on the great job you’re doing maintaining order and decorum in 

this legislature. I realize it’s traditional and I will do it with 

some reluctance because I’m listening to the noise from the 

members opposite and I’m wondering exactly what kind of 

decorum is being displayed in this House right now and what 

kind of example they think they’re setting for the voters of this 

province. 

 

But nevertheless, I do want to compliment you, Mr. Speaker, 

not only for doing a fine job under very difficult circumstances. 

I want to compliment you about something else, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is the excellent job that you are doing by taking the 

concept of parliamentary democracy to all the schools in this 

province. 

 

I would wish that the members opposite would listen for a 

moment because, quite frankly, what the Speaker is doing is 

both revolutionary and evolutionary. All too often when we get 

school groups coming to this legislature, they wonder what 

we’re doing here, why we’re doing it, why there’s so much 

banter to and fro. And they also wonder why the guy that sits up 

at the front prances around in a dress. They don’t seem to 

understand what the concept of being a Speaker is. They don’t 

understand that his robes . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The Speaker will neither  



March 10, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

enter into debate, or should ought the members involve the 

Speaker in the debate. And I simply want to remind the hon. 

member that I think she’s veering very closely to involving the 

Speaker in the debate. And out of respect for the rules of our 

House, I’ll ask the hon. member to continue without doing that. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I do not wish to 

involve the Speaker in the debate. I think that the Speaker does 

an excellent job in maintaining the rules of this House, as has 

just been amply demonstrated. 

 

I do though, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I want to commend you for 

the job, the fine and excellent job, that you are doing by taking 

the concept of parliamentary democracy to the schools. It is 

absolutely imperative, if we are to maintain a democracy in this 

country, it is absolutely imperative that students at an early age 

learn the nature of their government — how it functions, who 

its functionaries are, what they do, and why. 

 

Frankly they don’t get that from the media most often. Even 

when they would watch the televised proceedings in the 

legislature, they would get only a single slice of what goes on 

here — a snapshot, as it were, taken from a fixed-angle camera. 

 

I’ve often heard school children comment on what they see as 

the rather childish nature of some of the proceedings here. And 

it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that by having you go out to the 

schools and explain to the students what is going on here in this 

Chamber, why we do what we do, what the nature of question 

period is, what the nature of the banter, the to and fro comments 

and comedic insults, what they mean, I think that that does an 

excellent job in explaining to the students just exactly why our 

nature of parliamentary democracy is so important. By going 

out directly to the schools, by patiently answering the students’ 

questions, by posing them challenges of your own, you’re 

giving them a real-life notion of what’s involved in the 

legislative process. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you are to be extremely 

commended for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  At the risk of involving the Speaker one more 

time, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you are also to be commended 

for arranging the Commonwealth Day and the observance 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  It was marvellous, Mr. Speaker, to come into this 

building and to see all the school children here and to realize 

that not only were they coming into the legislature and seeing 

how their parliamentarians work but they were also seeing 

people from other Commonwealth countries and were able to 

talk with them and get their perspective of how their 

Commonwealth countries work. 

 

It is that kind of real-life experience, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

will fire the imagination and the democratic passion of those 

students and I think that it is extremely imperative that these 

kinds of things happen in this legislature, in this city, in this 

province, and this country. 

 

Part of the reason I think that, Mr. Speaker, is because these 

days we hear an awful lot of talk about the global village but all 

too often we tend to not have a real clear idea just exactly what 

that global village might mean. I mean we have so many 

millions and millions of people living in this planet, and even 

though we have relative ease of air transportation and 

everything, for most of us we tend not to get too far away from 

our home base. 

 

And so we have a great deal of difficulty understanding what 

some of these numbers in the global village mean. For too many 

people I believe, they think that the concept of global village is 

just a code word for downsizing and union bashing. In fact 

global village is, I believe, our attempt to try to make sense of 

the nature of the world today, and it is imperative that all of us 

understand that we live not only in our own individual 

communities, but we live in a country that exists within the 

larger context of the world. 

 

Canada, quite frankly, in this global village really exists within 

the high-rent district of the global village, and it is important 

that all of us every once in a while stop and pause and reflect on 

the living conditions of people who aren’t so privileged to be 

able to live in the high-rent district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that sense I think it’s important that we take a 

look at what actually is happening in the world today. If we 

were to make sense of the statistics, if we were to hypothesize 

that the world is a village and it’s a village consisting of 100 

people, what would it look like if there were 100 people living 

in that village but we maintained the same ratios of population 

and of achievements that we currently have? 

 

The people who are working for the March 21 observance of 

the International Day for Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

did just that. 

 

And they produced some statistics that I think quite frankly are 

shocking, Mr. Speaker, and I believe, tie in with the initiatives 

that you are trying to accomplish with the observance of the 

Commonwealth Day. 

 

They took a look at what the world would look like if it only 

consisted of 100 people. In that world, Mr. Speaker, 70 of those 

inhabitants of that 100 population village would be non-white, 

30 would be white. Even more amazing, Mr. Speaker, 50 per 

cent of the entire world’s wealth would be concentrated in the 

hands of just six people — 50 per cent of the world’s wealth 

held in the hands of six people. 

 

More shocking yet, Mr. Speaker, those six people would all live 

in the United States of America. Talk about concentration of 

wealth, concentration of power, and concentration of privilege. 

Those are the kinds of statistics, Mr. Speaker, that we — all of 

us — need to be aware of as we prepare to launch our work for 

this session and as we think beyond our own narrow, lean 

horizons. 



54  Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talks 

about the initiatives that this government will be undertaking 

with respect to poverty. Poverty, unfortunately, still exists in 

Saskatchewan and it exists all over the world. Mr. Speaker, in 

that global village of 100 people, 50 of those citizens would be 

suffering from malnutrition, 80 of them would live in 

substandard housing, and only one would have a college 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those kinds of statistics I believe scream out to us 

to recognize our privileged position in this province, and they 

should prompt us to seriously examine the seeds and the 

sources of racism. We all of us as legislators have to work to 

combat racism wherever it might exist, but most particularly 

where it exists in our own backyard. It is a responsibility, it is a 

duty for us as legislators, to combat racism, and we need to be 

doing it in a way where we are actually walking our talk rather 

than mouthing easy words. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do commend you for what you’ve done 

today. I think that by bringing the school children here, by 

having the displays in the rotunda, by having the speaker from 

South Africa address this legislature, you have gone a long way 

to setting an example for the kinds of things that all of us as 

legislators ought to be doing to combat racism in a real and 

practical way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many other things to say about the Speech 

from the Throne. I feel that even though many people think that 

we don’t work when the session is not . . . when we don’t have 

the legislature sitting, in point of fact, Mr. Speaker, probably 

the bulk of the work that we do is done before then, all the 

homework that we do to prepare for the Speech from the 

Throne and for the budget. Mr. Speaker, I think I speak on 

behalf of all members in this House, on all sides of the House, 

when I say that we actually do work very hard, very diligently, 

and we do care about the needs and concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  It now being 5 o’clock, the House will stand 

recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 35 

  Hillson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 35 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 

  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 35 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 36 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 36 

  Shillington........................................................................................................................................................................ 36, 37, 38 

  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................ 37 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 37 

  Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 

  Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 

  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 38 

  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 38 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

  Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 38 

  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 39 

  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

 Agriculture and Food Week 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 39 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 39 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

 90th Anniversary of St. Paul’s Hospital 

  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 39 

  Whitmore ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Property Tax Reassessment 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 40 

  Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 

 Youth Crime 

  Hillson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 41 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 

  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 42 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 42 

 Grain Handling Delays 

  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 

  Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 

 Group Homes Funding 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 43 

  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 

 Compensation for Parents Affected by Labour Standards 

  Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 44 

  Mitchell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 45 

MOTIONS 

 Recess for Commonwealth Day Ceremonies 

  Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 45 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Prorogation Speech Error 

  Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 45 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 46 

  Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 51 

OBSERVANCE OF COMMONWEALTH DAY ..................................................................................................... Back of Hansard 


