






















































Hansard: March 11, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 77 
 March 11, 1997 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of concerned citizens of this great province of ours with respect 
to youth crime, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
establish a special task force to aid the government in its 
fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 
Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 
crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 
violence including the charge of attempted murder of a 
police officer; such task force to be comprised of 
representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 
community leaders, representatives of the Justice 
department, youth outreach organizations and other 
organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also bring forward petitions today on behalf of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the Saskatchewan 
big game damage compensation program so that it 
provides more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers 
and townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, 
shrubs, and trees which are being destroyed by the 
overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 
elimination of the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control 
measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 
big game from causing this destruction. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have pages and pages of these petitions, and I 
see they range everywhere from Avonlea to Spring Valley, 
Melville, Rama — many from the community of Rama — 
Gravelbourg. I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present to the Assembly 
petitions from concerned citizens in Saskatchewan concerning 
the issues of misdirected youth. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
create a special task force to aid the government in its fight 
against escalating youth crime in Saskatchewan; such task 
force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 
municipal police forces, community leaders, 
representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach  

 
organizations and other organizations committed to the 
fight against youth crime. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan, I’d like to present a petition on the big game 
compensation program. 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 
game damage compensation program so that it provides 
more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 
townsfolk for commercial crops, staked hay, silage bales, 
shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 
overpopulation of deer and other big game, including 
elimination of the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control 
to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other big game 
from causing this destruction. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to present petitions on behalf of Regina citizens 
concerned about the closure of the Argyle Elementary School. 
The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to close 
the Argyle Elementary School and instead keep this 
important and viable education facility open and operating 
at full capacity, and in doing so continue to benefit the 
hundreds of children and families in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes primarily from the city of 
Regina residents concerned about this very important issue, and 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions on behalf of many 
hundreds of people from the province of Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 
to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 
long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 
years ahead. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, these come from Saskatoon, 
Nipawin, Carrot River, Regina, Kindersley, Alameda, and well, 
just generally all across the province. And I’m happy to present 
these today. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 



78  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 
revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 
levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 
property taxpayers. 
 

I so lay on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
establish a task force to aid the fight against the problem of 
youth crime in Saskatchewan; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
change the Saskatchewan big game damage compensation 
program so that it provides more fair and reasonable 
compensation to farmers and townsfolk; 

 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse the decision to force hunters to pay the entire cost 
of big game damage; and 

 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan): (1) provide details of any 
meetings taking place between officials of Talisman 
Energy and cabinet ministers, Crown Investment officials, 
and/or any other government official prior to February 13, 
1997, at which the possible take-over of Wascana Energy 
was discussed; (2) what are the dates and locations of any 
such meetings; (3) did any telephone and/or conference 
calls regarding the take-over of Wascana Energy take place 
prior to February 13 between any representatives of the 
government and Talisman Energy; (4) please provide a list 
of all individuals in attendance at any such meetings; (5) 
were any written minutes, briefings, and/or notes taken at 
any such meetings pertaining to Talisman’s attempted 
take-over of Wascana Energy; and (6) please provide 
names of any cabinet ministers and/or other government 
officials who indicated support for the Talisman proposal 
at any such meetings and/or whether they considered 
Talisman’s proposed bid of $18.50 per share a fair price; 
and if so, which cabinet ministers or other government 
officials provided Talisman with this commitment? 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 

no. 9 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance): what percentage of those charged 
with driving with blood alcohol content over .08 in the 
year 1996 in Saskatchewan were under the age of 19; and 
(b) what percentage of those receiving the 24-hour licence 
suspensions due to a blood alcohol content over .04 in 
1996 in Saskatchewan were under the age of 19? 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Thursday next move the first reading of a Bill, the 
non-profit corporations amendment Act, 1997. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: during the 1992-93 
fiscal year, how much revenue did the government collect 
from northern Saskatchewan from the following sources: 
(1) mining; (2) forestry; (3) tourism; (4) personal income 
tax; (5) corporate income tax; and (6) fuel tax? I have 
questions for each of the years of ’92-93, ’93-94, ’94-95, 
’95-96. 

 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Health: (a) which hospitals and/or care 
facilities in Saskatchewan have the capability to administer 
streptokinase for acute heart attack victims and which do 
not; (b) how many of these facilities have access to a 
qualified physician either in the facility or available on 
short notice; and (c) which districts have ambulance 
service capable of cardiac monitoring, heart attack victim 
stabilization, and safe transfer to a coronary care unit? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, it’s my pleasure to welcome today 
fellow parents from Argyle School. My two daughters attend 
Argyle School; and welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure as well to introduce guests seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker — several members of the École Argyle parents and 
community association as well as parents from other 
committees from several Regina schools. These parents are very 
concerned about the possible closure of these nine Regina 
elementary schools. 
 
I would like to add that we have received dozens of phone calls 
from other parents who want to be with us today in the 
legislature. Unfortunately they could not take time away from 
their work. But it’s our pleasure to introduce those folks in your  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, here today to see the proceedings this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I take pleasure introducing to the Assembly my youngest 
daughter, Jeanette, and also a friend of the Liberal Party, 
Jonathon Dennis. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Bruno Axemen — Provincial Broomball Champions 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to congratulate the Bruno Axemen, a midget boys 
broomball team from my home town who won the 
Saskatchewan provincial championship held in Bruno Saturday, 
February 22. 
 
The Axemen, led by tournament co-MVP (most valuable 
player) recipient, Tyler Weiman, allowed only one goal in three 
games to capture the gold medal finish. They opened the 
tournament with a three to nothing win over Saskatoon and 
went on to defeat Odessa two to one, finishing first in the 
three-team round robin. In the final game, they defeated 
Saskatoon again by a score of six nothing. 
 
Congratulations to the Bruno Axemen midget boys provincial 
broomball champions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Housing Starts 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in today’s 
Leader-Post there’s a picture of a new house being constructed. 
This is a normal activity in my constituency which is a rapidly 
growing neighbourhood in south-east Regina and area. 
 
Also on page 4, there is an article which says that I’m not the 
only Regina MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who 
should be happy. In the first two months of this year housing 
starts in the city are up 58 per cent over the same period last 
year. 
 
This good news from the NDP-leaning (New Democratic Party) 
Leader-Post is particularly noteworthy because it comes on top 
of the 1996 figures which tell us that housing starts in 1996 in 
our urban areas increased by 47 per cent over 1995, and by 30 
per cent in the rural areas. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the article states that one reason for 
the increase in new homes is that the market for existing homes 
is so hot that not enough are available to meet the demand. We 
had record sales in 1996 and builders are now scrambling to 
catch up. Sales are expected to increase this spring. Of course it 
takes workers with jobs to build houses, so this is good news for 
workers, builders, and buyers. 

So, Mr. Speaker, here is the question. Do we ignore the 
statistics that tell us the Saskatchewan population stands at its 
highest level since 1989, marking 12 consecutive quarters with 
increases, as the opposition would do; or do we believe our eyes 
and the visible evidence that all about us the Saskatchewan 
economy . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Next member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Louis Morin 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to draw to 
the attention of all members the passing of a very highly 
respected resident of my constituency. Louis Morin passed 
away February 10 at the age of 76. 
 
Mr. Morin enjoyed a long and active life. He was highly 
involved in his community of Turnor Lake, serving on the 
school board, as mayor and deputy mayor of the town council, 
and was also a member of the northern municipal council. 
 
Mr. Morin was also a senator with the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, was president of the Saskatchewan Trappers 
Association, was founder and president of the Northern Fur 
Conservation Trappers Association as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Louis Morin was an adviser and supporter to 
many people and was always available to help anyone. He put 
people’s concerns ahead of his own many, many times. 
 
Louis was a father, a grandfather, a great grandfather and a 
strong believer in northern native people. Louis was best known 
for his strong work in setting up Palmbere Days and working 
for and with the small communities. Louis enriched the lives of 
all those who knew him and even those who didn’t. His 
valuable contributions to those in the North cannot be 
understated. 
 
And I would ask all the members to join with me in expressing 
condolences to Mr. Morin’s wife, Marie Louise, and his entire 
family, and applauding his effort and his long-time, lifelong 
contribution to his people and his communities. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Upgrading of Wheat Pool Elevator in Weyburn 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Agriculture and Food Week in Saskatchewan and as a measure 
to contribute to the awareness of agriculture’s significance to 
our economy, I would like to congratulate the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool on its $8.4 million upgrade to its elevator in 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn elevator will expand its capacity 
from 10,000 tonnes to 32,000, and its ability to handle railcars 
will increase to 112 with a capability of loading 5 cars 
simultaneously. In addition, cleaning and drying facilities will 
also be added to the reconditioned elevator. This expansion will  



80  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

in effect triple the elevator’s capacity and add seven people to 
its full-time staff as well as several part-time staff, as will be 
required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this time of rapid change in the agriculture 
industry, I wish to congratulate the Wheat Pool for its 
expansion in Weyburn. With the expansion, the Wheat Pool 
will continue to provide quality service for the Weyburn and 
area farming community. The Wheat Pool is demonstrating its 
recommitment to producers in Weyburn and area. This, Mr. 
Speaker, is not only good news for Weyburn but for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alberta Provincial Election 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
election day in Alberta and I know it’s a tradition of the House 
to wait until after the election to congratulate the winner, but 
I’m going to be up at Saskatoon at SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) tomorrow so I’m going to 
go out on a limb right now, Mr. Speaker, and congratulate 
Premier Ralph Klein and his PC (Progressive Conservative) 
Party on the election to another PC majority government. The 
only bit of suspense left in this election is whether the Tories 
will win most of the seats or all of the seats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even some of the PCs we talked to in Alberta are afraid the 
province will be left without an official opposition. They don’t 
think that that will be good for Alberta. And we all know what 
it’s like here in Saskatchewan when you don’t have an official 
opposition. You wind up with lousy government like we have 
right now. But regardless of the size of the majority, I know 
Ralph Klein and the PC Party will continue to provide excellent 
government for the people of Alberta. 
 
Recently Dale Eisler wrote that our Premier may actually be a 
little jealous of Premier Klein. In fact I know that it must be 
kind of tough for our Premier stuck here between two 
successful Conservative premiers on each side of him. It’s a 
little bit like a big hunk of Spam stuck in between the sandwich 
of prairie Conservative politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the House will join with me in wishing 
luck to all of the candidates in the Alberta election and 
congratulating Ralph Klein and his PC team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wilkie Citizens of the Year 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, Wilkie got a head start on 
Agriculture and Food Week by celebrating Farmers’ Day on 
Saturday. There were a number of events to mark the day and I 
want to single one out in particular. At the pancake breakfast 
beginning the day, the Wilkie Citizen of the Year awards were 
handed out. Six citizens were recognized with a plaque and with 
a heartfelt round of applause. 
 
The citizens honoured by their community were Kathy  

Heilman, Francis Love, Bill Sittler, Margaret Skinner, Julie 
Brooks, and Wally Lorenz. These six people have worked 
tirelessly to promote the well-being of Wilkie, and I am very 
happy to bring the special recognition of their community to 
this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, because 
people of their calibre and spirit deserve the widest recognition 
possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Karen MacDonald 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
mourn the recent passing of Karen MacDonald of Oxbow in a 
tragic car accident. Karen will be missed by her husband, Ron, 
and by her father and mother, Don and Marni, and the rest of 
the MacDonald family. 
 
Karen was a speech pathologist who was active in band and 
sports and loved life to the fullest. Her family and friends often 
benefited from her great personal warmth. Karen’s father Don, 
Mr. Speaker, is a former member of this House and an active 
resident of the Moose Jaw community. 
 
I’m sure other members will join me in expressing our 
condolences and offering our prayers to the Rodenbush and 
MacDonald families at this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Image Wireless Communications 
Introduces New Technology 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to rise today and applaud the technological innovation that has 
taken place in the city of Yorkton for Saskatchewan. On March 
5, Mr. Speaker, Image Wireless Communications introduced a 
new multipoint microwave distribution system, MMDS in short. 
 
This new technology, first of its kind in Canada, will give rural 
residents affordable access to services that were, until now, 
available only in urban centres. In fact the new system will 
provide access to approximately 60,000 homes throughout rural 
Saskatchewan that do not have cable TV today. Not only will 
rural residents be able to tune into Saskatchewan 
Communications Network, they will also have the opportunity 
to be captivated by the fast-paced, action-packed excitement of 
this legislative session. 
 
As important, Mr. Speaker, the new MMDS system will create 
30 new jobs in the city of Yorkton and throughout the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Image 
Wireless Communications for their entrepreneurial leadership 
in this industry. It is this kind of innovation that will ensure the 
prosperity and vitality of our communities across the province. 
 
I ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to join me in congratulating the 
achievement of Image cable television in their endeavour in 



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

Yorkton, Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Districts Pharmacy Contracts 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
East Central Health District recently sent out tenders for 
pharmacy services for special care homes in that district. One of 
the businesses that received this tender found it strange that as a 
condition for receiving a contract, the successful tender would 
be required to pay a fee back to the district. 
 
This business told my office that they have contracts with other 
districts and have never seen this kind of payback requested 
before. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association 
itself has expressed concern about this type of tendering 
practice. Can the minister tell this House whether he supports 
such a practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe what the member 
says is true to my information and I can tell the member that 
representatives of the Department of Health have had several 
contacts with the district to discuss the matter. 
 
And we have requested, and the district has agreed, to set aside 
the fee until we can consult with the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association and finalize a policy with respect to 
the tendering and provision of pharmacy services to long-term 
care residents. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure 
the member that if upon a proper review this practice is found 
to be an unsuitable practice, this practice is not now being 
followed and this practice will not be followed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One would hope 
that when health districts award these types of contracts, of 
course they will be awarded at the lowest possible cost. Now 
we learn that at least one health district feels it’s necessary to 
charge contractors for letting them provide this service. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the question is, is this as a result of the 
government’s health reform, the wellness model? Is it forcing 
governments as a lack of funding coming from the provincial 
government to stretch to these types of tactics to try and gain a 
little extra cash inflow into their coffers? 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question would be to the minister. He always 
talks about the health districts being on their own, being able to 
make their own decisions, and here he’s stepping in right now 
and saying this isn’t right — it isn’t going to happen again. 
How many more things are going to happen with the districts, 
Mr. Speaker, that the minister is going to have to intervene in, 
and what is his plan for the districts in the future in intervening 

and stopping of them doing their business as they feel 
necessary? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the East Central Health 
District, like every health district, will want to consider matters 
when questions such as the member has raised are brought up. 
They are just as willing to consider the propriety of that kind of 
arrangement as we are, Mr. Speaker, and they’re doing so. 
 
And I think that takes care of that matter, Mr. Speaker. And 
perhaps since the member seems overly concerned about people 
getting money from various sources, while the member is at it, 
why doesn’t the member review the propriety of the Leader of 
the Liberal Party being on the payroll of the Liberal caucus 
office, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Addictions 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
alarmed to hear the minister in charge of Liquor and Gaming 
indicate to the media yesterday that there is nothing surprising 
about the explosion in the number of people attending Gamblers 
Anonymous meetings. I was more alarmed to hear the minister 
indicate that this is an issue that the public should not be 
concerned about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in January the government confirmed that a 
review of the gaming industry was taking place, but an 
examination of gambling addiction would not be part of such a 
review. Will the minister responsible explain why such a 
growing problem is being virtually ignored by his government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And first of all I want to correct the member from Melville. I 
had not said yesterday that there was an explosion or surprised 
by an explosion. That, Mr. Speaker, is the way in which the 
media have interpreted what I had indicated. 
 
What I said, Mr. Speaker, is that in Saskatchewan we’ve seen 
organized, regulated growth in gambling and gaming, and as a 
result of that what we’ve seen is we’ve seen some increases, 
some small increases, in the people who are in fact addicted. 
 
I also indicated to both the member on several occasions that 
we have in Saskatchewan some of the best education and health 
preventative service anywhere in Canada and put more money 
into addictions programing that anywhere in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re leading the nation in that area. 
 
I’ve also indicated and reiterate again, Mr. Speaker, that in 
combination and support with the first nations people, we are 
now leaders in this province in terms of all of the addiction 
services and treatment education that we provide across the 
province. 



82  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  I appreciate the minister’s response, Mr. 
Speaker. However, the latest figures from the province’s 
gambling addiction tell what’s happening. The hot line shows a 
tremendous increase in the amount of people calling to request 
help. The only survey conducted on the gambling addiction 
issue was conducted three years ago before gaming was fully 
introduced in this province, yet the government indicates it is 
adequately funding gambling addiction programs. 
 
Will the minister explain how this government can honestly say 
that it is properly funding gambling treatment programs when it 
has no updated study, which should and would determine the 
level of gambling addiction in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think 
what’s important to recognize here, and I’ve indicated again to 
the member opposite in our discussions that we’ve had in the 
past, that in fact in Saskatchewan we’ve just reached an 
opportunity now where gaming, in terms of its development, 
has finally reached a plateau. 
 
We just opened, not more than two months ago, the final casino 
in Saskatchewan. In this province we’ve capped the number of 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) that we have, in fact reduced the 
number of VLTs that we have in this province. We have bingo 
associations across the province, Mr. Speaker, that are nowhere 
else identified anywhere in Saskatchewan. We’ve been 
monitoring on a regular basis through the Department of 
Health, both through the department offices and 
non-government organizations, the number of people who are in 
fact showing up . . . or people who are identifying some 
indicators of having some addiction issues. And so the whole 
monitoring process has been in continuum. 
 
I want though however, to indicate that recently in an article 
that I read that was in the Alberta newspaper, where in fact the 
member opposite that asked me the question — from Melville 
— indicates that we need to let gambling continue to grow in 
Alberta in support of the Alberta Liberal position. 
 

Wascana Energy Take-over Bid 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Crown Investment Corporation is considering an offer of 
$18.50 a share for their Wascana Energy shares. At the same 
time the board of directors for Wascana Energy, which includes 
two government-appointed members, is recommending that 
investors not sell their shares for this value. 
 
Will the minister explain the difference between these positions 
and assure this House that the interests of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers will be protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite. The province has two roles 
with respect to the offer that’s been made by Talisman for 
Wascana Energy. One is the enforcement of The Wascana  

Energy Act which has requirements with respect to head office; 
and that’s our obligation regardless of ownership. 
 
The second obligation, and separate, is an obligation to assess 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan whether or not it is an 
appropriate price and whether or not to sell. That decision will 
be made before the end of the offering period, either positively 
or negatively, and will be based on external advice to ensure 
that we do get maximum value for the people of Saskatchewan, 
or retain the shares. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the offer to purchase Wascana 
Energy states, and I quote: 
 

Rural employee levels will be maintained for at least six 
months and thereafter the purchaser will demonstrate 
restraint regarding any realignment of Wascana’s rural 
Saskatchewan staff. The rural staff of Wascana Energy 
currently consists of some 250 employees. 

 
Is the minister concerned? And what action is he prepared to 
take about the possible loss of these quality jobs six months 
down the line? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  The responsibility of the government in 
this case is the enforcement of The Wascana Energy Act, as I 
indicated earlier. And we will enforce strictly the terms of The 
Wascana Energy Act. 
 
The discussion between the proponents and the public with 
respect to whether or not a particular offering should be 
received will be dependent on other obligations the offerers 
may want to make. Our responsibility is, as I said, to enforce 
The Wascana Energy Act and to make a decision with respect 
to the eventual disposition of our interests in Wascana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Regina School Closures 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Education. 
 
Madam Minister, the Premier has been saying that this year’s 
budget will see more money for priority areas like education. 
You have repeated that same message as well, and that I think is 
good news. But for hundreds of Regina families that await the 
outcome of the Regina school board’s decision to close nine 
elementary schools, the news isn’t complete, Madam Minister. 
Closing schools is a very serious matter. It directly affects the 
quality of education our children receive, the viability of 
neighbourhoods, property values, and much more. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you dangle money in front of the 
noses of school boards and the future of 800 Regina children 
and their families without telling them what they can expect? 
Madam Minister, how much more money can the K to 12  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

system expect from you and your government this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I too want to welcome the parents of the various schools 
that the Regina school board is looking at closing or amending 
the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very difficult issue. And if you look at 
this issue over the last 30 years, school closures in the province 
of Saskatchewan have been a fact of life. If you look at the 
trends — going back into the ’60s — each year the province of 
Saskatchewan, regardless of funding, schools have closed. And 
if you look at the facts, the facts tend to demonstrate that the 
closures are associated with demographics. 
 
In my own constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, we have seen 
five school closures in my own riding. And one of the reasons, 
Mr. Speaker, is that older people have tended to stay in the 
neighbourhood and younger people have not moved in. Now 
that trend is starting to change. But, Mr. Speaker, if you look at 
the facts in the province of Saskatchewan, it tends to deal with 
demographics, declining enrolment; and if you look at the 
legislation, school divisions have the power to decide whether 
or not a school will remain open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Madam Minister, don’t give us that line about 
how school boards make their own decisions without the 
influence from you. It simply isn’t true. You control the 
purse-strings, Madam Minister. Your cut-backs to education are 
forcing school boards to close schools. You have publicly stated 
that there will be more money for education, Madam Minister. 
You call the shots, ultimately. 
 
This Friday, less than a week before your budget, the Regina 
school board is making a decision whether or not to close nine 
schools in Regina and uproot over 800 children and their 
families. Madam Minister, school boards are saying to you: 
show me the money, show me the money, Madam Minister. 
 
Will you today tell the Regina school board what funds you are 
giving them so they can make informed decisions this Friday? 
Will you do that, Madam Minister? And if not, will you 
postpone the decisions by the board until after the budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I find the question 
coming from that particular member, the Progressive 
Conservative leader, quite interesting. Mr. Speaker, if you look 
at school closures in the province of Saskatchewan, let’s go 
back to the 1982 year when the Tories were in power. There 
was a 9.7 per cent increase in educational funding and look, 12 
schools closed. In 1983-84, there was a 10.5 per cent increase in 
educational spending and 19 schools closed; in 1985, a 9.2 per 
cent increase in educational funding and 13 schools closed. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, when the Tories were in power, there 
were 150 school closures when they were increasing spending 
in education. Since our term of office, there have been 59  

school closures or an average of only 12 schools a year — not 
15 schools a year, as under the Tories. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, it has nothing to do with funding. It 
has to do with declining enrolments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Prosecutions Review Report 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the minister, you notice all those comments were increasing 
education. The school boards made the decisions on the 
closures, not the government by cutting the funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, the Martin report on public prosecutions has been 
sitting on your desk for a couple of weeks now. Will you 
release that report today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The report was 
received approximately 10 days ago and it will be probably 
released, as I said, in about another two weeks. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
we’ve seen many, many problems with your prosecutors’ 
offices. The Milgaard case, the Martensville case, the Latimer 
case, all of these cases have been badly mishandled by your 
public prosecutors. And now we learn that there hasn’t been a 
proper flow of information between prosecutors and police in 
dealing with car thefts by young offenders. 
 
In some cases, prosecutors were advising the judge on 
sentencing without even knowing the offender’s complete 
history. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Martin report is already six months overdue. 
It’s been on your desk for a couple of weeks; now you’re 
talking a couple more. Hopefully, it contains recommendations 
that will improve public prosecutions in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you refusing to release this report? Why 
don’t you release it now? What are you hiding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The report will 
be released in two weeks and the hon. member will have a 
chance to review it at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Crime 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last two days in 
this House have demonstrated some clear points about the 
position of the three parties on the serious issue of youth crime. 
We have a Minister of Justice who minimizes the issue and 
appears indifferent. On the other hand, we have a third party 
which is so irresponsible as to suggest that if we simply lock up 
all our young people and throw away the key, there’ll be no one 
left to steal cars. 



84  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

The official opposition has called on this government to 
demonstrate leadership and establish a special task force to 
examine youth crime and to bring together enforcement 
agencies, youth outreach agencies, native elders, and 
community groups. 
 
Will the minister explain if he remains content to sit back and 
do nothing and ignore the issue, or will he take the first 
important step in dealing with the issue by accepting the Liberal 
recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 
willing to listen to suggestions from all places, including the 
Liberal Party. And we’re looking at the suggestion that’s been 
made. 
 
But what I would say is that we as a government and as the 
ministry of Justice are very concerned about youth crime. 
We’ve always been very concerned about youth crime. And we 
have been working very carefully with the Department of Social 
Services, with the cities’ police forces, with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), with all of the community groups, 
to address this issue. And we will continue to do that work in as 
careful and as clear and as focused a way as we possibly can. 
 
We are also, as part of our theme for this session of the 
legislature, talking about investing in children. And I think it’s 
very important to recognize that 95 per cent of the youth in 
Saskatchewan are good young people who are going to 
contribute to the future of our province. And that with the 
continued emphasis that that party seems to place on this issue, 
they are distorting and taking away from all of the very good 
youth of our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Group Homes Funding 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
in this House I challenged all the members of the legislature to 
join the official opposition in adhering to a $4 food budget for 
one day. This challenge was aimed at highlighting the fact that 
the amount allotted for food to residents of group homes, $4 per 
resident per day, is a rate that is unrealistically low. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue has clearly brought to my attention, and 
that of my caucus colleagues, that it is very difficult to sustain 
oneself both mentally and physically on $4 a day. And it is 
almost impossible to meet the guidelines set out in the “Canada 
Food Guide” on this small budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe it is important that this government get 
the message. We are speaking about a decent food allowance 
for vulnerable members of our society. Therefore I am asking 
the Minister of Social Services once again, will he and his 
caucus colleagues accept this challenge and try to eat well on a  

$4 food budget tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat something 
that I said yesterday. That is that this government is well aware 
of the issues facing the group homes in our province. When I 
meet with the group homes — and I’ve met with many of them; 
I’ve received correspondence with many of them — they tell 
me almost unanimously, Mr. Speaker, that the issue they face 
has to do with the wages and benefits for their employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a letter . . . I received a letter this month 
from the Mackenzie group home which the member referred to 
yesterday, a letter which does not mention the issue of food 
subsidy for their group home. Not a mention in the letter. Do 
you know what this letter mentions, Mr. Speaker? It mentions 
increases to the Canada Pension Plan put on them by the federal 
Liberals. 
 
Now finally let me say this, Mr. Speaker. While I recognize, 
Mr. Speaker, that these are not rich allowances, I want the 
member to be aware that according to the latest work done by 
StatsCanada, available in the Legislative Library right across 
from her office and across from the office of her research staff, 
StatsCanada indicates that according to its latest figures in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the average cost for groceries to feed 
an individual in this province is $3.75 per day. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The Chair’s having a 
great level of difficulty being able to hear the hon. member for 
Humboldt and I’ll ask all hon. members to allow her to put her 
question. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it 
incredibly difficult to believe that this government is concerned 
at all about poverty when the Minister of Social Services does 
not even take it upon himself to in fact take care of those very 
people put under his care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we feel it is important that MLAs learn firsthand 
the implications of their policy decisions in this Assembly. And 
even if it is only a symbolic gesture, it is still important. 
Unfortunately, this government does not see the value in such 
an exercise, and that is part of their problem. They are not in 
touch with the concerns of Saskatchewan people, especially the 
most vulnerable members of our society. 
 
Now with all due respect to the minister, that is a matter that 
falls under his responsibility. We have seen him duck the issue 
and we have seen his lack of sensitivity to the issue. This is 
becoming increasingly apparent to those requesting his help, 
and the general public. 
 
Will the minister explain when we can expect a sign of 
leadership from him and his government instead of excuses and 
meaningless lip-service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, only the Liberal caucus  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

does not recognize that this government has shown leadership 
nationally on the issues of benefits to families and children, 
recognized most recently in a Champions for Children award 
delivered on a national basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I invite the member, I encourage her, to encourage that 
high-priced research staff they have working for that caucus to 
do some real research before they come into this House. I repeat 
again, according to StatsCan — this is based on the most recent 
census figures — the average cost to feed an individual per day 
in store-bought groceries is $3.75. 
 
I recognize, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, that our group 
homes face some real financial challenges — we’re well aware 
of that and we’re giving it active consideration — related to 
staff costs, to staff benefits. Not the least of the benefits which 
is causing the group homes problems now are increases in the 
Canada Pension Plan benefits demanded by the Liberals. 
 
And I repeat again, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, if this caucus 
wishes to substantially address the issues of poverty in our 
province, they would stand with us in addressing the federal 
Liberals about the cuts to social programs which have 
decimated programing across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Flood Damage 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each 
year during fire season we hear the government address the 
problem accordingly by budgeting the necessary funds. 
However, when flooding occurs, Saskatchewan residents are 
left to fend for themselves as their crops and their livelihood are 
washed away by spring run-off. 
 
Will the minister in charge of Sask Water explain how his 
government has determined that fire is an emergency and 
flooding is not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would be more than happy to describe the work that 
has been done by this government with respect to the potential 
for flood in this upcoming spring. 
 
Sask Water has been working with other arms of government 
with respect to emergency planning. We have been monitoring, 
informing municipal governments and farmers with respect to 
potential damage in their given circumstance. We have been 
working with the Saskatchewan Emergency Planning group to 
deal with information and dissemination of information. 
 
Municipal government emergency measures advisers are on 
24-hour stand-by. We have turned over the government supply 
of sandbags to the appropriate municipalities. There is a 
brand-new crop insurance program in place, put by the Minister 
of Agriculture, for this upcoming crop season. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, a provincial disaster assistance program is in 
place for municipalities that may in fact incur problems. 

So for the member to stand in this House and suggest that the 
government has not been doing their job is absolutely, totally 
inaccurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204  The Education and Health Tax 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have it prepared. 
Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend the 
education and health tax, 1997 now be introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1997 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of a Bill, of Bill 
No. 2, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 1977 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
Bill No. 3, The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board 
Amendment Act, 1977 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move first reading of Bill No. 4, 
The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1997. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
I’d ask leave of the House to move some motions of 
condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 



86  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I 
believe that we have three former members that we wish to 
recognize, and I’ll say a few words about each one of them; at 
the conclusion of each individual member, move the 
appropriate motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first rise today to pay tribute to the passing of a 
former member of this Assembly, Mr. Arthur Kluzak, of 
Climax, Saskatchewan. Art Kluzak was born on July 13, 1906, 
at East Grand Forks, Minnesota, U.S.A. (United States of 
America). He leaves to mourn his two sons, Gord and Glen, one 
daughter, Helen, and numerous grandchildren. Mr. Kluzak was 
predeceased by his first wife, Hazel, in 1980 and his second 
wife, Betty, in 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Art Kluzak was raised on the family homestead in 
the Canuck district and later farmed there. In addition to 
farming, he was involved in several other ventures. He was a 
grain buyer with the Saskatchewan Pool elevators at Climax 
and at Tompkins. He owned an auto court in North Battleford 
and for a period operated the Climax Hotel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kluzak was also active in farm and 
community organizations. He helped organize the Co-operative 
Livestock Association in Tompkins and played a leading role in 
establishing the local stock yards there. He was a member of the 
school board in the Canuck district and served on the village 
council from 1954 to 1960. As well, he served as president of 
the Climax Board of Trade and the local Co-op Locker Plant. 
 
Art Kluzak was first elected to this House in 1960 as the then 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) member of the 
Legislative Assembly for the Shaunavon constituency. Art 
served one term with the Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd 
governments before returning to Climax to farm. In 1975 he 
retired from farming. In his retirement years he continued to 
spend his summers in Climax but also enjoyed the warm 
weather of Arizona in the winters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I can speak for many members of this 
House when I say that Art Kluzak will be remembered and 
missed for his dedication to his community, his province, and 
his country, his commitment unending to social justice, and his 
service to the political people, the political life, and the quality 
of life of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move, seconded by the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 
That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Arthur Kluzak, who died in Calgary on October 24, 
1996, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 
constituency of Shaunavon from 1960 until 1964. He was 
born on July 13, 1906 at East Grand Forks, Minnesota and 

 moved with his family to the Canuck district in 
Saskatchewan in 1912. He spent his childhood on the 
family homestead and was educated at local rural 
schools. Later he operated his own farm with his wife, 
Hazel, who he had married on October 9, 1930. 

 
Mr. Kluzak’s farming background led to his involvement 
as a grain buyer with the Saskatchewan Pool elevators at 
Climax and Tompkins. He organized the Co-operative 
Livestock Association in Tompkins and then played a 
leading role in establishing the local stock yards. 
 
Mr. Kluzak’s business interests extended beyond his 
farming operation. He owned an auto court in North 
Battleford for six years and later owned and operated the 
Climax Hotel. Throughout his life, Mr. Kluzak was an 
active participant in a variety of community organizations. 
He served on the school board in the Canuck district, and 
later as a village overseer from 1954 to 1960. While living 
in North Battleford, Mr. Kluzak was a member of the 
rotary club and chamber of commerce. He served as 
president of the Climax board of trade and with the local 
Co-op Locker Plant. 
 
Mr. Kluzak entered provincial politics in 1960 by winning 
the Shaunavon constituency. Following his term in office 
he continued to farm until his retirement in 1975. 
Predeceased by his wife, Mr. Kluzak married Betty Miller 
in 1981. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to add just a few comments following what the 
Premier’s comments were, and as I think he laid out, Art was 
very much a community man and very much a family man. And 
I think Art knew all too well the struggles that people went 
through, especially through the ’30s, living in rural 
Saskatchewan. And Art, of course, had to deal with some of the 
struggles that were very hard to overcome. 
 
And in fact in light of one very unbearable situation that Art 
found his family to be in, having being faced with a young son 
with some medical problems and a family without financial 
resources to take care of those medical problems, really 
became, I think, the driving force behind Art’s desire to get into 
politics to fight for certain things that he truly believed in — 
and fight hard for those things. What he wanted for himself and 
for his family, he wanted for everyone in the province. And I 
know that his family and friends are very proud of his 
achievements in that area, fighting for a very comprehensive 
prepaid medical insurance program. I know he championed that 
issue as one of his own. And I know that the Shaunavon 
constituents at the time, and still do, talk very highly of Art’s 
accomplishments in this area. 



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

The other thing that I think Art should . . . you know, will 
always be remembered for of course is his family involvement. 
He’s known throughout his family and . . . I’m a very close 
personal friend of the Kluzaks — our family has been for many 
years — and know many of the stories from talking to his 
grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
 
And Art became somewhat of a . . . his phone, his home, was 
the switchboard for all the family concerns. Because I believe 
his daughter lives in Quebec if I’m not mistaken; he has one son 
in Alberta, and the remaining family members, I think the bulk 
of them, are around the Climax area and Shaunavon area. 
 
(1430) 
 
And of course he took quite an involvement in especially his 
grandchildren and great-grandchildren. And many times I 
would see Art in the last three, four years at the Shaunavon 
Public School. He seemed to always be there attending different 
functions put on, to watch, you know, Dara or some of the other 
. . . Donovan, in school plays and such. 
 
And of course the Kluzaks are known for a lot of hockey 
ability. And we all know all too well of Gord’s 
accomplishments. But Art took a great desire in the game and 
he was always seen at the rink watching some of his 
grandchildren or great-grandchildren playing and always loved 
to talk about the game. 
 
The other place where Art and I used to enjoy some 
conversations, and I’d see him there every so often, were at 
some of the town hall meetings, at the senior citizens’ centre. 
Art was always there. And whenever he saw me in the crowd, 
he made sure that there was a seat beside me. He would ask 
somebody to clear a seat because he just loved to talk politics 
— not at the level where we’re debating, you know, whether to 
vote for this party or that party, but at a different level, one of 
what we can all do regardless of party stripe to enhance the way 
people live. 
 
He was always there to add his voice at the seniors’ meetings to 
ensure that the health care for the people that he knew and were 
surrounded in his community wasn’t jeopardized. And he 
always wanted his view put forward and it was one that was 
very common sense and always appreciated. And I know from 
talking with many of Art’s family or family members, he’s 
going to be . . . is and will be sorely missed. 
 
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of the PC caucus to join with others and other members 
in recognition of Mr. Kluzak, the former member for the 
constituency of Shaunavon. And of course his home, as was 
indicated, was in Climax. 
 
I’m sure that Mr. Kluzak would have been one who could have 
easily told the Liberal Party how it was to live on $4 a day for 
most of his life, having gone through many of the experiences 
of rural Saskatchewan, as people around the province did 
during those times of his lifetime. 

As we have already heard, Mr. Kluzak served as the MLA from 
1960 until 1964, certainly a challenging time in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Kluzak led an active and full and rich life, as 
we have heard, and we attest to that from his reputation. His 
family must feel extremely fortunate that their father, uncle, and 
grandfather enjoyed life to its fullest for 94 years. 
 
Although born in the United States, Mr. Kluzak was close . . . 
chose, rather, to remain in Canada and chose to be a part of the 
system here and a part of the community that he lived in. Mr. 
Kluzak obviously held the Prairies close to his heart because he 
stayed with them through thick and thin. 
 
Mr. Kluzak made many important contributions to the 
Shaunavon area and was integral in many of the cooperatives 
and agricultural organizations in Shaunavon and in the 
surrounding area. And certainly we don’t need to go over that 
list again, but we do acknowledge that very long list, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know that Mr. Kluzak will be fondly remembered and greatly 
missed for many years to come. And, Mr. Speaker, we would 
just say that in recognizing this fine gentleman, it doesn’t matter 
what party he was with, as the other members have indicated 
his political philosophy by reputation. And I have to say by 
reputation because I didn’t have the honour of knowing this 
gentleman in person. But certainly, living close to where he 
came from and watching his political career and his life, his 
reputation indicated that he had strong ties for the community, 
and we acknowledge that today. And we wish the family our 
condolences as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I rise today to, along with other 
members of the Assembly, remember Art Kluzak, who 
represented the Shaunavon constituency between 1960 and ’64. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many years ago, when I was much younger, I had 
an opportunity to work for the then federal government as a 
customs officer at the border crossing at Climax and I, at that 
time, got to know the Kluzak family, including Art, relatively 
well. 
 
And I want to say that in getting involved in politics, one of my 
mentors at that time, in fact, was Art Kluzak and the principles 
that he represented. And Art was on the executive of the then 
NDP in the Shaunavon constituency and we had many 
conversations about the advantages and disadvantages of 
getting involved in politics. 
 
One of the things that always stuck in my mind was the 
commitment that Art had to the principle of medicare. And he 
often talked about the moments of his political career that stood 
out over and over again, was here in the Assembly and around 
the Assembly, around the province, the great debate in 1962 
when he, along with the CCF, endeavoured to implement 
medicare, what then came to be a national program across this 
great country. 
 
And I want to say that those years that Art lived in the 
south-west, a very, very, obviously dry area of the province, 
tough to make a living. The people who came there early were a  



88  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

very, very distinct group of people. And Art, being the son of 
Czech immigrants, homesteaded in the Canuck area. 
 
And I want to say that the comments and article that I want to 
quote from, from the Commonwealth back in 1959 I think, tell a 
lot about the character of Art Kluzak, And in this article of 
November 18, 1959 it says: 
 

A product of rural Canadian schools, married with three 
children and four grandchildren, it would seem inevitable 
that such a product of farm life, so plentifully endowed 
with energy and vision should be selected to bear the CCF 
standard in the constituency which he knows so well and 
which he has helped to build. On his record, a better choice 
than Arthur Kluzak would be hard to find. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that it really is with those 
thoughts in mind that I stand here today to remember Art 
Kluzak along with other members of the Assembly. 

 
I want to join with the member from Wood River when he says 
that Art was very, very close to his family. He was ever so 
proud, particularly, of his grandchildren. And I know that his 
granddaughter Norma and her husband, who live on the farm at 
Claydon, when I would visit there, he would often show up with 
fresh vegetables that he would have grown in his garden after 
he retired as a very successful farmer in the Climax area. 

 
I want to say as well that the last time officially being with Art 
was at the induction of his grandson Gord to the Saskatchewan 
Sports Hall of Fame here in Regina, at the Centre of the Arts. 
And I remember Art wiping away tears from his eyes as Gord 
was inducted into the hall of fame. 
 
And it’s with these pleasant memories of a very, very dear 
friend that I want to add my condolences to his children — his 
son Glen, who still operates the family farm at Climax; his son 
Gordon of Calgary, who he was with at the time of his passing; 
and to his daughter Helen from Montreal. 
 
And I would like to join other members in offering condolence 
to all his family members and friends. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise this time to pay tribute to the passing of another 
former member of this Assembly, Mr. George Leith of 
Winnipeg. 
 
George Leith was born at Saskatoon on June 18, 1923. He 
leaves to mourn his daughters, Margaret, Georgia, and Deborah; 
sisters Margaret and Edith; and numerous grandchildren. 
George Leith was predeceased by his wife, Beryl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, George Leith was raised on the family farm in the 
east-central part of Saskatchewan. He was educated at Padgate 
School, later City Park Collegiate in Saskatoon, and then went 
on to take further studies at the University of Saskatchewan. In 
1943 George Leith enlisted in the Canadian Forces, and  

following the Second World War, returned to Saskatchewan to 
continue farming. 
 
George Leith was first elected to this Assembly in 1964 as a 
Liberal representative for the constituency of Eston-Elrose and 
served for two terms. In 1971 he ran for Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party, which inspired around his 
leadership the formation of a group called group 171, as I recall 
it, or leadership 171, the number of the supporters who he 
initially attracted and the loyalty of the supporters around the 
ideas which he advocated at that time, running for the party 
leadership. They were very much enthralled and enthused with 
the ideas that this dynamic group of young Liberals and other 
Liberals contributed to the Leith candidacy. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that I recall George Leith on a 
personal basis since I entered the House here in 1967. George 
served in many capacities as the Chair of various committees of 
this House. And many qualities come to mind. The fact that he 
was very approachable and a very personable person is the one 
that immediately comes to my mind. I think this is also a very 
important characteristic in politics, which sometimes I think we 
forget a little bit about today, because we’re able to carry out 
our differences . . . we should be able to carry out our 
differences here on political grounds, partisan grounds, in the 
House and yet be able to approach each other outside this 
legislature as people with varying political philosophies to be 
sure, but none the less still dedicated to the common good of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
George was that kind of a person. You could really share all 
kinds of talk with him and it would be done in a friendly way, 
personable way, and in a confidential way. 
 
Another characteristic which enters my mind is his fairness. In 
the chair he was very, very fair. I got into one dispute with 
George in the chair when I was seated over in opposition. I 
forget what the debate was about. George asked me to withdraw 
some remarks which he viewed to be intemperate. I can hardly 
imagine today that I would be guilty of such an offence, but 
apparently I was. And as a new member of the House I didn’t 
know what to do, whether to withdraw the remarks. I mean I 
knew I should withdraw the remarks, and half of my colleagues 
were saying don’t withdraw the remarks; hang in there; make 
your point. The other half were saying, withdraw. 
 
I was saying, where’s my leader? I need some advice as to 
whether to withdraw or not. My leader was not available at the 
time so I was left on my own. We brought in then another 
person who is of a different dimension but, and I say this in a 
loving way, was a character of this House, Jim Snedker. Jim 
was the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so with the greatest respect to 
you, unlike you, whenever Jim Snedker got angry — and I 
know you get angry; you contain your anger — Jim used to take 
off his glasses in anger and would just simply flip them down 
on the table in front of you with such force they’d slide straight 
off the table and down on the floor and of course then he 
wouldn’t be able to see his papers and make the proceedings. 



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

Well anyway they adjourned the committee meeting in order to 
call in the Speaker to give me one more last chance as to 
whether to withdraw or whether to stick by my guns. And I was 
scared. I didn’t know what to do. At that stage in the game, to 
make a long story short — or long — I ended up apologizing to 
the House. 
 
Mr. Snedker, Speaker Snedker, left the chair. George Leith 
returned to the chair and two minutes later I got a little notation 
from George saying, Roy, you did the right thing — not to me 
but to the institution of the Assembly. 
 
(1445) 
 
And believe it or not, ever since that time I have always, always 
accepted, believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, the ruling of Mr. 
Speaker and of the Chair regardless of who occupied that 
particular position. 
 
So he was fair, and he was very intelligent — highly intelligent, 
well educated. And I don’t say this with any partisan terms. 
George Leith really gave what the Liberal Party I think 
desperately needed in that period of time. It went through a 
devastating defeat in 1971, and as so often is the case with 
recriminations and analyses as to why the defeat takes place, is 
the danger that any political party, any organization, can tear 
itself apart. 
 
George Leith joined the campaign which ultimately was won by 
Davey Steuart — another great politician, Davey Steuart, by the 
way. And George Leith brought to that leadership campaign the 
dimension of new intellectual thought, I felt, if I may say so as 
an outsider, to the Liberal Party. It was needed. It moved the 
debate beyond recriminations. It permitted Davey Steuart to 
continue on as leader and to expand the tent, as it were, to 
incorporate some of the ideas that group 171 advocated. 
 
And I think while it didn’t work out for the best, as things have 
proven to be the case historically for the Liberal Party over the 
years since ’71, what it did do is, I think, played a very vital 
role in making sure that this great party, Liberal Party — I don’t 
subscribe to it, never have — but this great party of Canada was 
a very viable entity from 1971 onwards. And George Leith 
contributed to that debate on a provincial and national basis. 
 
Well I could tell you other anecdotal stories and other versions 
of my life here in this House with George Leith, but this is 
really a person who I truly, truly have missed from political life 
and mourn in his passing today. 
 
In the 1970s, George continued his political involvement after 
moving from this House by being special assistant to Eugene 
Whelan, the federal minister of Agriculture. I often wonder, by 
the way, how that could have been a mix and a match, but none 
the less it apparently worked out fairly well. 
 
And then George Leith in 1986 opened up a new chapter in his 
life and career. He served in a very distinguished manner as 
Chief Commissioner of the Canadian Grain Commission until 
1989. And then in 1990 he chaired the National Committee on 
Grain Transportation. Goodness knows how important that is  

today — always — in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
George Leith enjoyed many, many activities in addition to his 
work. He was a member of numerous organizations such as the 
Saskatchewan Flying Farmers, the Masons, the Royal Canadian 
Legion, and he was very active in the United Church. During 
his retirement years, George Leith spent his time doing the 
things he loved most — a little bit of golfing, a little bit of 
travelling, a little bit of flying; I guess a little bit of politicking. 
I didn’t know this, but they say even a little bit of wine-making. 
Maybe even a little bit of wine-tasting. At least I hope that was 
the case as well. His close friend, Evelyn, joined him in his 
pursuits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I can speak for many members of this 
Assembly when I say that George Leith will be remembered — 
and missed — for his warmth, his dry wit, his generous spirit, 
and his great contribution to the people of Saskatchewan and 
Canada. Therefore I move, seconded by the Leader of the 
Official Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
George Gordon Leith, who died in Winnipeg on May 31, 
1996, was a member of the Legislative Assembly 
representing the constituency of Elrose from 1964 until 
1971. Mr. Leith was born on June 18, 1923 in Saskatoon 
but was raised on the family farm in the east-central part of 
Saskatchewan. He received his early schooling at the 
Padgate School and continued his studies at City Park 
Collegiate and the University of Saskatchewan in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Leith enlisted in the Canadian Forces in 
1943, serving first with the army and then with the air 
force. Following the war, he returned to Saskatchewan to 
resume farming. 
 
Mr. Leith’s provincial political career began as a candidate 
in the Eston constituency in the 1960 general election. He 
did win election to this Assembly in 1964 and again in 
1967. Mr. Leith unsuccessfully sought a third time but 
continued to be a very active participant in his party, 
including seeking the leadership of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party in 1971, as I’ve described. 
 
In the early 1970s Mr. Leith’s political interests shifted to 
the federal level when he served as a special assistant to 
the federal agricultural minister, Eugene Whelan. Mr. 
Leith’s appointment to the Canadian Grain Commission in 
1976 began a lengthy period of service which included a 
term as Chief Commissioner from 1986 to 1989 and 
another as chairman of the National Committee on Grain 
Transportation in 1990. 
 
At home in his community, George Leith was a member of 
the Sovereign Masonic Lodge No. 192, the Lodge of 
Perfection, Rose Croix, Scottish Rite, past president of the  



90  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

Rosetown branch of the Royal Canadian Legion. He also 
had an interest in flying and belonged to the Saskatchewan 
Flying Farmers. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to add to the words of the Premier, in memory of 
Mr. George Leith. 
 
Mr. Leith was remembered as a man of dry wit and generous 
spirit. He will be sadly missed by his family and friends and I 
wish to offer them my condolences and recognize the great 
contributions Mr. Leith made to the province, to the county, and 
to the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
World War II veteran, farmer, politician, and public servant, 
Mr. Leith wore many hats throughout his public life. A 
prominent and well-respected member of the Liberal Party, Mr. 
Leith served the Eston-Elrose constituency in the 1960s. 
 
In 1971 he made a bid for party leadership, but his career took 
him to Ottawa where he served as special assistant to the 
minister of Agriculture. From there he moved to Winnipeg 
where he served on the Canadian Grain Commission, eventually 
becoming the Chief Commissioner, as already noted. 
 
As his career progressed, Mr. Leith helped shape our 
agricultural industry for Canada. But his contributions at the 
national and provincial levels do not overshadow his 
community involvement. A Mason and a legionnaire, Mr. Leith 
was known for his wide-ranging interests. He never lost the 
love of flying he developed in the air force and was a member 
of the Saskatchewan Flying Farmers. 
 
During his retirement, he kept in close touch with family and 
friends as he explored art, literature, music, and the world 
beyond Canada’s borders. 
 
With his passing, his loved ones and our country lose a man of 
warmth and dedication. Today I would like to ask all members 
of the House to join me in recognizing the contributions Mr. 
Leith made to our province. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
join with other members in remembering the life and service of 
George Gordon Leith. George Leith was a man who gave much 
to his community; he was a man who cared. Mr. Leith 
represented the Eston-Elrose constituency, part of which I now 
have the privilege of representing. He was indeed a political 
institution in the area. 
 
Mr. Leith was involved in many different organizations 
including the Masons, the Rose Croix and Scottish Rite. He was 
president of the Rosetown branch of the Royal Canadian Legion 
and a member of the Saskatchewan Flying Farmers. And still 
Mr. Leith found time to serve his community to the  

fullest in both federal and provincial politics. 
 
I didn’t know Mr. Leith personally, but I’ve heard many kind 
words for and about Mr. Leith. George Leith demonstrated, 
through example, the kind of life all of us strive for: a life filled 
with integrity and honesty; a life of working and giving to 
others. He’ll be sorely missed by his family and friends 
scattered throughout the province. 
 
We offer our most sincere condolences to Mr. Leith’s family 
and friends. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I too join with others to offer 
our condolences to the family of Mr. George Leith. George 
Leith was the MLA for the Eston-Elrose constituency, as it has 
already been said, which is part of the larger constituency of 
Rosetown-Biggar now. 
 
I also did not have the chance to meet Mr. Leith, but I did have 
the opportunity to be exposed to his family; they were 
well-rooted in the Liberal tradition. As a fledgling New 
Democrat in the early 1970s, I had the privilege of scrutineering 
in a poll in the Glamis area. I think we got one vote in that poll 
at that time. And so it speaks to the respect that was there for 
the traditions which George had established and from which he 
had grown. 
 
George, as already been said, was a member of the community; 
rich in family experience, and a great contributor to the 
community locally, provincially and abroad. 
 
He served, as you have heard, our province with integrity and 
with great honour, and went on to serve at the national level, 
both in his role with the Hon. Eugene Whelan and also as the 
Chief Commissioner of the Canadian Grains Commission, 
serving our agricultural industry and bringing honour to 
Saskatchewan and to the agricultural industry. 
 
So I want to register, with others, my sorrow and regret at his 
passing, and to express our appreciation for the lasting 
contribution he’s made to our province. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to attach my 
name to those of the former members that spoke so eloquently 
on behalf of the memory of George Leith. 
 
Mr. Leith was my MLA in the constituency that he represented 
from the time that I was 11 until I was 17 or 18 years old. And 
though it’s safe to say we did not share the same party 
affiliation, I know there was always a great deal of respect for 
George Leith, and a tremendous amount of respect for his 
community involvement in the sense of where he came from 
and what he stood for. 
 
I want to share one other part of George’s life that I believe I’m 
. . . I shared a part of that more so than anyone else in the 
legislature. And that was, during George Leith’s run to become 
Leader of the Liberal Party, this now MLA had a George Leith 
button on. I and a cousin of mine went to that Liberal leadership 
convention just to poke our noses in and see what was going on, 
and we had a grand time up in the Leith suite  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

upstairs. 
 
In George’s suite there was coffee and tea. You could have 
milk. There was certainly cookies and dainties around. My firm 
recollection, at the ripe old age of 17, was there was a different 
leadership candidate whose room was hopping more with some 
of the stronger spirits, if I may describe it that way. 
 
But I was in fact quite pleased to be wearing the Leith badge 
because, if the Liberals indeed needed a leader, I felt at the time 
that George Leith would’ve made the best leader — I hope the 
family will forgive me for this if I say it — the best leader out 
of a bad lot. But I say that with a smile on my face. 
 
I am, Mr. Speaker, honoured to have been able to celebrate a 
part of George Leith’s life and I certainly express my 
condolences to his three daughters and the balance of the 
family. Indeed, George Leith served a very honourable life and 
one that we should be proud of. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, at this time I rise to pay 
tribute to the passing of yet another former member of this 
Assembly, the late Mr. Dmytro Zipchen of Saskatoon, better 
known as Dick Zipchen. 
 
Dick Zipchen was born on August 10, 1905 in Western 
Ukraine, part of the world that my mom and dad came from. 
The following year he came to Canada with his family and he 
spent his childhood on the homestead near Hafford, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He leaves to mourn his son Roman, two daughters, Patricia and 
Lucille, and numerous grandchildren. Dick was predeceased by 
his wife, Mary, and daughters Natalie and Margaret. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dick Zipchen attended a one-room school in the 
Hafford district. He later completed courses in mechanical 
engineering and weed control at the University of 
Saskatchewan. He operated the family farm at Hafford, a farm 
that has now been in the family for four generations. In addition 
to his farm work, he was a weed inspector for the RM (rural 
municipality) of Redberry. During the 1930s he started an 
implement business, and to show you how well-rounded he 
really was, Dick Zipchen was also an auctioneer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Zipchen began his lifelong commitment to his 
community and the people of Saskatchewan as a young man 
when he served as a secretary-treasurer of Nauka School, and 
later as board member of the Blaine Lake School District. 
 
In 1936 he served on the Hafford town council and was a reeve 
of the rural municipality of Redberry for eight years. In 1946 — 
and I’d like members to note this — Dick Zipchen was Chair of 
the first board of the Hafford Union Hospital. This board 
introduced its own hospitalization scheme one year prior to the 
introduction of the province-wide hospitalization scheme. That 
takes a lot of guts and foresight and a lot of hard work. 

Dick Zipchen was active in cooperative ventures. He believed 
in cooperation. He was one of the first members of Co-op 
Implements Ltd., served on the board of directors of the 
Hafford Co-op Association and the Hafford Credit Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dick Zipchen was elected to this House in 1952 as 
a CCF member for the Redberry constituency. And as an MLA 
he served on the committee that established the guidelines for 
the grid road system in the province of Saskatchewan, still 
today an integral feature of our province. 
 
Dick Zipchen always maintained an interest in community and 
in politics. I never knew him, Mr. Speaker, in the sense of 
serving with him in the Legislative Assembly — even I can’t 
say that with respect to Dick — but I sure knew him from the 
Redberry constituency. 
 
There were two Dicks there who were absolutely dynamos — 
Dick Zipchen and then followed by Dick Michayluk — and 
these two were probably the most personable, easy to meet and 
approach politicians that I have ever met. And they were 
passionate about their ideas and their ideals. 
 
And if you’ll notice Dick Zipchen’s background as I’ve 
outlined it to you, one may not particularly argue that this is a 
person who took the benefit of high university learning and 
extended education, yet he had a worldliness about him and a 
knowledge about him about the issues of the day, which is 
exemplified by this example of the first hospitalization scheme 
in his area and exemplified by the grid road system and 
exemplified by his lifelong passion for debating ideas. 
 
And when these guys were on the stage . . . Well I’ll speak 
about the late Dick Zipchen for the moment although the same 
comments apply to Dick Michayluk — maybe Dick even on a 
slightly aggravated basis — they would get going, in English, to 
a large crowd. And in the middle of an English sentence, would 
drop in four or five or six or eight words or even phrases in 
Ukrainian which fit right into the main sentence thought, 
closing off in English without missing a beat. It was almost as if 
they would say the several words, comma, Ukrainian words, 
comma, back to English to make the point, exclamation mark. 
 
I only wish the rules of the House would allow me to tell you 
one true story that I personally heard and witnessed when the 
crowd was in its full flight in Hafford and I was on the stage, 
eyes agog, mouth agog, watching the fantastic oratory. I can’t 
do it because it involves language which I’m sure would be 
unparliamentary. Not on the part of Dick but on the part of one 
of the participating audience members. Because that was the 
other thing that took place very often. You know, you’d work 
the audience in the sense of saying, and what did the Liberals 
give you, or what did the Conservatives give you? And back 
would come the response by the crowd — very, very 
spontaneous. 
 
Well it was just a treat to be around these people because they 
brought good ideas and they brought humour and they brought 
passion. And they brought, as I say, a worldliness — the world 
was more than just Hafford; yes, community and family — but 
a worldliness to their job. 



92  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

And so when Dick served and finished his time in this House, 
he continued to be very active in the community and political 
affairs I’ve outlined. He was a vendor at the liquor board store 
in Hafford, was Chair of the Hafford Senior Citizens Low 
Rental Housing Authority. He continued to give us heck when 
we didn’t do the things we should be doing. Occasionally would 
praise us when we did some of the things that we should be 
doing. He enjoyed his favourite pastimes of hunting, fishing, 
and gardening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that I speak for many members of this 
Assembly and for those outside this Assembly who probably do 
not know Dick when I say that Dick Zipchen, Dmytro Zipchen, 
will be missed for his energetic dedication to his community, to 
his province, to his country — his adopted country — and to his 
political party, and his commitment to improving the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. Boy, what a full, dynamic life he led. If 
that could be said about us, that’s about all that can be said. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with those thoughts and memories, I move, 
by leave of the Assembly, seconded by the official Leader of 
the Opposition, the following: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Dmytro Zipchen, who died in Saskatoon on June 25, 
1996, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1952 until 1956, representing the constituency of 
Redberry. Mr. Zipchen was born on August 10, 1905 in 
Horodenko in western Ukraine. The following year he 
emigrated with his family to Canada and homesteaded near 
Hafford. Mr. Zipchen received his formal education in a 
one-room rural school and later completed courses in 
mechanical engineering and weed control at the University 
of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. On February 3, 1935, Mr. 
Zipchen married Mary Maksymiuk. 
 
Mr. Zipchen continued to farm the homestead that had 
been in his family for four generations. He was also 
employed as a weed inspector and auctioneer, and for a 
number of years operated an implement business with the 
Cockshutt Plow Company. He also was employed as a 
vendor at the Hafford liquor board store. 
 
Mr. Zipchen’s devotion to improving his community was 
illustrated by his dedicated service in a number of 
organizations. He was the secretary-treasurer of his 
elementary school and later a Hafford and district 
representative to the Blaine Lake School Unit No. 57. He 
served on the Hafford town council and was a reeve for the 
rural municipality of Redberry for eight years. 
 
Mr. Zipchen was a founding member of the Co-op 
Implements Ltd., the Hafford Co-op Association, and the 
Hafford Credit Union. He was the chairman of the Hafford 
Union Hospital Board and witnessed the board introduce 
its own hospitalization scheme one year prior to the  

provincial hospitalization plan. The Hafford Senior 
Citizens Low Rental Housing Authority also benefited 
from Mr. Zipchen’s service as chairman of the board. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be able 
to add my voice to the passing of Mr. Zipchen, Dick Zipchen, 
Dmytro, not known to me; but the area he represented is well 
known to me because that’s where I was born and raised. And 
while Mr. Zipchen sat in this Assembly I was attending high 
school in North Battleford. 
 
Just a few comments to add to what the Premier has already 
stated. Mr. Speaker, I understand that while an MLA in the T.C. 
Douglas government in the ‘50s, Mr. Zipchen was recognized 
as truly a committed and hardworking representative of the 
Redberry constituency, where he worked very hard to bring 
rural Saskatchewan some of the services that we take for 
granted today. He pushed hard for the government to spend 
more money on road development in Redberry. He urged the 
government to set up financing for rural electrification, 
proposing a plan that would help farmers pay for installation. 
That’s the kind of committed individual that Mr. Zipchen was. 
 
He honed his political skills at all levels; at the local levels, 
while serving on school boards, town council, and being the 
reeve of the RM of Redberry. No doubt his experience as an 
auctioneer as well served him well when he arrived in Regina in 
1952. 
 
Mr. Zipchen died at the age of 90, and as I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, up until weeks before his death he lived on his own 
and generously shared his love of gardening with his family and 
friends. 
 
The province was fortunate to be served by a man so dedicated 
to his community and to rural Saskatchewan. He will no doubt 
be greatly missed by his family and our sincere condolences, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the PC caucus, I would like to add our recognition of the life of 
Dick Zipchen. Mr. Zipchen was a man who gave much to his 
community and to his province, and although I didn’t know Mr. 
Zipchen personally, his history and reputation speaks for itself. 
Although born in the Ukraine, he immigrated to freedom in 
Canada at a young age and was clearly very proud of his 
adopted home. 
 
Mr. Zipchen’s strong interest in politics led him to become a 
member of this legislature for the Redberry constituency from 
1952 until 1956. He further served his community in many 
ways, including serving as reeve, a school board member, and a 
founding member of many of the local co-ops. 
 
He was a man who demonstrated through example the kind of  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

life we all strive for — a life dedicated to service and concerns 
for one’s community and province. 
 
I am certain he will be missed by his friends and family 
scattered throughout this province and country. 
 
On behalf of the PC caucus, I would like to express our deepest 
and sincere condolences to the Zipchen family. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Late last June, 44 years 
to the month after his election, the community of Hafford and 
the surrounding area that encompassed the former Redberry 
constituency said farewell to one of our special people, Dick 
Zipchen. Mr. Zipchen came to this part of the world from his 
birthplace in Horodenko in western Ukraine when he was one 
year old. His passing was a sad occasion in spite of the fact that 
we had him for 90 years. 
 
Dick and his family were true early pioneers. They arrived in 
this part of the world many years before most of the other 
families in the area arrived from Ukraine. Mr. Zipchen was a 
very powerful fighter for social justice and his community in 
particular. He was well known as a powerful and convincing 
speaker. Dick had only seven years of formal education but was 
very well self-educated. 
 
He served as a town councillor in Hafford, reeve of the RM of 
Redberry, and later as the MLA for Redberry constituency. 
 
In the spring of 1952, Redberry was represented by a popular 
opposition member. Mr. Zipchen knew that Redberry was a 
very tough seat to win but at his nomination, in which he had 
warded off two opponents, Mr. Zipchen announced in his 
acceptance speech that he was healthy, he was big and strong 
like a bull, and I will fight; I will win. 
 
Well few were convinced. In fact the story goes that Tommy 
Douglas said to Mr. Zipchen, Dick, if you win Redberry, I’ll 
walk out barefoot all the way to Hafford to congratulate you. 
Well about 9 p.m. election night Tommy got a call: Mr. 
Douglas, get walking. We won. 
 
Well Dick did not always win but he always tried. Many give 
him the credit for establishing the hospital in Hafford. He was 
the backbone of virtually every community undertaking for 
over half a century. Many fondly and respectfully referred to 
him as “the godfather,” and in this case it was an endearing 
term. 
 
I have talked to Ann Ogenchuk, who worked for Dick when he 
was in office, and to Eiling Kramer, who was elected the same 
day as Mr. Zipchen. It is an intriguing experience to listen to 
these two individuals who knew and admired this man for so 
many years. 
 
When I was elected to the legislature, we set up our 
constituency office a short half a block from Mr. Zipchen’s 
home. Many times we met either in his home or in my office. 
We also miss him driving past the office on his way for coffee 
or to pick up the mail. 

Dick Zipchen was a good friend and a fine man. The 
community where Dick spent his life is better for the fact that 
he chose to live there and dedicate his life to family, friends and 
community, and always politics, to his last days. No higher 
honour can be bestowed on a man than to serve his fellow man. 
Dick did just that to the fullest. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to use 
this occasion to pay my tributes to Dmytro “Dick” Zipchen and 
to his family from a personal point of view. Although I did not 
get to know Dick Zipchen from a direct, person-to-person 
contact, I wished I had. I knew of him as a family member and I 
know that he was influential on people and events who 
influenced me. 
 
Dick Zipchen was married to Mary Maksymiuk, who was my 
mother’s first cousin. They resided and raised a family in 
Hafford, as was mentioned earlier. As a young school boy, for 
me at that time in the ‘50s, I lived with my parents on a farm 
midway between North Battleford and Hafford. Although we 
were in a neighbouring constituency, we had contact with the 
Redberry constituency and we had contact with Dick Zipchen. 
We maintained contact because Zipchens were family, and my 
parents, who lived in that district, also maintained social contact 
with Hafford through their contacts in the church and the 
community. 
 
Now I was then very much in my formative years, attending 
public school, but I can recall what respect was paid in my 
community to political figures — political figures locally, like 
Dick Zipchen and Eiling Kramer — and their names were held 
in esteem along with names like Louis St. Laurent and John 
Diefenbaker and Tommy Douglas — names that were bigger 
than life to a young fellow. 
 
There was prestige in having a family member like Dick to be 
elected to serve the public, either as a reeve or on the school 
board or in the co-ops or in the credit union or to a provincial 
government. And it led me to believe that public life was a very 
honourable challenge, that there was a high responsibility and 
much was expected of elected people. And with Dick Zipchen, 
the community’s expectations were met. 
 
And I feel, Mr. Speaker, that it was growing up in an 
atmosphere like this that attracted my respect for working in our 
parliament, in our government system. When I talked to my 
parents about Dick, their description of Dick was he was a 
going concern or he was very active or he had good humour. As 
previously mentioned by the Premier and those that spoke 
before me, he was involved in many, many community events, 
many community activities, and through his work he became 
known — very well known — in his community and he was 
influential. He exemplified the value of hard work as was 
highly valued by many of the Ukrainian pioneers of the time. 
 
So as a family member and as a legislative colleague, I am 
humbled in paying my respects to Dick Zipchen for his  



94  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

outstanding contribution in community leadership. He was a 
true social democrat. 
 
I pass on my condolences to his immediate descendants: his 
son, Roman; his daughters, Patricia and Lucille; and their five 
grandchildren. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to 
move a procedural motion that would have these tributes 
transmitted to the family members. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Northeast: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
here on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland and a 
little bit daunting when one sits here and considers the 
condolences for members past in this Assembly. 
 
I want to extend my best wishes to the new member from the 
Battlefords as he begins a new session and a new dimension of 
his professional life, and wish him all the best as he enters the 
debate here in the Assembly. 
 
I want to begin my remarks today by focusing on what I see as 
some of the contrasts or contradictions between the parties 
opposite, particularly the Liberal Party, and the New 
Democratic Party on this side of the House. And I want to begin 
with what I see as perhaps the most fundamental difference 
between the Liberal Party here in Saskatchewan and the 
governing New Democratic Party. And that quite simply is our 
approach to fiscal responsibility. 
 
Our commitment to a balanced budget and to an elimination of 
the deficit and an ongoing eye on the mountain of debt that still 
needs to be paid down. 

How can the Liberal Party propose to deal with the needs and 
priorities of the people of Saskatchewan, the aspirations of the 
people of Saskatchewan — as they call for the government to 
do in their amendment to the Speech from the Throne — when 
they have no articulation of party policy with respect to the 
deficit, and the debt, and fiscal responsibility when it is not 
even mentioned in their news release before the beginning of 
this session announcing their agenda for this session. 
 
And I’m referring here to the office of the Liberal opposition 
news release dated February 5, “Jobs renewed focus highlight 
Liberal opposition agenda.” And simply put, in this agenda for 
the upcoming session which was released a month ago, there is 
not a peep about a commitment to fiscal integrity as part of their 
agenda in this session. 
 
In fact the Leader of the Liberal Opposition in the House goes 
so far as to say, and I quote, “The Liberal opposition hopes to 
demonstrate to the New Democratic Party that there is more to 
good governing than balancing the books, and looks forward to 
underlining this point in the next few short weeks.” 
 
Well here we are, Mr. Speaker, and it’s no accident that fiscal 
responsibility is not a part of the Liberal agenda. Months ago it 
wasn’t a part of the agenda. Even a week ago when they held 
their press conference, a week ago today in this building, a joint 
press conference with the leader of the party, Dr. Melenchuk 
and the Leader of the Opposition in the legislature — this gets a 
little bit confusing having two leaders — but the Leader of the 
Opposition in the legislature, the member from Canora-Pelly, 
when asked about what priorities they have for this legislative 
session by reporters, do not mention fiscal responsibility and 
the mountain of debt. Can you imagine that from a political 
party in Saskatchewan when we have gone through what we 
have gone through these last five years and indeed the last ten 
years before that with the Tory government of Grant Devine. 
 
I go back to the words of the present Leader of the Liberal Party 
in the House. The Liberal opposition hopes to demonstrate to 
the New Democrats that there is more to good governing than 
balancing the books. Well in one sense I think they’re right. In 
one sense I think they’re right that there’s more to good 
governing than simply balancing the books. That certainly is 
one of the hallmarks of good government, is balancing the 
books and showing fiscal integrity. 
 
But I want to turn now to a second hallmark for me and for the 
people of Saskatoon Sutherland that is hallmark of good 
government, and that is not just talking about child poverty but 
doing something about child poverty. And in fact, the Liberals 
don’t even address child poverty or changes to the welfare 
system as part of their agenda for this session either. It’s just the 
cheap talk that they want to offer, as they have the last day or 
two, about $4 that they’re forgoing for one day as a publicity 
stunt to show their solidarity with the poor. 
 
Well I say that’s a wonderful symbolic action and you should 
be greatly commended for that. That will really change the 
course of Saskatchewan politics and the plight of the poor here 
in Saskatchewan. It’s a wonderful tokenism that you’ve given 
us. 



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

Now the Speech from the Throne quotes the Canadian 
Conference of Catholic Bishops in this regards, right in the 
Speech from the Throne, when they wrote: 
 

To think that almost one Canadian child in five lives in 
poverty in one of the richest societies in world history is 
nothing less than a damning indictment of the present 
socio-economic order. 
 

And this is in Canada that we’re talking about, one of the 
richest societies in world history. 
 
And it’s interesting that the Rev. Jesse Jackson, whom we know 
as a presidential contender in the United States, he recently 
spoke to over a thousand people at Valparaiso University in the 
United States to a law symposium, a national symposium, on 
teenage violence and drug abuse that was sponsored at 
Valparaiso University. And he made the point that prenatal care 
and head-start programs for underprivileged children in terms 
of education and day care are on the front side of an alternative 
to jail and welfare, which he called on the back side of the 
problem. 
 
In other words, if we don’t deal with things like prenatal care, 
proper educational start for our young children, and day care on 
the front side, we’re going to be dealing with these children on 
the back side. And that is why this government has introduced 
the child action plan here in Saskatchewan — to deal with these 
problems on the front side so that our children not only have the 
benefits of attention to these problems here and now, but our 
children don’t have to deal with these social problems in the 
future. 
 
Reverend Jackson says, and I quote: 
 

When you cut prenatal care, head start for education, and 
day care, you increase school drop-outs and anti-social 
behaviour. The end of that line often leads to premature 
deaths and jail. These are our children. Shall we lift them 
up or lock them up? They were not born the way they are. 
We must do something to put them on the path that leads 
them to hope and fulfilment and not death and destruction. 

 
(1530) 
 
Now who are the poor here in Canada? Thirteen per cent of 
two-parent families, we’re told, in Canada are poor. The 
corresponding figure for single-parent females in poverty is 
almost 60 per cent — 60 per cent of such families in poverty. 
 
How poor are the poor? Well according to the Canadian 
Council on Social Development, their Campaign 2000 to lift the 
concern of child poverty across the country, the income of the 
average poor family with children is $16,700, while the average 
income for all families with children is $54,800. A gap between 
54,000 and 16,000 suggests what poverty might be like for 
those who endure it. 
 
Another way of looking at it is to say that poor family has about 
one dollar for every three and a half dollars available to the 
average family with children . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It  

sounds like a Liberal lunch budget, one of the members on this 
side says. It isn’t just a one-day lunch budget, it’s a way of life 
for those who have to endure it. Moreover a poor family lives 
about 50 per cent below the low income cut-off line, which is 
commonly accepted as the poverty line. 
 
And the costs of being a poor child — dare we talk about this in 
this Assembly? Well the Liberals wouldn’t do it, not in this 
session. But I will. The cost of being poor. And it doesn’t just 
mean that the poor don’t have material goods or money in their 
pockets. Being poor means that a child of course may miss out 
on a birthday party. And I’ve had constituents come to my 
office on social assistance and tell me what it’s like not to be 
able to send their kids to a birthday party because they don’t 
have the money to buy a present for their child to bring. 
 
Being poor isn’t just a matter of not having warm clothing, or 
not having trips with the school or the hockey team, or 
nutritious food, or pizza maybe for one day at the school, 
because they can’t afford it. No, being poor isn’t just a matter of 
not having material goods. 
 
A poor child is also more likely to die as a baby, to be sick or to 
develop physical or develop mental disabilities. And then the 
family must pay additional costs for medications, special 
clothing, child care, transportation, and special recreational 
programs. 
 
Because of illness, poor children miss school more often. By 
adolescence they often fall behind in both performance and 
their own hopes for school achievement. They are more likely 
to drop out before completing high school. And we all know 
that the devil finds work for idle hands. 
 
And when poor children become adults, what happens? Well 
they certainly are less likely to find well-paying, secure jobs 
than those who have been protected from being poor, who have 
the advantages of good health and education. And this is a loss 
not only to themselves in terms of potential income and a good 
lifestyle, but a terrible loss to the people of Canada — all of us. 
And that is in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the bottom line with 
poverty. Eventually we all pay the price. 
 
It’s not just the poor or those who are living on welfare who pay 
for their poverty. They pay dearly, but we also all pay the price. 
Taxpayers ultimately must contribute to increased health care 
costs, special education, facilities, jails, programs which poor 
children are more likely to need. And our country pays the price 
of diminished opportunity for each child and for our common 
future. 
 
So what to do about this? Here in Saskatchewan, New 
Democrats have said that now is the time to begin to address 
this problem of poverty. And I’m proud that in this Speech from 
the Throne it features as one of its major points. One of six 
major points of the agenda of this government is an attack on 
child poverty as part of our government’s agenda. 
 
The bishops are right. This is a damning indictment of our 
present social economic order; and here in Saskatchewan, New 
Democrats are prepared to tackle this problem and to restructure  



96  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

and reorder our society with the help of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speech from the Throne notes that the government will 
continue to make economic development a top priority. This 
isn’t easily done. There are no magic wands or solutions in 
terms of providing jobs for people. But the Speech from the 
Throne recognizes that a job is the best way to address child 
poverty, and a job is the best way to help people escape from 
the trap of welfare dependency. 
 
A second thing that the government will do, in addition to 
focusing on jobs — that’s one of the primary attacks on poverty 
— will be to work energetically to implement a new national 
child benefit plan here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these changes have been made, 
these proposed changes have been made, if the federal 
government will come through with the resolve to make these 
changes, of the 130,000 Saskatchewan families in our province, 
a total of 130,000 families, 55,000 of the lowest income 
families will receive some increased benefit from a new 
national child benefit program. Some modest benefit. 
Something to help their children and their life. Whether it’s a 
supplemental health benefit or a child benefit, some concrete, 
tangible, financial assistance to break the cycle of welfare and 
poverty, to give them some hope, which is more than a 
tokenism of living on $4 worth of food for one day is going to 
give them, pretending that something is being done. No, we’re 
talking about actually doing something in concert with the 
federal government. 
 
And I say parenthetically here, if the Liberals opposite were 
really serious about doing something about poverty, they would 
be talking to their relatives in Ottawa. We don’t hear a word. 
The silence is deafening in terms of their commentary on what 
the federal government has done to social transfer payments to 
the provinces and to other social programs. 
 
So here in Saskatchewan, if they can work with their federal 
counterparts and convince them to act on some of the initiatives 
that we have brought from Saskatchewan to the federal 
government, if they can bring themselves to do that, to go 
beyond the meagre $4 theatrics of today, then one-third of 
Saskatchewan families can have some tangible concrete help to 
deal with their problems. 
 
And our government won’t stop there with the national child 
benefit. Pending, pending the national child benefit, the Speech 
from the Throne announces that our government will further 
strengthen Saskatchewan’s Action Plan for Children and will 
target child poverty, invest in child care in inner city 
neighbourhoods, in rural communities, and the North, and 
strengthen child nutritional programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And I’ll have more to say about that later, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the action plan for children will 
continue to be implemented. 
 
Furthermore, the government will introduce amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Assistance Act to provide incentives to parents to 
increase their earnings and pursue child maintenance — the 
whole theory being that there’s more money going into families 
with these changes so that they can provide a better life for 
themselves and their children. 
 
The government will also introduce legislative amendments that 
will help youth and low income people to get the training they 
need through the Youth Futures Program which will assist 
young people to complete their education and make the 
transition to the workforce; long-term help to put a new 
foundation over . . . underneath the lives of Saskatchewan 
young people. And also a provincial training allowance which 
will help low income individuals enrolled in adult education 
programs to better provide for their children. 
 
And it doesn’t stop there. We’ll amend the family maintenance 
amendment Act to strengthen provisions for child support here 
in Saskatchewan. And the youth offender service amendment 
Act which provides liability protection to volunteers who serve 
on youth justice committees will be amended to allow people in 
communities to get involved in helping to solve some of the 
problems of poverty. 
 
And so here we see, in very concrete fashion, in the Speech 
from the Throne, as part of the government’s agenda, the 
hallmarks of the difference between a New Democratic 
administration or an approach to these problems and a Liberal 
approach to these problems. This is not just a plan that we have, 
not just word realities — these are real, practical, positive, 
palpable forms of assistance to those who need them, unlike the 
Liberals who don’t mention poverty as part of their agenda. 
 
And now I want to sketch briefly how damning this refusal to 
address child poverty really is. I want to begin by putting a face 
on the problem, by speaking very briefly about a constituent 
who phoned my office in Saskatoon yesterday after having 
received one of the Speech from the Throne contact cards or 
summary cards that was distributed in my constituency. It 
happens that a woman called yesterday to my office, having 
taken the time to read the card. And when she read about the 
government’s initiatives to reduce child poverty as I’ve just 
talked about, and she read the words, strengthening our action 
plan for children, enhancing support and prevention services, 
she thought she needed to phone. 
 
She thought she needed to phone. Because while she was 
getting help now with a parent aid coming into the family 
through the family support centre — I’ll highlight this to the 
Minister of Social Services; I know he has a special concern for 
the family support centre in Saskatoon — this particular woman 
was having a parent aid coming in 16 hours a month, 2 hours 
twice a week, to help with parenting and problem solving. 
Without divulging too much of the particulars so that I reveal 
her particular identity, she had three children, one of whom had 
a learning disability. 
 
But the real problem in this home was not just the parenting 
problem. There was a relational problem between her and her 
husband. She was in an abusive relationship with him; alcohol 
was involved. And she was seeking to leave her husband for the  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

sake of herself and her three children. 
 
But when reading this little detail about the Speech from the 
Throne, enhancing support and prevention services, she was 
afraid that she might be losing the very services that she had 
now through the family support centre in Saskatoon, and was 
pleading for assistance, worried that she might lose the lifeline, 
as slim as it was now in her circumstances, in the future. 
 
She herself had come, apparently, from an alcoholic, abusive 
home and so she recognized very clearly the need for something 
to be done in her present home with her children. 
 
This is the personal face of poverty and the need for social 
programs and social supports for individuals who deal with 
such problems. This is the personal face of poverty and it’s just 
the tip of the iceberg when we look at the issue Canada-wide. 
 
Because Canada-wide, the number of poor children has 
increased by 46 per cent in the last seven years. Imagine that. 
What a damning indictment, as the Canadian bishops say, of 
our social system and of all of us as politicians; I myself 
included. That nearly 50 per cent increase in poor children in 
the country of Canada in the last seven years . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And one member says, rightly so, and this is at 
a time when collective wealth has grown. And I’ll have a few 
words to say about that in a little while. 
 
Well in the last seven years, almost a 50 per cent growth in poor 
children. What a wonderful record we have as a country. That 
was only eight years ago, in 1989, that the Parliament of 
Canada in Ottawa unanimously passed a resolution vowing to 
eliminate child poverty in Canada by the year 2000. 
 
(1545) 
 
What a wonderful thought. What a wonderful action, for 
legislators in Ottawa to vow to eliminate child poverty by the 
year 2000. Well we’ve got three years to go. With a 50 per cent 
increase in the last seven years, we have our work cut out for 
us. And that’s precisely the point I’m making. That in this 
Speech from the Throne we are serious in this government 
about getting down to work and trying to do something about 
child poverty in practical, concrete terms here in Saskatchewan. 
That’s where we have to begin as a provincial government. 
 
Since the time that the Parliament of Canada introduced its 
pledge or campaign to eliminate child poverty by the year 2000, 
the number of poor two-parent families has increased by 39 per 
cent. Poor one-parent families have increased by 58 per cent. 
These are all figures from the Canadian Council on Social 
Development Monitor. If people want this information, I 
strongly urge them to contact the government caucus office and 
we’ll see that you get a copy of this information. I’m going to 
ask people to bear with me a bit because these statistics are very 
important and bear repetition. 
 
Children in families hit by long-term unemployment have 
increased by 44 per cent in the last seven years. Children in 
working-poor families have increased by 17 per cent. Children 
in families needing social assistance have increased by 68 per  

cent. Children in unaffordable rental housing have increased by 
60 per cent. The only area in which Canada has improved since 
1989 and the parliamentary resolve to eliminate poverty is in 
the rate of infant mortality, which is down by 13 per cent. 
That’s the only area that we’ve improved. But even there as the 
Campaign 2000 notes, children in poor families are still twice 
as likely to die as infants than those in well-off families. 
 
And they go on to write, and I quote: “If this rate of increase in 
child poverty is allowed to continue,” says the Campaign 2000 
in its recent annual report, “Canada could enter the new 
millennium, not with an absence of poor children but with twice 
the number as in 1989.” 

 
It is shocking to think that we as a country, and that we as 
legislators here in Saskatchewan, or anywhere else, are 
presiding over this growth in the problem of poverty and not 
doing anything about it. And that’s why we here in 
Saskatchewan are investing in people. 
 
And what are the Liberal elected members doing about this 
problem in Ottawa? They’re adding to it. They’re adding to it. 
Instead of taking steps to implement the 1989 resolution, the 
Government of Canada has sharply reduced its funding for 
programs to benefit children. And this is not a secret; it’s 
known across the country. “The Chrétien government’s Canada 
Health and Social Transfer in particular will have a profound 
negative impact on children,” says Campaign 2000. And it also 
cites the Liberal’s 52 per cent cut in funding for community 
action program for children and their unfulfilled pledge to set 
up a national child care program. 
 
“Red book,” 1993. Last federal election campaign. A promise 
for $75 million in a national child care program. A pledge to 
create 150,000 new, quality child care spaces in 1993. And to 
date how many have been created? Zero. Zero. And the Prime 
Minister himself has not responded to requests to establish a 
child care task force to address this problem. 
 
And should we be surprised, after the federal Liberals have 
made changes to unemployment insurance that have hurt the 
poor, cuts to the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, 
replacements of cost sharing through the Canada Assistance Act 
by block funding through the Canada Health and Social 
Transfer — all of these changes costing the province of 
Saskatchewan $67 million in this financial year alone. 
 
And that’s why we are picking up the slack. We’re doing the 
work that the federal Liberal Party is unwilling to do; and that 
we are trying to provide an investment in people through our 
child action plan and through the Speech from the Throne and 
the activities of our government in this very legislative session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  The clear thrust of the last several federal 
Liberal budgets has been to reduce both the size and the scope 
of government when it comes to human services. And along 
with that, there has been a very clear trajectory for individuals 
and families and the private market to do more in this regard 
and for the government, the federal government, to do less. 



98  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

And what’s the problem with relying on the market? What’s the 
problem with relying on individuals, individual households, 
picking up the slack, or the business community? 
 
Well one of the problems with this approach is the assumption 
underlying it that these other actors have the capacity to pick up 
the slack, the capacity and/or the willingness to pick up the 
slack left behind when government pulls out of these activities. 
And it isn’t always possible for people to do this or for the 
business community to do it, especially if they don’t have any 
breathing space and an individual family is living in poverty. 
 
Different individuals — it’s no secret — different families have 
different capabilities to fend for themselves, and this is because 
the private market has a good track record of creating wealth 
but not much interest or capacity in distributing wealth 
equitably. And that is one of the roles legitimately for 
government to address. 
 
Canadians over the years clearly and consistently have had a 
consensus that it is one of the roles of government to address 
the problem of wealth distribution. But this role has become 
increasingly difficult as market incomes received by families 
have become more unequal and disparate. These last years, as 
I’ve talked about earlier, as there have been more and more cuts 
to the social transfer programs of the federal government, it 
becomes increasingly hard to look after people who are in need, 
and incomes become more unequal, leaving an increasing gap 
between those at the top and those at the bottom with people in 
between squeezed. 
 
I want to say here that there’s more shocking news; that the 
combined wealth of the richest 50 Canadians, all 
multimillionaires of course, now exceeds $39 billion. If you 
take the 50 wealthiest Canadians, their wealth collectively 
exceeds $39 billion according to The Financial Post magazine. 
And if you assume that the annual income of the average poorer 
family of four is no more than $25,000, this means that the 50 
Canadians at the top of the income ladder have more money 
than five million low income Canadians. The gap is widening 
here in Canada. 
 
Over the years, the federal government, along with its 
provincial and local counterparts, as I say, has provided a 
positive role, a pivotal role in developing social infrastructure 
and contributing to economic security and social security 
among Canadians. But what we see happening in the last 
number of years is that the federal government is pulling out of 
these programs in a way that the government of Brian Mulroney 
could only dream of having done. And part of this has to do 
with massive give-aways by the federal Liberals to the 
corporate sector, to banks and financial institutions who 
bankroll their election campaigns. 
 
Consider for example that according to Statistics Canada, over 
$17 billion worth of corporate profits went untaxed in Canada 
in the year 1994, the year for which these statistics are most 
recently available. Over $17 billion in corporate profits go 
untaxed. Some 81,000 corporations that are making a profit 
don’t pay any income tax. Well that’s maybe nice if you own 
one of those corporations, one of those 81,000 corporations, but  

it doesn’t speak much for those who are living in poverty. It 
cries out for tax reform. 
 
The money is there — federally the money is there, in terms of 
the tax breaks that are being given — but the government isn’t 
there to collect the money federally. Federal health transfers 
decline; employment training from the federal government is 
reduced and eliminated; the quality of education is eroded; 
youth unemployment soars; the benefits for the most vulnerable 
in our society, the unemployed and welfare recipients, are 
slashed; and governments both federally and provincially blame 
their deficits for these cut-backs and proclaim that the pain and 
anguish they cause are for the public’s own good.  
 
But that hasn’t happened here. In the five years that the New 
Democratic government has been elected we have not cut social 
service payments to social service recipients, to our credit. And 
we aren’t prepared to do it now either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The same day that the media announced a wage roll-back in 
Ontario for low-paid child care workers, we saw the spectacle 
of Canadian banks boasting of massive profits even exceeding 
the record sums that they had accrued the year before. This is 
the reality of what’s happening in our country. 
 
And then we see the federal Auditor General reveal that two 
family trusts were permitted to transfer at least $2 billion worth 
of assets out of Canada without paying a cent of tax on the 
gains they had accumulated. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, that’s a lot of $4 a day. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  That’s a lot of $4 a day, a member says on 
this side of the House. Two billion dollars worth of family trust 
assets transferred out of Canada, allowed by the federal 
government. No tax paid on it, according to the Auditor General 
of Canada — a policy of the federal Liberals. 
 
Subsequently, it was revealed that these trusts belonged to the 
Bronfman family. Estimates of the federal and provincial taxes 
legally avoided by their transactions are as high as $75 million 
worth of taxation forgone by the federal Liberals. 
 
And instead of thanking the Auditor General for bringing this 
matter to light, what did the Liberal members of the Common’s 
Finance Committee do? They denounced him for making this 
revelation. And now, reluctantly, the Chrétien government 
assures us that we won’t allow this to happen any more. Not 
again. Aren’t we fortunate? 
 
The point is that there’s sufficient money in Canada to maintain 
and even improve our social programs while we are dealing 
with the deficit. We’ve proved that here in Saskatchewan. We 
know that that is true federally as well. There’s sufficient 
money to maintain and improve our social programs, but there 
are too many tax loopholes besides the family trusts that should 
be closed, and too many cuts from the federal government to 
social programs in our country, and no willingness for members 
on the opposite side to take responsibility for poverty as part of 
their agenda for this legislative session. 



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

(1600) 
 
I want to talk now about where we go from here. I want to say 
that here in Saskatchewan we have dealt with our financial 
deficit, we have balanced our budget, and now is the time to 
attack the social deficit, to invest in people, to bring balance not 
just to our finances but to bring balance to the problem of child 
poverty. And we’re going to do this not only because it’s the 
right thing to do but because it’s the only sensible thing for us 
to do. 
 
Our long-term prosperity and the long-term collective welfare 
of this province can easily be derailed if we become obsessed 
with the short-term fiscal considerations at the expense of 
investments in people, in health and in education, and in 
security for children. 
 
And so New Democrats will continue to insist that the federal 
government plays a key role in safeguarding our social and 
economic security programs for Canadians, especially those 
who are poorest and most vulnerable. And if the Liberals don’t 
want to talk about child poverty, I say they don’t deserve to 
govern this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
member opposite asked what I’m doing about it right now. I’m 
at least talking about it, and I’m going to tell you — not just 
talk about it — I’m going to tell you what we’ve done. 
 
Okay. The action plan for children, Mr. Member opposite, the 
action plan for children is now in its fourth year. That’s what 
we’ve done. Addressing child poverty, $10 million in new 
initiatives under the action plan. In 1994-95, $4.4 million in 
new money for prevention initiatives, preschool pilot projects, 
and prevention . . . early intervention community projects, 
initiatives to support vulnerable children and families such as 
family violence outreach, legal aid enhancements, 
province-wide expansion of unified family court, assistance to 
child victims and witnesses. That’s what we did about poverty 
four years ago. 
 
Three years ago, $1.9 million in initiatives related to child care, 
new initiatives, support for young mothers, treatment for 
adolescent offenders, remote housing projects, and bridging to 
support single parents. 
 
And this last year, $4.2 million in initiatives — new initiatives 
related to the expansion of community schools, Indian and 
Metis education programs, increased support to children in 
schools with special needs, enhanced measles immunization 
program, child care initiatives, expansion to post-adoption 
programs to assist requests for information, and 
community-based youth justice pilot projects. 
 
The child action plan has worked across departmental lines to 
provide two and a half million dollars in funding for community 
schools and for Indian and Metis education development 
programing; a million dollars in increased support for students 
with special needs; child care initiatives of over half a million 
dollars and post-adoption programs, and the list goes on, as I’ve 
mentioned . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Street workers in 
North Battleford, as the member will know. 

And this is a record of accomplishment. These aren’t things that 
we’re going to do; these are things that have been done by this 
government. At the very same time that we have been balancing 
the province’s finances and dealing with the financial deficits, 
we’ve been dealing with the human deficits as well, and we’ve 
been investing in people. 
 
It’s a record to be proud of, and this reflects the commitment to 
better the needs of our children and youth despite the problems 
we face. And we renew our commitment to do this in this 
legislative session again in the Speech from the Throne, to 
provide in the child action program a long-term strategy to 
invest in our children and youth. 
 
I want to share just some of the initiatives that have been 
happening in and around Saskatoon in this regard. In Delisle, 
with the Delisle family tenant association, $2,000 given for 
programing to socially and economically disadvantaged 
children between the ages of two and four. In Dundurn, $5,000 
for at-risk children and youth, a summer education and 
recreation program for at-risk children who are five to eighteen 
years. 
 
In another program in Saskatoon at the King George 
community summer, a mentorship program in Saskatoon; 
$5,000 in funding to maintain the mentorship program of 
one-to-one mentorship to socially isolated children identified by 
the school for the summer months so that they don’t languish 
over the summer. The program is intended to strengthen and 
create positive adult-child relationships, enhance children’s 
self-esteem and confidence, and create opportunities for at-risk 
children to participate in social, leisure, and cultural activities. 
 
And the list goes on and on. I have, I think it’s 14 pages with 
almost a hundred examples of funding projects in and around 
Saskatoon that have been aimed at child poverty. Saskatoon 
communities for children in conjunction with the Saskatoon 
(West) School Division is a joint planning mechanism to 
provide services to children from birth years to 12 years of age, 
involving community organizations in the Saskatoon region that 
serve and advocate on behalf of children and their families, 
partnering with government organizations to deliver services to 
children. 
 
Abused women support groups to prevent the incidence of 
family violence and act in partnership with abused women so 
that they can learn to support their children and to provide a 
stable environment for them and to ensure that they have 
well-being. 
 
In fact even in the University of Saskatchewan, $10,000 in 
funding for a physical activity program for children with special 
needs, children from inner city schools, as part of their regular 
school day to participate in this program for children at risk. 
 
Reading for Success programs in Confederation Park in 
Saskatoon aimed specifically at low income, single parent, 
aboriginal, and immigrant families. A Healthy Start food 
security program to ensure that infants and children in low 
income families have access to nutritious foods and other  



100  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

resources needed for a good start in life. Parents participate in 
life skills training to help them learn how to cook on a 
collective basis and do bulk buying of food items. 
 
And in my own community of Sutherland, an aboriginal 
outreach program which funds an aboriginal outreach worker to 
work with families of aboriginal ancestry in Sutherland and to 
increase understanding of poverty issues in the community. 
 
These are all actions that are being taken by our government 
here in Saskatchewan to address poverty and better the lives of 
children in our province. 
 
This Speech from the Throne, in opening the session of the 
legislature, is all about investing in people. We’re going to 
show in this session that this government doesn’t just talk about 
doing things for children in poverty, but actually does things for 
them — passing legislation and allocating funding to deal with 
these problems. 
 
And we can do this, we can provide long-term solutions 
because we have built a solid, rock-solid foundation of financial 
responsibility so that we can take these steps and deal with 
these programs and problems. 
 
And so we are investing in people. We are dealing, as Rev. 
Jesse Jackson said, with the problem on the front side so that we 
don’t have to deal with it on the back side. We are lifting up our 
children during this legislative session so we don’t have to lock 
them up sometime later in their life. 
 
And that is why I will be supporting the Speech from the 
Throne, and why I have condemned the federal government and 
many of the members opposite for their complicity in the 
destruction and the dismantling of our social welfare system. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I wish first of all to say what an 
honour it is for me to represent the North Battleford 
constituency, even if it is only on an interim basis, as hon. 
members opposite keep telling me. 
 
The city of North Battleford, together with the communities of 
Prince, Cochin, Meota, and the first nations communities of 
Saulteaux and Moosomin make up some of the best scenery and 
the finest people in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And had it not been for Governor Dewdney 
buying up a bunch of land in the Pile O’ Bones area, we would 
still be the capital of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m extremely pleased to note that my 
enthusiasm for North Battleford is shared by hon. members 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, so much do they enjoy our wonders that 
last fall most of them camped in North Battleford for an entire 
month. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And the weather wasn’t even that great. They 
enjoyed our unparalleled scenery. They enjoyed our colourful 
history and the warm hospitality of our people even if they 
found us a trifle independent and quite able to make up our own 
minds. 
 
Mr. Chairman, my friends opposite will soon have another 
opportunity to come to the Battlefords. We are making a bid to 
host the Saskatchewan Summer Games in the year 2000, and I 
want to personally invite each and every member to join with 
me in North Battleford in celebrating the first Saskatchewan 
games of the new millennium. However, Mr. Speaker, if I may 
make clear, the invitation to come back to my constituency is 
for the year 2000 and not 1999. 
 
I want to thank all members of this Assembly for the gracious 
way they have welcomed me, and I want to say that I am 
pleased to note that policy differences inside the House are not 
allowed to become personality differences outside the House. 
 
I also want to thank especially my colleagues and to say how 
proud I am to be associated with them. I keep looking for signs 
of the mean-spiritedness the NDP claim to have noted and I 
detect none. I see only men and women dedicated to the 
betterment of Saskatchewan and its people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last but far from least, I wish to give my 
personal thanks to you in helping me learn the ropes and get 
settled. I am very much aware that many fine people come from 
Moose Jaw. In fact, I was born there myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the recent by-election, the NDP ran ads 
saying a Liberal member of the legislature would be useless. 
While I freely concede that my value to this House is yet to be 
proven, residents of my area are concerned that in the nearly a 
year since Doug Anguish resigned, the Premier has not seen fit 
to name any of his members of the NDP caucus to the cabinet 
seat traditionally reserved for the north-west. 
 
(1615) 
 
I would like to pay tribute to my two opponents in the recent 
by-election. In an age of cynicism about politics and politicians, 
I am pleased to say there was nothing done, in my view, to 
bring disrepute on the democratic process. For the Conservative 
candidate, I had considerable sympathy. He worked hard, but it 
was clear from an early point that no matter what he did, voters 
are simply not ready for a repeat performance of the Devine 
comedy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Conservative voters unhappy with the present 
direction of this province understand clearly that they have no 
realistic alternative but to join forces with the Liberal Party. The 
Conservative candidate tried to make an issue of the provincial 
sales tax and the devastating effect it has, especially on the 
western part of the province. But he could not get beyond the 
obvious point that if his party had not left our  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

province’s finances in such a perilous state, taxes wouldn’t have 
to be so high. 
 
The NDP candidate was gracious and decent, though at times 
the scripts he was given to read were a bit puzzling. One minute 
he would be claiming there had been absolutely no health cuts 
at all, that bed closures and staff lay-offs were an illusion; the 
next moment he would argue that all the cut-backs in health 
were because of the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, leave aside that these two arguments are 
contradictory. Leave aside the extra hundred million in new 
revenue the province receives from the VLTs. Leave aside the 
record provincial revenues from oil lease sales. Leave aside the 
millions this province saves as a result of lower interest charges 
on our debt — a direct result of the fiscal policies of the Hon. 
Paul Martin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Leave all of these factors aside and people are 
becoming increasingly aware that other provinces suffering 
under the yoke of the same federal government as we are doing 
a much better job of protecting basic services. 
 
Almost everywhere people continue to have some faith in the 
governmental process. They believe their government can and 
should be doing something besides whining about Ottawa and 
claiming they are powerless to effect any change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that were really true, why would we have a 
provincial government at all? It is little wonder that many 
people in North Battleford who told me they had never voted 
any way other than NDP decided they just couldn’t do it this 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people told me they hadn’t changed. They 
hadn’t left the NDP; they feel the NDP has left them. The only 
responsible and moderate choice is the Liberal Party. 
 
Since I joined this House I think a couple of debates have 
already focused the difference between our three parties. The 
first has been the issue of youth crime in Regina that has so 
concerned many people. On the one side, the NDP minimized 
the problem and appear indifferent. To the extent they admit 
there is any problem at all, they just shrug their shoulders and 
say, blame Ottawa. Then there are the Conservatives who 
appear to argue that if we would lock up all our young people 
and throw away the key, there would be no one left to steal cars. 
Only the Liberals provide that middle, reasonable, positive 
voice of sanity between the two wild extremes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Then there’s the issue of child poverty. We are 
concerned in this province that every day of the year residents 
of group homes and SARCAN clients have to survive on a $4 a 
day food budget. We have decided that we are going to make a 
statement by trying to do that for one day. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s a trivial thing. 

Mr. Hillson: — Okay, that . . . the hon. member says that’s 
trivial. Frankly I agree it’s a small sacrifice for us to make, 
going one day without adequate food, sitting in the cafeteria 
watching hon. members opposite with their trays heaped and 
overflowing as they said to us, what’s your point, there’s no 
problem here, as another sandwich and stew fell on the floor. 
Yes, it’s a small sacrifice but it was a sacrifice we were 
prepared to make and they weren’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Since my election, I have continued to receive 
many calls from people who are in pain and have had their 
surgery delayed for months and months while operating rooms 
are closed for lack of funds. 
 
Our new leader, Dr. Melenchuk, has said the he would allow 
private facilities to reduce waiting-lists, provided there is no 
extra billing and the entire bill is covered by medicare. The 
NDP finds this scary. They would rather have no treatment at 
all than have private treatment, even if it is fully covered within 
the public system with no extra charges. Why is it preferable to 
have nothing instead of something? 
 
Yet while the NDP claim to be against any private care, they 
have de-insured one service after another, many of the same 
services which are covered in other provinces. Look at the list, 
Mr. Speaker: the children’s dental program — gone; the drug 
plan — largely gone; insulin coverage — gone; oxygen 
coverage — gone; assistance for couples having difficulty 
conceiving for in vitro or reverse sterilization — gone; eye 
examination — gone. The NDP still wants to run on the 
successes of 30 years ago, but the people are more concerned 
about today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past few months I have spoken to countless 
people who have informed me that they have always supported 
the NDP because they believed that party would protect health 
care. Instead, we have a government which excels at nothing so 
much as making excuses and shifting blame — blaming Ottawa 
because it can no more spend money it doesn’t have than we 
can is not a substitute for policy and innovation. The people are 
tired of being told that we have to cut beds and lay off nurses 
and close hospitals, but, Mr. Speaker, the NDP still has money 
left over to distribute comic books telling the people how great 
our health care system is. People are convinced that we do have 
the money to protect basic services. What the government lacks 
is a sense of commitment and priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are concerned with the direction of 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy, our Crown corporations that the 
people of this province have traditionally been proud of and 
have believed have given them good service. But now they 
want to know why all the increases in rates after the 
government said there wouldn’t be any and after these same 
corporations piled up huge profits ranging from 50 to $100 
million. 
 
They wonder why SaskPower invested 31 million in the 
cooperative republic of Guyana, one of the most indebted 
countries in the world. What is the purpose of this investment,  



102  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

Mr. Speaker? Is it foreign aid? Is it an attempt for us to get rich 
on the backs of some of the poorest people in the world? Do our 
utility rate increases have anything to do with this investment? 
Is our hard-earned money in danger of ending up in a sink-hole 
in the Amazonian forest? 
 
I would like to take a few minutes to talk about the provincial 
sales tax and its effect on my part of the province. Of course the 
9 per cent sales tax is a problem everywhere, but particularly in 
western Saskatchewan. People vote with their feet and their cars 
as to whether they choose to pay it. 
 
The Minister of Finance has said many times that reducing the 
sales tax even one point would cost the province $80 million in 
lost revenue. My question for her is how much revenue do we 
lose every day by people driving to Lloydminster, Medicine 
Hat, Grand Centre, and Edmonton to do their shopping. 
 
How many telephone orders are placed from Saskatchewan to 
Alberta companies and delivered into Saskatchewan with 
phoney invoices indicating Alberta pick-ups? How many boat 
and trailer, snowmobile and trailer, or ATV (all-terrain vehicle) 
and trailer purchases have the invoices split so that a 
Saskatchewan resident bringing back goods from Alberta can 
license the trailer without having to disclose the rest of the 
purchase and pay tax on the balance of the purchase? 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, we know how much is coming in the 
front door with the provincial sales tax, but do we have any idea 
at all about how much we are losing out the back door? I 
suspect the answer is that the provincial government hasn’t got 
a clue and doesn’t want to find out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is fond of saying that we in 
Saskatchewan are a special breed; that we are tougher than 
other Canadians, and I agree. Indeed the truth of this came 
home last summer when my daughter and I went on a trip. In 
other provinces we would see red flags or bump signs along the 
roads and then nothing would happen. 
 
In Saskatchewan a bump flag means tramp on the brakes, grab 
the steering wheel, brace yourself, and hang on for dear life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are 
made of sterner stuff. Frankly, I worry. I worry that when the 
Liberals become government — oh, when the Liberals become 
government — maybe our people will become soft as they 
become accustomed to driving on smooth roads; when wellness 
means something other than you don’t dare get sick; when job 
opportunity means something besides having to leave the 
province. 
 
Yesterday the hon. member for Saskatchewan Southeast, in her 
excellent speech, described the government as, and I quote, 
“plodding.” I completely agree. She also said that it was wrong 
to live with hope. With that statement I couldn’t disagree more. 
The NDP may think that hope is unimportant or even 
destructive, but the Liberal caucus knows the truth of the 
saying: without hope, the people die. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — A recent Government of Saskatchewan survey 
asked our residents several questions about health care. The 
results, I should say, were not all bad for the government. In 
fact the results disclosed that most people continue to be 
reasonably satisfied with the level of care they receive. 
 
Then came the kicker. People were asked what they expect in 
the future. A staggering 67 per cent replied that they expect our 
health care system to deteriorate in the next 10 years. Only 10 
per cent said they expected improvement. There is the problem 
in a nutshell. I suspect if the question had been asked on any 
other possible question except perhaps the gambling industry, 
the answer would have been the same. People expect 
deterioration. People no longer have confidence in the future 
under this government. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been called next-year country because 
throughout our history we have been sustained by the belief that 
no matter what the problems of today, tomorrow will be better. 
But lately we have been losing that confidence that our children 
will have the best of schools, that we will drive on roads as 
good as any on the continent, that our young people can stay 
and build lives here with something to look forward to besides 
responsibility for a crushing debt, that our seniors will be 
looked after. We must recapture the sense of hope and optimism 
that built this province if we are to move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members opposite say I have a tough act 
to follow as MLA for North Battleford. I agree. But I say to 
them, Anguish is out, hope is in; the Liberal caucus will work 
for a better tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have this 
opportunity to rise in my place and take part in this debate. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to inform you that 
at the conclusion of this debate, I will be voting against the 
amendment and in support of the motion to accept the Speech 
from the Throne for the second session of the twenty-third 
legislature. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the fact that it is good to be back in 
this Chamber and to interact with my colleagues. I also wish to 
greet the opposition members, especially the new member from 
North Battleford. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to stand proud for their 
accomplishments over the last five years. Their support and 
understanding was an absolute must as our government dealt 
with a difficult situation, to say the least. But with their help, 
great progress is being made and once again Saskatchewan 
people have created opportunity. 
 
I am pleased to say that here in Saskatchewan our provincial 
government has a clear path laid out to prepare this province for 
the 21st century. We as a government have done extremely well  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

over the last nearly five and a half years. The good management 
of our government has established Saskatchewan once again as 
a good place to live and do business. 
 
Our health services are once again number one in the country 
and constantly improving as health reform takes place, thanks 
to the good management and additional funding from our 
provincial government and no thanks to the federal Liberals 
with their cuts to transfer payments to Saskatchewan health, 
education, and social services. 
 
My constituency of Redberry Lake is enjoying much better 
times in recent years. The farm situation is considerably 
improved with good crops for the most part and somewhat 
better prices. I am very pleased with the progress made on the 
twinning of the Yellowhead. If all goes well, by this time next 
year the stretch from Saskatoon to North Battleford will be 
complete. This includes a second new bridge at the Borden 
crossing. 
 
I am pleased to say that while in order to handle today’s larger 
units and heavier traffic, a second, modern bridge is being 
constructed, the beautiful old bridge with its triple arch 
construction is remaining in place. This bridge has been part of 
the landscape and has served us well since 1937. While the 
design is different, the Borden bridge still spans the North 
Saskatchewan River and is truly a bridge between the 
communities surrounding my home and the rest of the province. 
 
The Borden bridge has been a focal point for many of us for 
years, as a lot of us feel a personal connection. I rarely cross 
that river that I don’t remember my uncle, who worked on the 
construction of the original Borden bridge, which opened in 
1937. 
 
In fact I have a connection that goes back some 90 years to the 
nearby CP-CNR (Canadian Pacific-Canadian National Railway 
Company) railway bridge where my grandfather served as a 
sectionman. Safety was not so great a concern in those days and 
he told the story of being caught out on the bridge with the rest 
of the crew when an unexpected freight train suddenly 
appeared. They sat on the end of the ties, high over the water, 
and let the train go by. As he was not able to swim, I expect his 
fingerprints are still visible in the ties. 
 
I am extremely pleased that the Green Certificate program that I 
was instrumental in having introduced as an agricultural 
apprenticeship course has been extremely well received, with 
over 140 trainees becoming involved since its inception. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  This program has all the ingredients to be an 
exceptional success as it has a low cost arrangement with a total 
industry commitment, as well as recognition in several school 
divisions as an accredited course at the present time. 
 
This is one training program that most often sees family 
members working together and does not require huge 
expenditures on bricks and mortar. The interest is increasing 
and I believe it will become even more important to the entire  

industry as time passes. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to compliment the reeve 
and councillors from the rural municipality of Douglas, No. 
436, for their cooperation with the Department of Highways in 
undertaking the maintenance of a portion of Highway 376. 
These are the kind of arrangements that require cooperation of 
both levels of government and benefit us all. 
 
Due to the changes in rail transportation, more and more burden 
for heavy-haul road is going to fall on municipal and provincial 
governments. The federal government completely abdicated its 
responsibility in the last budget with more offloading onto 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
A great many of my constituents are extremely pleased that 
Saskatchewan is once again showing leadership with the 
introduction of the first legal chelation clinics in the country, in 
cooperation with the college of physicians and surgeons. These 
new clinics will allow Saskatchewan residents to receive their 
treatment in their home province without expensive travel and 
with the assurance that everything is all legal and above board. 
The health of Saskatchewan people is our top priority. 
Chelation treatment is just one more step. 
 
I am very pleased, as are most Saskatchewan farmers, with the 
major changes to crop insurance. First of all, the province paid 
off our share of the crop insurance deficit, which allowed lower 
premiums, and the whole program has been simplified, which 
cuts down on the paperwork and allows clear understanding of 
available coverage, including spot-loss hail insurance. 
 
I attended several of the crop insurance informational meetings 
and the farmers of the Redberry Lake constituency were well 
pleased with the changes. A large number of my farmers are 
becoming involved in game farming. This interesting new 
approach to livestock production is providing new opportunities 
for many rural residents. It is extremely interesting and 
generally profitable work to work with these beautiful animals. 
I believe there is a brilliant future in rural Saskatchewan in this 
unique, new livestock business. 
 
Every indication is evident that the hog production is about to 
make a huge expansion in this province. Beef numbers are up, 
and sheep and wool production is on the rise. Farmers are 
generally optimistic as spring of 1997 approaches, and I believe 
we are all well poised to make great strides forward in the years 
to come. 1997 promises to be an even greater year in my 
constituency for tourism, with travel up and new tourist 
attractions becoming more accessible. 
 
While I’m on my feet I want to pass a few comments on a 
major problem created by Ottawa that impacts negatively on 
our province, and in fact limits the amount of good news that 
we can expect in any throne speech. We were led to believe by 
successive Tory and Liberal governments that our greatest 
hold-up to progress for Saskatchewan farmers was the Crow 
rate. If only the Crow were gone, secondary industry would 
blossom and grain movement would be enhanced, we were told. 
Never again would we would experience disruptions in the 
grain movement. 



104  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

Our Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation minister 
expressed outrage at the news that the federal government is 
giving the railways the right to charge more for hauling grain. 
He said in his news release on March 7, and I quote: 
 

“Farmers have been watching their grain sit on (the) 
sidings for weeks and sometimes months . . . as a result of 
(our) . . . unprecedented backlog in the grain handling 
system (and) are being forced to pay $15 million . . . in 
demurrage.” . . . “Now, as a result of the legislative 
changes made by the federal government in the past few 
years, the railways will be rewarded with a raise, estimated 
at $15 million per year. This is completely unacceptable.” 

 
The Canadian Transportation Agency yesterday announced 
an increase of 1.5 per cent to the cost of capital formula for 
the railways. This change will result in a net increase in 
freight charges on grain of approximately $15 million per 
year. 

 
(Our minister said) “Allowing the railways to increase their 
rates is a slap in the face to every western producer,” . . . 

 
“The federal government must immediately move to 
amend the Canada Transportation Act to recreate a proper 
balance between the needs of shippers and railways and to 
ensure that additional unwarranted costs to producers are 
removed. Anything less than this is unacceptable,” . . . 
 

Such things as car shortages and demurrage charges would be a 
thing of the past — or at least that’s what they said. Those 
federal government Liberals did all that to us, even though they 
knew if they left it — and this was some years ago — that the 
Tories would have done it to us anyway. So it doesn’t really 
matter whether the Tories or the Liberals are in Ottawa, we in 
the West get the short end of the stick. 
 
Secondary and value added, all those good terms that we all 
use, are important. But we should remember that at the time of 
the death of the Crow, we were processing about seven and 
one-half per cent of our production on the Prairies — such 
things as feed lots, crushing plants, and malt processing. Double 
that, and we still have to ship 85 per cent of our production. 
That’s 85 per cent at the much higher rate while we still face 
railcar shortages and demurrage charges. 
 
The throne speech outlines many progressive moves our 
government is making to compensate for Ottawa’s lack of 
foresight. Ottawa Liberals, like Saskatchewan Liberals, are just 
recycled Tories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Neither group supports Saskatchewan farmers as 
they face such things as lack of rail service. Perhaps the words 
of the late Justice Emmett Hall will prove accurate, with these 
folks in charge, when he said, and I quote: “If the Crow goes, 
buffalo will once again roam the prairies.” 
 
Be it the sorry Tories, or the Liberals who seem to be able to  

justify anything and never be sorry, we often find ourselves 
victimized as Saskatchewan farmers. Not victimized, as some 
would have you believe, by other Canadians elsewhere in the 
country, but victimized by both foreign and Canadian 
corporations who are more interested in corporate profits than 
the well-being of Canadian people. 
 
These same corporations are often contributors to both those 
sorry Tories, and the Liberals who don’t seem to realize when 
they should be sorry. Last summer I had the opportunity to take 
part in an excursion to the Port of Churchill. I was extremely 
impressed with the potential of the port — potential is the key 
word; other words, such as neglect, come to mind. 
 
Here is a seaport, an actual prairie seaport, that because of the 
neglect of Liberal and Tory governments has never reached its 
true potential. 
 
(1645) 
 
The Canadian dream well over a hundred years ago was a 
country united coast to coast, joined by rail. Now we have a 
federal government who is totally fragmenting the rail system, 
such as the Churchill example. Can the fragmentation of the 
country be far behind? 
 
Short-line rail systems, even American short-lines, may be the 
only links we as shippers have to port. So I don’t wish to be 
critical of their contribution. What I am critical of is a 
government that would not only allow but encourage such a 
fragmented system to exist. Our ancestors fought tremendous 
obstacles to create such Canadian institutions as national 
railways, national airlines, and the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
What we need from Ottawa is a vision of what is needed to 
prepare us for the 21st century, such a vision as that shown in 
the Speech from the Throne read in this Chamber on March 6. 
Today we get only Liberal governments in Ottawa completing 
Mulroney’s destructive Tory policies, and they aren’t even 
sorry. 
 
We often hear about national unity. Perhaps we should elect a 
national government with a national agenda instead of returning 
the Liberals to continue to destroy what was once the Canadian 
dream. 
 
I mentioned Churchill and the fact that the rail line needs some 
repairs, and so do the port facilities. In the overall scheme of 
things, neither cost need be that significant. 
 
I just want to take this opportunity to explain why the 
governments in Ottawa never supported the port the way that it 
should have been. Well Canadian people owned the railway 
through the CN (Canadian National) and also owned the port. 
Our government would have, I suspect, put millions into the 
upgrading required of the rail and the port facilities had they 
just been owned by their corporate friends. 
 
We often hear the strong call for national unity. Well 
Saskatchewan people would respond a lot quicker if our 
national government had our interests in mind instead of some  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

corporate agenda. 
 
In conclusion I would just like to paraphrase a few of the 
opening comments from the throne speech. Through 
cooperation, community and shared effort, Saskatchewan is 
back on its feet. Our agricultural industry is rapidly 
diversifying. Our resource sector is strong; trade is growing; 
investment in oil, gas, mining, and forestry is booming. The 
value added industries of tomorrow, like equipment 
manufacturing, food processing and ag-biotech have never been 
stronger. 
 
For the first time in almost a decade, more people are moving to 
Saskatchewan than moving away. It’s a remarkable turnaround 
— a turnaround mirrored in our province’s public finances. 
This year my government will present for your consideration a 
fourth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
Thirty-five years ago Saskatchewan gave Canada public 
universal health care. Today the people of Saskatchewan are 
making another, perhaps equally important, contribution to our 
country. We are setting a new example, pioneering a new 
model. We are showing that people who hold true to values of 
cooperation, community, mutual aid, and responsibility can 
return from the brink of bankruptcy; can preserve and renew the 
foundations of civil society like medicare and education; and 
can build a growing, competitive, high-employment economy 
without regressive transfers from the poor to the rich and 
without undermining essential supports for our family. 
 
We have done well as a government, as a province, as a people, 
to have progressed to the present situation. We are well poised 
to enter the next century with the direction that was outlined in 
last Thursday’s throne speech. I am proud to stand in this 
legislature and vote against the amendment and vote in favour 
of the 1997 throne speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you and what 
a pleasure it is to be back in this Assembly with my friends and 
my colleagues and stand in my place to support the Speech 
from the Throne. Welcome back to all of you and a special 
welcome to the new member, the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
It’s a pleasure to see you again as well, Mr. Speaker. I know 
that your wise counsel will guide us in this session as it did in 
the previous session. 
 
I would also like to welcome our new pages. Their job is a very 
important one and all of us appreciate the work that they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
congratulate the member from Swift Current for his eloquent 
speech, the one he delivered in moving the Speech from the 
Throne. His words were clever, witty, relevant, and beautifully 
presented, an inspiration to all of us who follow. Well done. 

And what a pleasure it was to listen to the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast in seconding the motion. Her comments 
are always thought-provoking and challenging and she did not 
disappoint. Congratulations to you on a speech well delivered. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it really is wonderful to be in this 
House again and stand in my place to represent the fine people 
of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. No matter how many times you 
do this, it is thrilling. The feeling is almost impossible to 
describe, but it makes me very aware of what it means to live in 
a parliamentary democracy, and I cherish that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  I would like to say a few words about my 
constituency and the good people who live there. It includes the 
north-west portion of the city of Regina, as well as the rural 
communities of Lumsden and Grand Coulee. It also 
encompasses the many farm families living east, north, and 
west of Regina for several miles. And it’s growing, Mr. 
Speaker, just like the population of Saskatchewan. 
 
More people are moving in. Contractors are building new 
homes; entrepreneurs are opening new businesses. In some 
months I have sent out as many as 16 letters to new business 
people, welcoming them to our community. And last year, 
Winston Knoll Collegiate opened its doors to 645 students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  The constituency contains many fine 
restaurants where you can eat a variety of dishes, from 
traditional to ethnic. It has an active professional community — 
doctors, chiropractors, lawyers, therapists, dentists, and others. 
The retail trade is also well represented, the Co-op grocery store 
in the Sherwood Mall being a good example. We also have 
pharmacies, clothing stores, hardware stores, convenience 
stores, and gas stations. 
 
There is a vibrant cultural community in Regina Qu'Appelle 
Valley, Mr. Speaker. We have writers, sculptors, potters, 
painters and printmakers, and artists who work with wool and 
fabric. Lumsden alone is home to many talented artisans, 
including Mac and Beth Hone, both accomplished painters and 
printmakers who have achieved a national reputation. Mac 
Hone won the Saskatchewan Arts Board’s lifetime achievement 
award last year and it was an award well deserved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  If you want to pursue recreational activities 
we have the facilities for you. The North West Leisure Centre 
as well as the rec centre in Lumsden and Grand Coulee means 
you can swim, skate, or curl; you can also bowl and play pool. 
There are several parks in our constituency, small 
neighbourhood parks as well as larger provincial parks like 
Condie and Wascana Trails. We also have two challenging golf 
courses and of course many productive and well-kept farms. 
 
It is always a pleasure to visit the schools in our area, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to thank them for inviting me to take part  



106  Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1997 

in their many activities. I also want to congratulate them on the 
many projects that they undertake, from environmental 
programs like Clean Cat which encourages schools to become 
green; to safety programs about bicycles and taking care on the 
streets; to hosting Canadian citizenship courts, and developing 
partnerships with Crown corporations like SaskTel, SaskPower, 
SGI and other businesses. 
 
Riffel High and the separate school board have partnered with 
SaskTel to allow all their students access to other students in 
schools throughout Regina via the Internet. Winston Knoll has a 
state of the art computer lab as well as facilities for films and 
video making, drama productions, food preparation, and shops 
for metal and woodworking. St. Angela Merici School and I 
have a partnership ourselves to deliver my monthly 
constituency newsletter. Not only does this help the students 
appreciate participatory democracy, but the funds raised benefit 
the entire school. 
 
There are other fine schools in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, in 
Grand Coulee and Lumsden as well as Regina, and they too are 
involved in their own creative and innovative projects. And all 
our students have the dedicated, knowledgeable, and energetic 
teachers that they need and deserve. 
 
So I thank again the people who have chosen me to represent 
them. I thank them for their phone calls, their letters, and their 
visits, and I thank them for their welcome when I drop by their 
homes or place of business. And I hope that they will continue 
to share their ideas and their concerns with me, because when 
that happens we have participatory democracy at its best. 
 
Now what can the good people of my constituency, what can 
the good people of Saskatchewan expect from this government? 
Well they can expect good government. They can expect that 
the priorities of this government will be the priorities of the 
people of this province. And they can expect that this 
government, through the MLAs on this side of the House, will 
continue the proud Saskatchewan tradition of sharing, of 
cooperation, of innovation, of achievement, to create together a 
strong and vibrant community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a time of real hope and optimism in this 
province. As the throne speech says, today is “one of the most 
hopeful times in our province in many years.” And why is that, 
Mr. Speaker? It is because all the hard work and sacrifice of the 
people of this fine province over the last five years have 
brought us here to this time of optimism. Difficult times and 
tough choices have brought us here. 
 
The throne speech outlines where we are and where we are 
going. We are building Saskatchewan together. And we are 
building together, Mr. Speaker, by investing in people. 
 
Our priorities are very clear: to create meaningful jobs for today 
and tomorrow – that’s our first priority; to provide quality 
education and training, building the best possible education 
system; to tackle child poverty and reform the social welfare 
system; to protect medicare and deliver a stable, secure and 
caring health system; to rebuild our transportation system to 
meet the needs of a growing economy and to address the  

long-term sustainability of our highways; and, Mr. Speaker, to 
continue to maintain our fiscal integrity, sound and 
compassionate financial management. 
 
Our priorities, Mr. Speaker — our priority is to build 
Saskatchewan together. 
 
Now I know that my colleagues in government have spoken 
eloquently on these priorities and I also know that those who 
speak after me will do so as well, but I would like to focus on 
one of those priorities for the remainder of my comments. I’d 
like to talk a little bit about health care and health renewal. 
 
We all know the history of our health renewal process — 
reducing the over 400 boards to 30 districts where the people 
who live in those districts make the decisions about their health 
care needs; community-based, recognizing that health care is 
more than a building, more than bricks and mortar, as our 
Premier often says. 
 
Health care is more than being cared for when you are ill. 
Health care is education and prevention. Health care is about 
having a job. Health care is about staying in your community. 
Health care is about support programs for seniors and new 
mothers. Health care is about providing respite services and 
palliative care. Health care is about counselling. Health care is 
about knowing that emergency services are available for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good health care is knowing that the services you 
need will be there when you need them. And because health 
care remains a top priority for this government, they will be. 
We will continue to invest in our health system, to ensure that 
the people of Saskatchewan have access to not only the best 
wellness and prevention programs, but also the best health care 
and treatment services we can provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to chair our government caucus 
committee on health, social policy, and justice. And a very fine 
committee it is, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud of the work the 
members of that committee have done and are continuing to do. 
 
(1700) 
 
We meet regularly with groups and organizations and 
professionals who work in the health care field. And one of the 
things that impresses me — impresses all of us on the 
committee — is how dedicated these people are and how 
committed they are to the concept of wellness. They meet with 
us to share what they are doing and to offer ideas on how we 
can do things differently, and even suggestions on how to do 
things better. They often express their appreciation to the 
government for the work that is being done in health renewal. 
Meeting with these people and learning about what they do is 
very inspirational and very educational. 
 
And while we recognize that we must continue to work on 
renewing our health care system, I think it’s also important to 
recognize how far we have come. More health services are 
available in Saskatchewan communities than ever before: 
prenatal nutrition, diabetes education, blood pressure clinics, 
province-wide breast cancer screening, and palliative care  



March 11, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

programs, to name a few. 
 
Saskatchewan is well served by hospitals and nursing homes. 
We still have twice as many hospitals per capita as the national 
average, and the number of nursing home beds per person over 
75 years of age is higher than many other provinces. We are 
meeting the needs of our growing seniors’ population with 
expanded home care and other programs. Community- and 
home-based services help people stay independent longer. 
 
All districts now have mental health, public health and 
addiction workers. We have increased minority and women’s 
representation on district health boards. And did you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan life expectancy is higher than the 
Canadian average and that for women it is the highest in 
Canada? We must be doing something right in this province. 
 
I could continue, Mr. Speaker, because there is so much more 
that could be said, not just about our health renewal process, but 
also about the other priorities of this government that I 
mentioned earlier in my remarks. But I know that there are 
many others who wish to speak. 
 
But before I take my place, may I say again that this is a time of 
real hope and optimism in Saskatchewan. A time to build 
Saskatchewan together. A time to build a new economy and 
create meaningful jobs. A time to provide progressive 
education, compassionate social programs, and a health care 
system that is all-inclusive and always there. A time to develop 
a comprehensive transportation plan, and a time to protect 
Saskatchewan’s hard-earned fiscal freedom for generations to 
come. 
 
And we’re going to do that, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to 
support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  I look forward to entering into the debate on 
the Speech from the Throne. I’m also sure the members 
opposite are waiting with bated breath to hear my views on the 
speech. But as I have quite a number of remarks and the time 
does not permit today, I move that the debate be adjourned for 
today. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 77 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 
  Hillson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 77 
  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 77 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 78 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 78 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 
  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 
  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 78 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 78 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Bruno Axemen — Provincial Broomball Champions 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 
 Regina Housing Starts 
  Hamilton ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 
 Passing of Louis Morin 
  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 
 Upgrading of Wheat Pool Elevator in Weyburn 
  Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 
 Alberta Provincial Election 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 80 
 Wilkie Citizens of the Year 
  Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 80 
 Passing of Karen MacDonald 
  Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 80 

Image Wireless Communications Introduces New Technology 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 80 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Districts Pharmacy Contracts 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 81 
  Cline ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 81 
 Gaming Addictions 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 81 
  Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 81 
 Wascana Energy Take-over Bid 
  Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 82 
  Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 82 
 Proposed Regina School Closures 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 82 
  Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 83 
 Public Prosecutions Review Report 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 83 
  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 83 
 Youth Crime 
  Hillson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 83 
  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 
 Group Homes Funding 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 
  Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 
 Potential Flood Damage 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 85 
  Lautermilch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 85 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 204  The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 85 
 Bill No. 1 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1997 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................... 85 
 Bill No. 2 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................... 85 
 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1977 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................... 85 
 Bill No. 4 — The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1977 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................... 85 
CONDOLENCES 
 Arthur Kluzak 
  Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 86 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 86 
  Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 87 
  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 87 
 George Gordon Leith 
  Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 88 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................ 90 
  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 90 
  Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 90 
  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 90 
 Dmytro Zipchen 
  Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 91 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 92 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 92 
  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 93 
  Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 93 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 94 
  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 100 
  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 102 
  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 105 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 107 
 




