



















































Hansard: May 14, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1645 

 May 14, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to present petitions on behalf 

of many residents in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area 

by declaring it an accessible, protected wilderness area 

where sustainable, traditional cultural values and activities 

are maintained. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are primarily from the city of Saskatoon, but I also note that 

they are from the city of Moose Jaw as well. I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also rise with 

my hon. colleague to present a petition on behalf of the good 

citizens of Melville, Grayson, and Weyburn. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would also 

like to present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Melville. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also  

would like to present petitions, but to do with creation of 

regional telephone exchanges. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The communities involved in the petition are from Fertile and 

Gainsborough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That the 

conditions of some highways connecting communities in 

northern Saskatchewan are at times impassable; that these 

highways, including Highway No. 155, are crucial to the safety 

and health of northern residents, and that the government’s 

refusal to rebuild these highways is preventing access to 

emergency care, to education, to health, and to sharing of 

resources amongst communities; 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway No. 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road, including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, and Pinehouse, and an 

access road to Garson Lake. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Turnor Lake. And I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are gravely concerned about the problems surrounding 

child prostitution. And the pray reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are exploited 

for sex in public places and stop prostitution which 

jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their children. 

 

The petitioners on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 

present petitions on behalf of citizens praying for the 

establishment of an accessible wilderness area surrounding the 

Dore and Smoothstone lakes. And the prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area 

by declaring it an accessible, protected wilderness area, 

where sustainable, traditional cultural values and activities 

are maintained. 

 

  



1646  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those who have signed these 

petitions are from the communities of Moose Jaw, 

Prud’homme, Waldheim, and the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 

a new petition to present today. 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that strippers in bars cause 

tensions in marriages, relationships and families, which 

can end up destroying those marriages, relationships, and 

families; that strippers in bars in many instances attract 

undesirables and encourage drunk and rowdy behaviour; 

that strippers in bars encourage a distorted view of human 

sexuality which has proven to lead to promiscuous and 

violent sexual behaviour; that strippers in bars lead to an 

increase in crime, such as rape, sexual assault, and sexual 

abuse, placing the children and women in our communities 

at greater risk; that strippers in bars create an atmosphere 

that is ripe for prostitution. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping, and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from the 

community of Alsask. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too have a 

petition I wish to present to the Assembly. And I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action is 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions I have are signed by individuals from the 

communities of Dinsmore and Wiseton. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise also to  

present a petition, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatsoever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including appealing the recent court decision 

striking down the existing law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning all stripping in establishments 

where alcohol is served. 

 

And these are signed by people from Martensville, from 

Dalmeny, and from Osler. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read 

and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to 

establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime in 

Saskatchewan; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to support the creation of regional telephone exchanges; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to reform provincial legislation to help children who are 

being exploited for sexual purposes; and finally 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the rebuilding of Highway No. 155. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Friday next, move first reading of a Bill — the 

Chief Electoral Officer accountability Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Northwest, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the other members 

of the Assembly, a group of students. They’re from the grade 5 

class at Silverwood Heights School. They’re seated in your 

west gallery. They’re accompanied here today by their teachers, 

B. Gallo, and C. Wright; and chaperons T. LaBrash, Mrs. 

Staples, and Mrs. Dauvin. 

 

I had a group of students from my constituency here yesterday 

that I was fortunate to be able to meet with, and I look forward 

to the opportunity to meeting with this group from Saskatoon 

after the question period. And I would ask all members to join 

me in making this group feel welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 

to all members of the Assembly, a group of students and their 

chaperons that are seated in your gallery. 

 

The group of students come from the Canora Composite 

School. They are grade 12 students at the Canora Composite. 

They are 42 in number and they had the pleasure of meeting 

with the Speaker back last fall when the Speaker was on tour. 

And I know they had a lot of questions for the Speaker, and I 

think conducted themselves very well. 

 

I’d like to also introduce two teachers that are with the group — 

Mr. Larry Neufeld and Mr. Merv Tomski. And I know that 

these are chaperons but I believe they also serve in the capacity 

of bus drivers, Kathy Thomas and Lawrence Stephanowich. 

 

I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming this group to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With your 

indulgence and the indulgence of my colleagues in the House, 

I’d like to introduce a large number of guests in the west 

gallery. 

 

This year, 1997, we’re celebrating the 25th anniversary of the 

occupational health and safety program in Saskatchewan. And 

like so many good things in this country, this is one of those 

that started in Saskatchewan and became a model for the rest of 

Canada. 

 

The guests in the west gallery are joining us to celebrate this 

anniversary today and I would ask each of them to stand when I 

introduce them and to remain standing, and then we can 

welcome them in the usual manner at the end of the 

introductions. 

 

The first person that I would like to introduce is Mr. Gordon 

Snyder. Mr. Snyder, you’ve got to stand up here. There you are. 

Mr. Snyder was a member of this Assembly for, I think 22 

years, 11 of them as minister of Labour. And in 1972 he 

oversaw the development of a radically new approach to 

occupational health and safety and he steered it through this 

legislature and oversaw its administration until he left that 

office involuntarily in 1982. 

 

Sandra Morgan is the current deputy minister of Labour, and I 

ask Sandra to stand. Jeff Parr is the current executive director of 

the occupational health and safety division. 

 

With us are also four employees of the department who have 

been involved with the health and safety program for all 25 

years or for almost all of the 25 years that it’s been in effect. 

And I’d like to introduce them: Gail Romaniuk, Faye Olynyk, 

Herb Wooley, and Fayek Kelada. Mary Maxwell is the Chair of 

the Occupational Health and Safety Council. 

 

Bob Guest is a member of the Farm Health and Safety Council. 

Jacquie Griffiths chairs the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour’s Occupational Health and Safety Committee. Warren  

Bobbee and George Kwas are with the Canadian Society for 

Safety Engineering, who we work with in promoting 

Occupational Health and Safety Week, coming up the first 

week of June. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that good legislation is only part 

of what it takes to prevent workplace injuries. We know that 

education and awareness is very important as well and I’m 

pleased that we have a number of guests who are involved in 

the early safety training program in the Estevan area. This is a 

new and innovative program, as so many things are that come 

out of the Estevan area, providing for safety training for young 

people before they enter the workforce. 

 

Wayne Irwin is the Chair of the program steering committee. 

Sherry Leach is the Co-Chair. Other members of the steering 

committee with us today are Gord McMurtry, Ray Frehlick, 

Lloyd Stewart, and Rick Boyle, who is substituting for Peter 

Hammond. Also with us are two people who worked with the 

steering committee and helped us to get this very exciting 

program going, Gail Mehler and Angela Radcliffe. 

 

Four of the students who took the training this year are also 

here: Ryan Benjamin, Russell Topinka, Cory Olson, and Ryan 

Irwin. 

 

The Premier and I will be meeting with our guests after 

question period in the members’ dining room by the cafeteria 

and I would invite all members who are able to get away from 

the House to join us in welcoming these people. So I’d ask all 

my colleagues to welcome these very important people to the 

House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

behalf of the third party I would also like to welcome the group 

here dealing with occupational health and safety. In particular 

I’d like to welcome Mary Ellen Benjamin and her son Ryan, 

who are here. And a special welcome to Wayne Irwin who . . . 

Mary Ellen and Ryan are both from my constituency and 

Wayne wishes he still was, but he has to live in Estevan now. 

 

I ask everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 

add to the words of the minister in terms of welcoming all of 

the individuals who represent the occupational health and safety 

division and we thank you very much for being present this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

a great privilege this afternoon to introduce probably the largest 

group here today, 84 students from Venture Heights. They’re in 

the east gallery. They’re grade 7 and 8 students here and I’m 

sure they’ll have a good time. I’ll be meeting with them a little 

later on to answer a few questions. 

  



1648  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

With them are teachers Debra Rodger, Diane Beaulé, Anita 

Dyck, Bob Thomas, and chaperon Sheri Protz. 

 

Would you join with me to welcome these people to Regina and 

to our legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me a pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 

Larry Birkbeck, former MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) from Moosomin. And accompanying him this 

afternoon is Mary Arpin. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may say, there are those who 

despair and think that Tories are beyond redemption. Not so. 

Mr. Birkbeck is working very hard for the re-election of the 

Prime Minister and the Liberal government. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 

introduce a guest from my constituency that is sitting in the 

west gallery, sitting amongst all the occupational health and 

safety folks that are here this afternoon. And that’s Bill 

Robertson, who is a well-known Saskatchewan writer and poet. 

 

He recently had a session at a local restaurant, introducing his 

new book. And I’m sorry I wasn’t able to be there, Bill, but I 

understand it was extremely witty. We are now on the verge of 

introducing Saskatchewan poets and writers to our high school 

students, and I’m sure that Bill’s writings will be amongst the 

curriculum that will be taught to Saskatchewan students. So 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a guest in 

the west gallery from Saskatoon, Lorraine Holowachuk. 

Lorraine and I have been working on a Justice project for the 

last two years, and she’s here this afternoon to meet with the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

Assembly, a very remarkable young woman seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to ask her to stand as I 

introduce her. 

 

Her name is Jade Rosin. Jade is a high school student at 

Langenburg and she is spending the day being my shadow. 

She’s following me around to see just exactly what it is that 

MLAs do in a day. And in the few hours that I’ve had to get to 

know her, she really is, as I said, a remarkable young woman. 

 

She’s a grade A student in all her courses, has a special interest 

in writing, and is possibly looking at a career in journalism. She 

tells me she’s also in the process of writing a novel. 

 

So I am delighted to spend some time with her, and I ask you all 

to join me in extending a very warm welcome to Jade. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just 

happened to notice that there’s a couple of other notable people 

from my constituency and elsewhere — Mr. Patrick Close, Mr. 

Brian Gladwell. Patrick is with CARFAC (Canadian Artists 

Representation) and Brian Gladwell is a very noted 

Saskatchewan artist. And if you could welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Occupational Health and Safety 25th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the 

provincial election of 1971 one of the promises made by the 

New Democratic Party was to establish a program of 

occupational health. By the end of the legislative session of 

1972, the occupational health and safety branch was created in 

the Department of Labour, and the occupational health Act was 

passed. Following our lead, every province in Canada now has 

it’s own Act. That is the way NDP (New Democratic Party) 

governments handle election promises. 

 

Today we are paying tribute to the visionary members of that 

government who once again made Saskatchewan the vanguard 

of progressiveness in North America. Some of them are with us 

today, and have been introduced in this Assembly. 

 

Among the many points that can be made and should be made, I 

wish to highlight two. First, this monumental legislation was the 

creation of both elected officials and of committed individuals 

who saw the need firsthand — individuals like Gordon Snyder, 

like Dr. John Markham at the University of Saskatchewan, Don 

Ching, Bill Gilbey of the Grain Services Union, and Dr. C. 

Dennis of the department of public health. 

 

Secondly, on this anniversary, legislators, educators, employers, 

and employees alike should remind and recommit ourselves to 

the basic and profound proposition that created this legislation. 

— that a decent day’s work demands a decent day’s pay in a 

decent and safe workplace; so that at the end of the day, all 

workers can return to their homes and families in good health 

and with peace of mind. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes, today 

does mark the 25th anniversary of occupational health and 

safety in the province of Saskatchewan. And it is my pleasure to 

rise in the Assembly today and recognize the value of workers 

and the importance of such legislation to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have come a long way as a society from the times of the  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

Industrial Revolution to create a healthy and safe environment 

for workers, and we all think that that is very important. After 

all, more and more individuals spend a substantial portion of 

their day in the workplace. The positive or negative experiences 

that we have there will have far-reaching social, emotional, and 

economic costs, not only for that individual but for their 

families, their employees, and their community at large. 

 

As the nature of work in society continues to change, so must 

our definition of a safe and healthy workplace. Over the years, 

we’ve seen this legislation evolve to encompass not only those 

obstacles which cause direct physical harm, but also less 

obvious workplace dangers such as sexual harassment. 

 

In order for Saskatchewan to progress into the 21st century as a 

healthy society, it is important that we do everything we can to 

keep our workers safe. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Apology for Remarks on Federal Leaders’ Debate 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yesterday I 

made a statement in this Assembly that attempted to provide 

some light-hearted comments on the federal leaders’ debate the 

previous night. In retrospect, I realize now that those comments 

were unfortunate, and I would say upon reviewing the verbatim 

of this Assembly, that they were also inappropriate. 

 

Since my election to this Assembly in 1995 I have attempted to 

bring about a renewed vigour and spirit to debate in this House. 

However, at no time have I intended to offend anyone. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is now clear that some of those remarks 

were indeed hurtful, and for that I apologize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Early Safety Training Support Program 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In April I stood here 

and commented on the government’s commitment to our youth 

by providing an $8,000 grant to the early safety training student 

support program administered in Estevan. Providing a safe 

workplace and preventing injuries are two extremely important 

issues that government and industry together must address. 

 

The recent changes to the occupational health and safety 

regulations have placed Saskatchewan at the forefront of 

workplace health and safety. These changes, Mr. Speaker, will 

enhance the early safety training program. Not only will this 

program be a part of the curriculum in Estevan, it will now give 

every high school the opportunity to adopt safety training as 

part of their curriculum. 

 

This will benefit our youth by educating them about the rights 

and the hazards of the workplace. Students will benefit with 

additional knowledge about the workplace environment, and 

industry will have the opportunity to hire safety-conscious 

employees. 

 

I want to congratulate everyone involved with the early safety 

training program for their work and commitment to our youth. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Head Literary Events 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am very 

proud to have in my constituency the town of Indian Head. 

 

Indian Head is the true literacy capital of Saskatchewan, 

regardless of what the Speaker and the Hon. Minister of Social 

Services might have to say. Two upcoming events in Indian 

Head support my claim. 

 

Tonight Canadian mystery writer, Alison Gordon — who was 

introduced in this Assembly two years ago — will be in our 

library. She will be reading from her new mystery, Prairie 

Hardball. Part of this book is set in Indian Head. In fact, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I understand the good parts take place in 

Indian Head, and the murders take place in North Battleford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  And next Thursday, Indian Head will 

celebrate the life and work of Saskatchewan’s greatest writer, 

Sinclair Ross, a writer the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

recently mentioned in the Assembly. 

 

In a life that had more than a little bit of gypsy to it, Sinclair 

Ross spent a few years in Indian Head where he attended the 

local school. Some of our elderly residents remember him. 

Those of us who are too young have had his excellent books 

about Saskatchewan life during the Dirty Thirties to remind us 

of his talent. 

 

Indian Head is a short drive from Regina and I welcome all 

members to venture out to Indian Head to attend one or both of 

these events. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Head Sports Hall of Fame and Museum 

Honours Inductees 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, Indian Head Sports Hall of Fame 

and Museum has been open to the public since 1992. There are 

eight directors who are active. Ken McCabe is the president and 

is the person who has most driven this hall of fame and 

museum. Without his vision, drive, and energy, the Indian Head 

Sports Hall of Fame and Museum simply would not exist. 

 

Ken and the entire board — indeed all of the people of Indian 

Head trading area — are very proud of their sports history. 

 

This year has an impressive list of inductees. The star-studded 

head table includes Barry Trapp of Hockey Canada, a 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame representative; CKRM’s 

Willie Cole; and it is anchored by the real heavyweights, Bob 

Poley as guest speaker, and their own MLA, Lorne Scott, who  

  



1650  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

will be not inducted for his athletic ability, but I know that the 

good people of Indian Head are very proud of his October 1996 

international wild waterfowl conservation award presented to 

him in Milwaukee. 

 

Tickets are still available through Indian Head-Wolseley News. 

I congratulate Ken McCabe, the board, inductees, and indeed all 

of the good people of Indian Head trading area, for this great 

initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pilot Butte School Performs Wizard of Oz 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last 

Wednesday evening my colleague, the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, and I had the privilege and pleasure to drop 

into the Land of Oz with Dorothy and Toto and over 300 

students, parents, and friends of Pilot Butte School. 

 

The gymnasium was transformed into a magical place under the 

artful guidance of co-directors Daryl Dozlaw and Carolyn 

Gaudry. 

 

Jodi Draghici sang and danced her way down the Yellow Brick 

Road with the able, sometimes comical assistance of 

Scarecrow, Nathan Seon; Tin Woodsman, Matt Bialowas; Lion, 

Cory Paetsch; and fierce guard dog, Dudley Philips — all on 

the way to see the mighty Oz, Luke Truitt. 

 

You will remember the struggle between good and evil. In this 

case Glinda, Dana Istace, the good witch, and the wonderfully 

wicked Sara Kokoski. 

 

The cast of thousands made sure everyone had a part to play, be 

it singing flowers, flying monkeys, fighting trees, or energetic 

munchkins. 

 

I’d like to congratulate Mr. Jakubowski, the principal, his entire 

staff, the numerous volunteers, and students, for their hard work 

and enthusiasm to put together such an entertaining evening. 

 

Residents of Pilot Butte must also be thanked for the 

community support offered to the activities and programs of 

Pilot Butte School. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Literary Contest Winner 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Saskatchewan has about 4 per cent of Canada’s population. Out 

of that number however, has come a disproportionate number of 

our nation’s exceptional writers, artists, actors, and may I say, 

politicians. 

 

There are as many theories as there are writers for why this is 

so. But the fact remains that we are far more than the 

geographic centre of Canada. 

 

And our writers start young. An outstanding case in point can  

be found in the village of Pierceland in my constituency. 

Bronwyn Stoddard is an 11-year-old grade 6 student at the 

Pierceland School. Already she has written a number of poems 

and short stories, and one of her poems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

has recently won the junior poetry category at the national 

Royal Canadian Legion literary and poster contest. 

 

Bronwyn, representing the 4 per cent of Canadians I referred to 

earlier, has outperformed the other 96 per cent of Canadians. As 

anyone in Saskatchewan would say, the odds were just about 

right. 

 

Her winning poem was entitled, “Remember,” a poem about 

Remembrance Day. Right now we are six months away from 

the November 11 ceremonies, but I believe that Bronwyn’s 

poem will be quoted at more than one cenotaph on that day. It is 

remarkable for its maturity and for its refusal to sentimentalize 

what was not a happy period in our history. 

 

Gordon McNeil, Legion zone commander from Loon Lake, will 

be presenting the national award to Bronwyn, and her poem will 

be published in the Legion magazine, along with the other 

winning entries. 

 

I congratulate Bronwyn Stoddard and confidently predict that 

this will not be her last publication. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, yesterday I asked the government to release the 

Kuziak report. The member opposite said, and I quote from 

Hansard: 

 

. . . we haven’t (gotten) the report . . . We have no 

indication . . . that it has been completed. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the report is done. But the Chief 

Electoral Officer says he is withholding it until after the federal 

election, on the advice of the Justice department. Is this not 

political interference? 

 

Even the former Justice minister is troubled by this. And 

today’s Leader-Post quoted him as saying, it seems odd to me. I 

think when the report’s completed, it should be filed with us. 

 

And the minister suggested yesterday that I was going over the 

edge? Well it seems very odd to us, Mr. Speaker. It clearly 

smacks of political manipulation. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice explain why his department is 

interfering? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t gone over 

the edge yet, but just a moment, he’s not finished. 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

I think I made my position very clear. When I left the Chamber 

yesterday, I was interviewed by a journalist who told me that he 

had spoken to Mr. Kuziak, who said the report was completed. I 

said that if that’s the case it should be filed, that I couldn’t see 

any justification for withholding it. 

 

No one from the government side, or none of our employees, 

have been in touch with him to try and get him to suppress this 

report or delay it in any way. That’s his decision. But I would 

hope that he files it and files it soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister opposite 

indicated yesterday that this government tries to respect the 

independence of the Chief Electoral Officer in every way 

possible. But how independent can this officer be with the 

Justice department interfering in the process? How effective can 

he be when he answers to Executive Council? This latest 

incident clearly shows the Chief Electoral Officer should be 

independent of cabinet. Even the Premier himself likes the idea 

of making the Chief Electoral Officer an independent officer of 

the legislature. And I quote from a June 8, 1996 Leader-Post 

article: “It’s got lots of merit to it.” 

 

We will be introducing a Bill, the Chief Electoral Officer 

accountability Act, which will have the officer report directly to 

the Assembly, as does the Ombudsman, as does the auditor, and 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. Will the government 

support our Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well as we always do, Mr. Speaker, we 

will take a careful look at it. I do think the member, while 

maybe not having gone over the edge yet, has gone right up to 

edge and looked over it with his suggestion that the Department 

of Justice has somehow interfered with this matter. 

 

I think that history may show us, that history may show us that 

the Chief Electoral Officer had consulted the Department of 

Justice with respect to some of the questions that arose in the 

report. I don’t know that, but that is my surmise. And I think 

that any suggestion that the Department of Justice has interfered 

in this matter is very likely unwarranted and certainly 

premature. 

 

Now let’s hope that the member doesn’t take the additional step 

and go spinning off into space the way he used to last year with 

respect to these questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  In response about spinning off into space, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what we’re trying to do, what we have been 

trying to do, is to restore some public confidence in this entire 

political process. But when the NDP government suppresses 

reports that might prove embarrassing, it is being disrespectful 

to this entire process. Quit interfering. Get out of the way and 

allow the Chief Electoral Officer to do his job and release his 

report immediately. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  He did it again, Mr. Speaker. He cannot 

restrain himself. He did it day after day after day last year and 

here he went today spinning off into space with allegations of 

suppression and interference which just plainly are not true, and 

that member knows it. That member knows it. He’s political 

grandstanding over a situation where an officer, where the Chief 

Electoral Officer, who must retain a degree of independence 

and autonomy from government, who is not subject to our 

orders, has made a decision — maybe the wrong decision. But 

to suggest that the government was in any way involved with 

him making that decision is just patently false. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Police Services Cost-sharing 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On April 10 

in this House I asked the minister of Municipal Affairs if she 

was soon going to be forcing RMs (rural municipality) and 

smaller villages to pay a portion of police costs, and she said 

no, for the time being the status quo is what’s in force; there’s 

no move to change that. 

 

Well then late in the session, late in the day, the eleventh hour, 

wham, we see a Bill before this legislature that would force 

RMs and small villages to pay for police costs, coming in 1997 

— same year as reassessment, the same year as 29 million 

disappears from funding to municipalities, the same year as the 

road access program is gone, same year as the promise of 10 per 

cent VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues disappears. 

 

Now the principle that all Saskatchewan people are going to 

have to make a contribution for police costs may be in order, 

but why did you have to hit them right now in this year when 

you’ve hit them so many other times in so many other ways? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I don’t know if I heard 

the correct . . . the word there but I believe the minister . . . or 

the member did not use some parliamentary language and I 

would ask him to restate. But I will allow the question to go 

until I read the verbatim. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, when I was asked 

previously whether we were going to charge, the legislation 

hadn’t been introduced and I said, no. On that day, the status 

quo was there. 

 

The legislation has been introduced, has had second reading 

yesterday, and there is no time frame on the measures that 

would be enabled by those changes. So there is not a date. It’s 

not a foregone conclusion that it will occur in this year. The 

amendments are enabling. 

 

And you know — you know — that it is a burden on 

municipalities of population over 500 who have to pay for 

policing versus those who don’t. And it needs to at some point 

in time be rationalized, and this is enabling. But there is no time 

frame on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



1652  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I think I get it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the 

minister of Municipal Affairs is telling me is that this may be 

the word today, but what the word is tomorrow, she can’t tell 

us. So what’s going on and what the story is, well that just 

changes from day to day. 

 

But this is an insult to local taxpayers — that there’s nothing in 

this legislation or the minister’s statement that tells us how hard 

she’s going to hit the rural municipalities. Before the Liberal 

opposition can support this, we need some figures or the 

formula. 

 

I’m sure the minister knows what she intends to do; what rural 

municipality ratepayers are going to have come up with. Why is 

she hiding it? Or is this just another case that the bad news is 

being held off until after the close of this session or after the 

close of the federal election? Why can’t she give us the whole 

story now? Let us know how hard she’s going to hit rural 

municipal ratepayers on this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, rather than 

grandstanding in this House over an issue, the member will 

have ample time in Committee of the Whole to raise all of his 

questions. And I’d like to quote to the member the statements 

that he made yesterday, quoted from Hansard after the second 

reading. This is Mr. Hillson, member from North Battleford. I 

would just . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now I’m sure 

that the minister has realized her error of using proper names in 

the House. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I was quoting from 

Hansard where the name is. This is what the member from 

North Battleford said yesterday: 

 

I would just say that the principle behind this legislation 

(referring to the police legislation) — namely that all 

residents of the province will have to contribute something 

towards their police services — is one that we accept and 

one which is reasonable. 

 

That’s what the member said yesterday. 

 

Let me say this. The Liberal government in Ottawa is making 

any rationalization more difficult by choosing this year to 

require that municipalities that have detachments pay the taxes 

and the maintenance costs on the federal buildings in their 

town. They’re making it more difficult. That’s what the Liberals 

do to offload onto municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Futures Program 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to 

ring-a-ding Lily, but after the last two answers, I’m not sure  

anybody’s home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of Municipal Government 

issued a news release yesterday confirming the elimination of 

the futures program. She indicates that the $16 million pay-out 

to RMs as part of the wind-up program will ease the financial 

pressure on rural municipalities. Madam Minister, the $16 

million is not new money. These are funds owed to RMs for 

roads which have already been built. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you misleading the people of 

Saskatchewan? Will you admit this is actually the money that 

you owe these municipalities from past years and it is not new 

money? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, speaking of not . . . you 

know, try to explain something to the members opposite, and 

you can never get through because the lines are always busy. 

 

An Hon. Member:  That’s right. Always busy, or off the 

hook. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, or off the hook. 

 

As the member opposite knows, the futures program was a 

flawed program, in that there never was, when it was instituted, 

a schedule of when the municipalities could expect to see their 

money back. There was nothing in the plan. So what happened 

is, municipalities were able to build roads from future 

allocations, building up a liability on the part of the government 

and an accounts receivable on their part. We wanted to end the 

program, reduce the liabilities. We’ll take a look at it. If it’s 

warranted that there should be a program of that kind, we’ll 

certainly make the design better so that there are clearer time 

lines when they’d get their money back. Now they have it all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s only one flaw 

to do with Municipal Government and it’s across there on the 

chair of the Minister of Municipal Government. 

 

Madam Minister, your sanctimonious news release also notes 

that RMs are free to undertake road building activity beyond 

their construction allocation on their own. Well if you know 

anything about municipal government you would know that 

RMs cannot do it on their own. And that is why the futures 

program was so important. The futures program cost this 

government no extra money and it has merely extended the 

yearly allotment of funding to RMs so they could carry out road 

construction. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you are slashing a program that served 

our local governments well, also served our taxpayers well. If 

you have any commitment to the rural municipalities, tell this 

House what future programs will be replaced with, and what 

commitment do you have to RMs that a new program is being 

developed which will allow them to do important local road 

work with a long-term plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Highways has tabled a transportation plan. There are planning 

councils active in the province. In the South West 

Transportation Council, where many municipalities, 107 

municipalities, are working together to come up with a rational, 

shared plan for transportation needs. 

 

I think it’s incredible that the member opposite would defend a 

program which was interest-free loans by municipalities to the 

provincial treasury. It was obscene and that’s why we ended it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporation Management Salaries 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the SaskPower Minister. Mr. Minister, late last 

year SaskPower gave raises to about two-thirds of its managers, 

averaging about 8 per cent. Of course Jack Messer led the way, 

boosting his base salary to over $166,000, an 8 per cent 

increase, while rank and file SaskPower employees got just 1 

per cent last year. Mr. Minister, we have also reviewed the 

contracts of senior SaskEnergy officials and found that several 

received pay raises on January 1, ranging from 5 to 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think it’s fair that senior executives of 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy are receiving hefty pay hikes while 

rank and file workers get just 1 per cent and consumers 

continue to pay record high utility rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin 

by correcting the member. With respect to utility rates in this 

province, we stack up against any other jurisdiction. And I want 

to say to that member, that SaskEnergy rates at this point in 

time are the lowest not only in the western Canada, they are the 

lowest rates in all of Canada. And I think all of the people that 

work in that corporation should be commended for that work. 

 

With respect, Mr. Speaker, to the rates that the CEOs (chief 

executive officer) and the senior management of these 

corporations are receiving, if you stack them up against any 

other utility in Canada and in North America, you will find that 

they are not by any stretch, even close to an average pay. 

 

I want to say that we have been, Mr. Speaker, through the 

collective bargaining process, have dealt with our in-scope 

employees. What we do across the piece with respect to the 

management salaries, I think has been reasonable and I think 

it’s been fair and I think we’ve got a hard-working bunch of 

people in those corporations who serve the people of 

Saskatchewan very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. This 

morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

Newsworld, I heard Alexa McDonough say that any family 

earning less than $100,000 a year in Canada is living in virtual 

poverty. So I guess the NDP are simply trying to fight poverty 

by giving Jack Messer and other senior appointees hefty pay  

hikes. I hope Jack is managing to make ends meet with his 166 

grand, plus benefits. 

 

Mr. Minister, why the double standard? Why do senior officials 

like Jack Messer get big raises while rank and file employees 

have their wages virtually frozen? 

 

Immediately after question period, I will be introducing an Act 

to Maintain the Equality of Senior Staff and Employee Raises, 

and by a strange coincidence, the initials of this Bill work out to 

the Messer Act. The Messer Act will ensure that senior 

management of Crown corporations are prohibited from giving 

themselves larger raises than that received by in-scope 

employees through their collective agreement. Will you support 

the Messer Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, without having a look 

at the legislation, it’s very difficult to comment. But I would 

want to say, given the initiatives of most of what the 

Progressive Conservatives have been involved in politically in 

this province for the last 20 years, I would probably want to 

exempt myself. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite, under your 

administration, one George Hill was paid 450,000 a year, the 

same job that’s being done right now by Mr. Messer for 

166,000. The average CEO for a Canadian utility is paid 

$595,000 a year, much more than the 166 paid by the CEO of 

SaskPower. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, I say as I said the other day — 

a little bit of selective amnesia the member has got. He forgets 

the salary that was paid to Mr. Hill — almost half a million 

dollars; the same job now being done by what is a very capable 

CEO for $166,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Absence Investigations 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. My questions are for the Minister of Education. 

Madam Minister, we’re both familiar with the case in 

Saskatoon where two children, 10 and 12, have not been in 

school. In fact the 10-year-old has been denied access to an 

education for months and months. The astonishing thing is that 

as far as we both know, neither of these brothers have been 

formally suspended or expelled. No one involved in this case 

has been forthcoming or they have provided completely 

conflicting information. 

 

Madam Minister, who has the responsibility and jurisdiction to 

investigate in depth what is happening in a case such as this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

must admit that I am not familiar with the case that the member 

refers to. There may have been correspondence sent to my 

office which has been referred to the department. So I just can’t 

recall what exactly she’s talking about, but I can assure the 

member that at the end of question period I will look into the 

situation and determine how best to ensure that these young  

  



1654  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

people are in fact in school. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Madam 

Minister, I have your letter here. My office has been in touch 

with your office, and you have signed the letter, Madam 

Minister. 

 

It came as quite a surprise to me to learn that this is not an 

isolated case. It has become so common that new terms have 

been created, terms not in your Education Act — terms like 

“disinvited” and terms like “deemed exempt from attending.” 

There is a troubling trend here — and it’s primarily urban — 

where children as young as seven are being denied access to an 

education. And if I know this, Madam Minister, then you most 

certainly do. 

 

What is your government doing about the estimated 319 such 

disinvited children in Saskatoon alone? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, what I can assure the 

member is that this government two years ago introduced a 

program in excess of $5 million to ensure that children, 

particularly with special needs, children that had behaviour that 

was difficult in terms of classroom management, would have 

access to additional programs through their school division. 

And there was recognition to the school divisions for the 

children that I’ve referred to. 

 

What I can say to the member is that according to The 

Education Act, all young people in this province between the 

age of 6 and 21 are entitled to an education, an education that is 

deemed appropriate to their particular learning needs and 

deemed appropriate to their special needs. 

 

What I can assure the member is that I will take her question 

and deal with her question at the close of question period, 

because I’m not familiar with the specifics of the case that she’s 

referring to. I literally get hundreds of letters each month and I 

can’t recall this specific case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, and, 

Madam Minister, if you’re getting hundreds of letters pertaining 

to this particular issue, I most certainly think that you should be 

able to advise this Assembly what the action is going to be on 

the part of your government. 

 

There appears to be no consciousness at all as to what these 

children are being suspended to — not suspended for, but 

suspended to, Madam Minister. Now I’ve provided you with 

pages 7 and 8 of the report of the Saskatchewan Children’s 

Advocate which states, and I quote: 

 

. . . parents have very limited opportunities to appeal 

decisions made by school authorities . . . (and) school 

boards . . . and there is no provincial mechanism in place to  

ensure that a concern raised by a parent will be dealt with 

in a fair and consistent manner. 

 

Now let’s put the facts on the table here. One case like this one 

raised today is too many. And there is no plan in place by your 

department to fix a serious, serious problem . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The member has been 

very long in her preamble and I would ask her to put her 

question directly, please. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I’ll put the question. Madam Minister, will 

your government as a first step determine who, in a neutral 

capacity, will have the jurisdiction to deal with children being 

denied access to education, as well as dealing with their parents; 

and will your government commit the funding necessary to 

support this important work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I can assure the member is that 

immediately after question period I will get information from 

my department as to the specifics of the case that she is 

referring to. 

 

What I can assure the member is that this government is 

interested in ensuring that every student in this province who is 

between the age of 6 and 21 and does not yet have a grade 12 

education, has access to an educational program that meets their 

specific learning needs. That is our obligation under the terms 

of The Education Act. 

 

What I can assure the member is that we will make sure 

immediately after question period that the case that she 

references is dealt with. That’s what I can assure the member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 

for the Minister of Health or his designate. Because of your 

health care cut-backs, Saskatchewan nurses are injuring 

themselves on the job. Heavy lifting of patients that used to be 

done by two or three nurses is now often left to just one nurse. 

As a result nurses are hurting their backs, having to take sick 

leave to recover, or ending up in the hospital. This could very 

well cost taxpayers more money than it would have to properly 

staff facilities in the first place. 

 

Mr. Minister, our caucus’s health care bill of rights would 

ensure that staff levels are safe for both patients and nurses on 

the job. Mr. Minister you should have no problem supporting 

this legislation because it would deal with situations just like 

this one. It would provide Saskatchewan families and nurses 

with the security and stability they need. 

 

Why are you refusing to provide Saskatchewan people with 

what they deserve? Won’t you support our health care bill of 

rights? 

 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know that 

in this budget year delivered . . . the budget delivered March 20, 

the district boards of the province of Saskatchewan will receive 

$51.3 million, or 5.2 per cent increase in funding, over the 

budget the year before. That’s after back-filling every one of the 

federal Liberal cuts. 

 

This is a 5.2 per cent increase — $51 million — to do exactly 

what we hope the member and I would agree on, and that’s to 

provide a safe workplace for our staff. 

 

Now I just find it passing strange, Mr. Speaker, that that party 

would be raising . . . because they and their right-wing 

colleagues, as we all know, are promoting some kind of a two 

tiered . . . I call it the Americanized Republican system. Now I 

want to just give an example, Mr. Speaker, of what that means. 

 

I have here in my hand a bill, a bill for six days of 

hospitalization in the United States of America. What’s the bill 

worth? — $80,000. That’s the kind of system that these folks, 

and their Reform friends, and the Liberals too, promote. This 

two-tiered, you-pay-as-you-go medicare. That’s what they’ve 

got in the U.S. (United States), Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

interested . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 235  The Maintenance of Equality of Senior 

Staff and Employee Raises (“MESSER”) Act 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill No. 235, The Maintenance of Equality of Senior Staff and 

Employee Raises (“MESSER”) Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I request that item 1, question 

66 be converted to order for return (debatable). 

 

And with leave, that item 2, question 67 also be converted. And 

with leave, that item 3, question 68, item 4, question 69, item 5, 

question 70, I hereby table the responses for these last three 

questions — 68, 69, and 70 — in the interest of open, 

accountable, and responsible government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Leave has been requested by the 

Government Whip to table answer to 67, and to table answers 

68, 69, and 70. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 69 — The Police 

Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’d just like to make a few comments regarding Bill 

No. 69. And I think all government members, and certainly the 

minister responsible, is aware of the concerns that this side of 

the Assembly has in regards to the Bill. 

 

In view of the fact that while the minister would lead us to 

believe that all the levels of government in this province are in 

agreement with this Bill, certainly SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) officials do have a 

problem, and individuals who represent small jurisdictions in 

the province of Saskatchewan, small communities who are now 

going to face an added cost that they didn’t have before. 

 

An added cost which, I think you will find, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when you take a close look at it, you will find many of 

these small communities, while they may not disagree with 

putting some money . . . monetary funds into a police support 

system, on many occasions find that they don’t really feel that 

they really receive a lot of police support. While they’re just a 

phone call away, the presence on a number of occasions or most 

of the time really isn’t that visible. 

 

And I think that’s one of the biggest arguments that small 

communities, small hamlets, and certainly rural governments 

have had over the past number of years with the way costs, the 

policing costs, is certainly covered in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the minister indicated that there’s been consultation with 

SARM, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), and the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 

 

I trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re not being led to believe 

that there’s total agreement on this, because I know there isn’t. I 

know that there are some major concerns yet, some concerns 

that individuals in these levels of government certainly feel 

need to be addressed, and I think some issues that need to be 

raised and some clarifications before this Bill would really 

proceed into debate in Committee of the Whole or into . . . 

certainly to even be passed in this Assembly. 

 

I know that a number of the members on this side of the House 

have received calls with regards to the Bill and wanted the 

opportunity to speak to it. 

 

I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at it, even in this 

Bill, there are aspects to this Bill that many people would agree 

with. And we also recognize the changing times that we face 

and the changes that are taking place in police work. 

 

  



1656  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

And the minister alluded to the fact that the RCMP are certainly 

upgrading their vehicles and RCMP members will have access 

to computerized data and computers in their vehicles; so that 

when they happen to pull over a person on the road or spot 

someone or want to get some information, they can key their 

computer and that information is available to them just at the 

push of a button, rather than having to go back to the office and 

dig into their files and do some extra legwork. 

 

And what it does, and I think the minister is right in that regard, 

it should give RCMP officials and local police more of an 

opportunity to have a visible presence on the street or on the 

highways — areas where people really feel and would like to 

believe that that visible presence is something that certainly 

deters criminal activity or people abusing or taking advantage 

of or disobeying the laws of our province. 

 

So Mr. Deputy Speaker, with those few comments, I just 

wanted to bring to the attention of the Assembly that there are 

some concerns with this Bill. The monetary issue is certainly 

the major question. And we want to know how far SARM has 

been communicated with on this issue and what kind of 

agreements will actually end up in place. 

 

I believe some of the agreements are going to be left to . . . and 

some of the fee structure is going to be left to regulations. 

That’s of a concern to us because of the fact that we don’t really 

get to debate it publicly. It’s put in there, in the regulations. 

Those regulations can be changed unilaterally by an order in 

council, which means that while today agreements in principle 

and what’s finally achieved at the end of the day may not . . . 

may be somewhat appealing to all of the community groups 

involved, when it comes to the costs, as they are moved into 

regulations, in two or three years down the road, smaller 

communities might find themselves, without their really 

knowing it, all of a sudden with major, major bills on their 

hands. 

 

So there are some issues that need to be raised, need to be 

addressed, and questions that we certainly need to deal with. 

And therefore, in bringing this to your attention, I want to give 

other members of the Assembly the opportunity to certainly 

speak to these specific concerns that they have in regards to Bill 

No. 69. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I agree completely with the member from 

Moosomin and actually the member from North Battleford 

yesterday who spoke on this, and I think we all have the same 

concerns. And I think we’re all being asked to do the same 

thing here. 

 

We’ve been presented with the shell of a Bill but once again 

this government’s up to its old tricks. We’re asked to look at a 

Bill, judge it, send it out to people, and they’re supposed to give 

us their response to what they think of it, with no numbers in 

this Bill absolutely whatsoever. I don’t know how we could 

even consider saying this is a good Bill, a bad Bill, or whatever 

until we quit using that old term, regulations, that this 

government seems so famous for. 

 

How can a town out there or a small town or an RM that is not 

being asked to pay for policing up to this point take a look at 

this Bill and say yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could live with this. 

I mean they haven’t had a chance to even see what it’s going to 

cost them. 

 

I would like to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I do believe at 

one point the Minister of Municipal Government had the 

numbers. I think RMs were actually told at one point that they 

would be paying approximately $15 per capita. And for some 

reason that has been withdrawn and pulled back. And I really 

find it amazing that now we are asked to pass something and we 

don’t even have all the information to do it. 

 

Another concern I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I realize 

that at the present time the provincial government pays 

approximately $61 million for RCMP services — it would not 

surprise me in the least if, when the smoke clears from all this 

and the regulations are brought in, that $61 million will end up 

being around 40 million and it will be another cut-back and 

another form of downloading on the smaller municipalities, 

small towns, villages, and RMs in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve saw this happen before and it would be not anything 

surprising to me if we saw it happening again here. And I would 

suggest to the minister that we will be watching. We will not let 

her get away with this again. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know really how we can judge 

this Bill on its merits until we see the numbers and we get more 

feedback from the people that are involved; although I don’t 

know how they give us an honest opinion on it when they also 

cannot see the feedback. 

 

And I would like to go back to this old adage of bringing 

everything in in regulations. Democracy really does not have its 

best shot at things when we always want to do it after session’s 

over, when nobody’s looking, and slide these rules in. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, also the other thing I think that brings to 

light the bad timing of this is from the day that this government 

was elected in 1991, we’ve saw nothing but downloading, 

passing the buck, balancing the budget on the backs of rural 

municipalities, towns, cities, RMs. 

 

And now on top of this, we’re asked to add another 2 or 3 or 4 

mills on the old scale to pay for policing, when these people out 

there just can’t afford it after all the downloading this 

government has done to them. 

 

This year alone urban municipalities have been dumped on to 

the tune of $17 million, rural municipalities another 12 million; 

now on top of that, these same municipalities have been asked 

to raise your mill rate once again to cover the policing costs. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn this 

debate until we’ve had more time to get feedback from the 

interested parties. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 67 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to be able to speak on Bill 67 today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, presently marketing boards are considered an 

important component of the existing farm economy in this 

province. Many producers believe that when the boards work 

properly, they enable producers of agriculture products to have 

some measure of protection from the uncertainties of price in 

the modern agriculture and agri-food economy. 

 

This is especially true for what the small producers say. And 

they say that the huge agri-business operations may think that 

they don’t need marketing boards, but the small and 

medium-sized producers, for the most part, believe that they do 

need them. 

 

Let’s talk about farm marketing boards, Mr. Speaker, and where 

the NDP stands on them. We have federal farm marketing 

boards. The most obvious is the Canadian Wheat Board. This 

NDP government has cried out in a loud and piercing voice that 

it wants the Canadian Wheat Board to be preserved and 

protected. 

 

The members of this government cried foul when the federal 

government allowed barley producers to vote on whether to 

preserve the Canadian Wheat Board’s monopoly on the sale of 

export barley and domestic malting barley. The NDP said that 

even discussing whether to open up the barley market to 

purchasers other than the Canadian Wheat Board was virtually 

treasonous. It was opening up the door to the destruction of the 

Canadian Wheat Board. And they were the champions of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and the single-desk system for 

agriculture products. That’s what the NDP says. 

 

Now let’s look at what the NDP does. Where the NDP holds 

power, as it does here in Saskatchewan, let’s look at what it is 

doing to the agriculture products marketing board, over which it 

has jurisdiction. Let’s look very closely, Mr. Speaker, because 

what we see is very revealing about the principles followed by 

the NDP, and the degree to which they are true to those 

principles. 

 

A close look at Bill C-67 will give our farm families in this 

province an opportunity to see just what kind of champions of 

the Canadian Wheat Board the NDP would be if they ever came 

into power at the federal level. The news is not comforting, Mr. 

Speaker, for proponents of single-desk marketing. 

 

This Bill would give to the provincial cabinet the unfettered 

power to dissolve all of the farm product marketing boards and 

commissions which exist in this province — dissolve them, 

discontinue them, and wipe them out without even allowing a 

vote by the producers who benefit from them. 

 

We are talking about real boards and commissions here. We are  

talking about these organizations — and I’ll list them so it’s 

clear who we mean. We’re talking about the Broiler Hatching 

Egg Producers’ Marketing Board, the Canola Development 

Commission, the Chicken Marketing Board, the Commercial 

Egg Producers’ Marketing Board, the Saskatchewan Pork 

International Marketing Group, the Pulse Crop Development 

Board, the Sheep Development Board, the Turkey Producers’ 

Marketing Board, and the Vegetable Marketing and 

Development Board. 

 

All of these organizations are to be potentially put on the 

chopping block. All of them are vulnerable if this Bill passes. 

All of them could be discontinued and wiped out and dissolved 

if this Bill passes. With one stroke of a pen, the provincial 

cabinet could decide it was no longer convenient for them or 

their friends to have the Turkey Producers’ Marketing Board in 

place to serve the needs of small and medium-sized turkey 

producers. 

 

And no vote will be held unless the provincial cabinet decides it 

wants a vote. And if a vote is held, the cabinet can decide the 

rules of the vote. If there is a vote, and if the producers decide 

to maintain the existence of their marketing board, the cabinet 

can simply override the vote and abolish the marketing board 

anyway. 

 

Quite astounding. And just as important, Mr. Speaker, is the 

breach of principles. There are at least two basic principles of 

Saskatchewan rural life that are being sacrificed here. One 

principle is the basic right of Saskatchewan agriculture 

producers to join together to protect their interests in a 

cooperative manner, which this government lauds. That right 

will be destroyed, Mr. Speaker. It will be gone and it will have 

been the NDP that will have destroyed it. 

 

(1445) 

 

The second principle that seems to have been thrown overboard 

in the rule of democracy . . . is the rule of democracy. Whatever 

happened to democracy? Whatever happened to the principle 

that democracy should rule? Mr. Minister, I ask you, Mr. 

Minister of Agriculture, can you look Saskatchewan farmers in 

the eye and tell them with a straight face that you need the 

power to dissolve their marketing boards without giving them a 

vote on the subject? I don’t think you can. 

 

Why do you want this power, Mr. Minister? Who are you doing 

this for? And who has pushed you to do this? Who is in the 

background telling you that you should do this? 

 

I don’t think that it’s marketing boards and I don’t think it’s the 

producers. We know because we have talked to many of them. 

The producers of this province say that they want to preserve 

their democratic right to decide for themselves whether to keep 

their marketing boards, amend them slightly, or wind them 

down. They are not willing to see the government take that 

power away from them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are over 2,200 members of SPI, and I 

can challenge the government to show me one scrap of evidence 

that they want their marketing board abolished  

  



1658  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

without even having the right to vote on the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move that debate on this motion be 

adjourned. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  My apologies, I’m sorry, but the 

member has adjourned debate on this motion once and cannot 

adjourn debate again. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

hon. colleague raised a great number of points and a great 

number of issues surrounding this Bill. And we are certainly 

very interested in looking into the ramifications of what this 

Bill has and the Draconian measures that could be taken in 

regard to the impact on orderly marketing in this province and 

in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, orderly marketing has been a cornerstone of many 

industries for a number of years in this province and across this 

country. And we are very concerned that the amendments in 

this Bill can potentially change that overnight. 

 

We have many people that have approached us to talk about this 

issue, and we want to very much look into it further. And at this 

time I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when I was a very young man — which seems like a long time 

ago — one of the things that, one of the things I did in the past 

life was to be involved with the poultry industry. I still am, in a 

different form, but one of the very first remembrances I had of 

my father-in-law’s family was meeting my father-in-law, who 

was a small poultry producer in the Kelvington area. And, Mr. 

Speaker, he started in the industry, as many people did 30 years 

or so ago in the poultry industry, and attempted, attempted to 

build an industry and to build a business for himself in this 

province. 

 

And many things that happened at that time were very 

disturbing, Mr. Speaker. Because what had happened is that 

people would come in and out of a commodity in a very 

haphazard way and many times producers who were trying to 

make a commitment to this type of an industry were being 

forced into a very disruptive and a very insecure way of dealing 

with their industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember on one of the very first occasions that 

I had to speak to my father-in-law about the agriculture 

business — and I had a lot to learn about it because I grew up in 

a town — he told me about all the work he and fellow farmers 

and colleagues had done at that time in terms of organizing 

themselves and trying to organize and petition government — 

and I might add, an NDP government of the day — to allow 

them to have the authority to organize themselves into orderly 

marketing boards, marketing agencies. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

remember all the trips and all the meetings and all the work that 

went into it by people like my father-in-law, who  

put in a lot of work to make sure that this was going to happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it did happen. It happened under legislation 

that was introduced a great many years ago, that allowed 

producers to organize themselves into orderly marketing. And it 

was legislation that was proposed to an NDP government, who 

was passed by an NDP government, and a government who said 

they stood for those principles of the producers having the right 

to come together in an orderly marketing system. Mr. Speaker, I 

thought that that was an important, an important principle that 

happened. 

 

And over the years, Mr. Speaker, there have been accusations 

that orderly marketing and marketing boards contributed to 

higher priced commodities. Mr. Speaker, I remember in 1972 

when I was involved with that, the Safeway flyer would say: 

whole fryers, 99 cents a pound. Mr. Speaker, I’d be willing to 

bet that right now you could see features advertised in the city 

of Regina at the present time that’ll advertise whole fryer 

chickens for 99 cents a pound. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, everybody in this House except perhaps a 

few Regina members, who don’t understand what it means to 

have the input costs go up so dramatically over the years, would 

understand how efficient that the industry has worked and how 

much good value that there actually has been contributed to the 

agriculture industry by the orderly marketing system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in Canada are very fortunate and very blessed 

in so far as we have the opportunity to have the highest quality 

food at a regular inspected way for people in our province at 

very affordable prices. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I guess the problem that I have with this 

legislation is the inconsistency of the principles of this 

government. Mr. Speaker, people have counted on the principle 

of orderly marketing over the years and all of a sudden this 

government is in a hurry to get rid of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to understand why that is so. We need to 

be concerned about what is in the interest of all of a sudden 

moving into that direction. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we 

have concerns. We want to know the real answer of why people 

like my father-in-law years ago and all the work that they’ve 

done over the years to have an orderly marketing program, 

should still be able to look forward to that and still be consulted, 

still understand why it’s necessary for this to change. 

 

Farmers and agriculture people are reasonable people, Mr. 

Speaker. If it’s indeed true that there’s good reasons why this 

should change, that the orderly marketing system that’s in place 

now should change because of pressures in the international 

world, pressures that need to be considered, and to changing 

commodities and value added processing, let’s have that on the 

table and let’s understand what those changes should be and 

let’s engage the people of this province, the producers, in that 

discussion. 

 

And I am confident that just as 30 years ago when my 

father-in-law travelled around this province talking to  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

agriculture producers, that they could see the need for orderly 

marketing at that time, if this government is so sure that they’re 

right in this venture, why not talk to the producers and have 

them understand why it’s important that this change happens 

now, Mr. Speaker. Because I’m convinced that if they took the 

time to consult and to talk to producers, you would find that 

they would be willing to understand the rationale behind this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s a concern that I have about it, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

concerned that what’s happening is, that we’re not having the 

full discussion with the people involved in the agriculture 

community about why these changes should be made. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m concerned about this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand here 

and sit here today in amazement at the government opposite 

trying to move along a Bill that our colleagues have pointed out 

will affect so many Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Not longer than 10 minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy 

House Leader and the Minister of Agriculture came across the 

floor to ask us our intentions of this Bill. We said that we would 

speak to it; we’d like to adjourn it for another day. 

 

The minister said, well fine. He says, I would like to move 

closure of this Bill but I want to make a few comments. And if 

you’d like to adjourn it again today, you go ahead and I’ll make 

my comments Friday next. 

 

Well all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, with the Premier in 

attendance in the House, they want to ram the Bill. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to go back and quote from an article in Hansard from 

April 24. A statement, Mr. Speaker, made by the Premier of this 

province in a self-righteous manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier was speaking about federal legislation 

being passed and he says, and I quote: “But what we do not 

support is ramming and jamming the legislation through . . .” 

And now, Mr. Speaker, today we see the Premier of this 

province ramming and jamming legislation through that will 

affect many of our producers. 

 

That’s the reason that we think we need to adjourn this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and I move adjournment of this Bill. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this 

debate. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this 

debate because I have been listening to the one or two Liberal 

speakers opposite on this issue, and to put it bluntly, I think 

anybody who listens to them has to come to the conclusion that 

there is high confusion as to what the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan stands for with respect to this particular Bill — 

high confusion. 

 

On the one hand, the words last stated by the member from Arm 

River was that they want to speak on this Bill and delay it  

for a certain period of time so that there can be consultation 

with the public at large. Note, no opposition to the Bill in 

principle; note, no support for the Bill in principle, at least not 

from him, but from further consultation. 

 

On the other hand, the previous speaker — the member from 

Melfort who spoke before the member from Arm River — got 

up and talked about the history of the marketing boards, 

particularly from his experience in the chicken and poultry 

industry. And he did not say that he was either for this Bill or 

against this Bill. What he said that he was against was the lack 

of provision in this Bill for a vote. 

 

The lack of a provision for the producers to have some say 

about when and how a marketing agency or a marketing board 

might be changed in its mandate and its directions. That’s his 

position. And he nods his head, as I’m speaking, in approval. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a debate in second reading on the 

principle of the Bill. A debate on the principle of the Bill means 

you are either for the principle of what the Bill does or you’re 

against it. And if you’re against it, you’re against it with reasons 

and cause. And if you’re for it, you’re for it with reasons and 

cause. What you are not is sort of in the current position of the 

Liberal Party, which is I don’t know if I’m for the Bill in 

principle or against the Bill in principle. I want to consult. I 

want to perhaps consider the question of whether or not there 

should be a vote amongst the producers. 

 

On that last issue, for example, that is a matter which can be 

introduced in Committee of the Whole, clause by clause, by 

way of a specific amendment introduced by the Liberal Party. 

And I so invite them to do that. And as the member from 

Melfort shakes his head that he’s going to do it, good enough — 

that’s how the democratic process works. Let him go ahead and 

do that, and we can debate the merits of it. 

 

But you cannot allow, I say with the greatest deal of respect, to 

have a debate in second reading of the kind of shallowness that 

the Liberals opposite are advocating on this particular issue. 

And doing so after they make their points of view of either 

further consultation or a need for further vote, and then 

adjourning the debate with only their point of view being 

articulated, and nobody else having a chance to respond. And 

nobody else having a chance to respond. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province and the farmers 

and the producers and the Liberals opposite ought to know 

exactly what’s going on here. This Bill which is being 

introduced by the government, approximates, roughly parallels, 

if not indeed is exactly identical to — but I won’t go that far —

in its principle to the provisions that existed in this Legislative 

Assembly, in this legislature, prior to 1990, which, as the 

minister indicated in the introduction of the Bill in second 

reading, had been removed by inadvertence. 

 

(1500) 

 

It is a provision which does not come from Mars and falls only 

on the province of Saskatchewan. It’s a provision which 

roughly is approximated in its principle and in its intent in all of  

  



1660  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

the other relevant provinces across Canada. It is a Bill which is 

intended to work with the producers in the key production areas 

to make the necessary changes in order to meet the challenges 

of the world and the global economy, of which the member 

from Melfort should be the leading acknowledger thereof and 

the leading exponent of the need for change. 

 

He is involved in a business or businesses in Melfort of what he 

knows he talks of — I respect his opinion in this regard — and 

what he knows for sure is true about what I say. The need for 

this provincial government, like every provincial authority, to 

make sure that we’ve got into place an orderly system for 

marketing, but one which is responsive for the 1990s and the 

21st century; one which makes his business viable on an 

ongoing business, which allows our farmers to get into 

production and to match the competition — whether it’s down 

there from Tyson Foods in Arkansas, or whether it’s from 

large-scale hog production and pig production in any other area 

at all. That is what the objective of this particular Bill is. That is 

the principle of the Bill. 

 

Now it doesn’t take a rocket engineer to figure out you’re either 

for that principle, and you’re going to be building for the 21st 

century, or you’re against this principle, and you’re not going to 

be building for the 21st century. 

 

It’s not a question of being for the Canadian Wheat Board or 

against the Canadian Wheat Board. It’s not even an issue of 

saying whether or not the New Democratic Party says on the 

one hand it’s for the Canadian Wheat Board but by introducing 

this Bill it’s against the question of orderly marketing. It is not. 

 

It is a question of adjusting the structures in cooperation with 

the producers involved in order to make the most sensitive, 

most efficient, most first-class, world-scale operation for 

agriculture available for the farmers of this province including 

the end-produce . . . users of their product like you, sir, in 

Melfort. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You got our votes for it too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And the Conservatives say, you’ve 

got the support in this operation. And I appreciate that because 

there are many things that we disagree on, but this is one which 

is a basic reality. 

 

This is a Liberal situation. And the former leader of the Liberal 

opposition says that the Tory leader supported the budget, and 

he did that too. Unlike you, who voted against the 2 per cent 

cuts in the sales tax; unlike you, who voted against the $57 

million increase for health care; unlike you, who voted against 

the increase on K to 12; unlike the hon. member from Saltcoats, 

who voted against the $2.5 billion in Highways, all the while 

getting up and advocating for more. 

 

You doggone right — some members of this House, regardless 

of ideology, can put that ideology aside and do what’s right for 

the province of Saskatchewan. And if the official opposition 

would once, once, just once in the life of this parliament 

understand that principle — and apparently it doesn’t do so in 

the course of this debate — it would at least get this principle  

accepted and maybe gain some credibility in the public at large. 

But it refuses to do so. It refuses to do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are the facts in this debate. This is the 

situation with respect to this debate, and this is all well-known. 

It doesn’t take, as they say, a rocket engineer to figure out the 

consequences of it all. You can drag on the Bill to this Friday. 

You can drag it on to next Friday, the next Friday after that, the 

next Friday, and go for as long as you want. But you know full 

well what you have to do to help out the producers, the farmers 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and that is to enact this Bill. 

 

It may very well be that we need to make some amendments in 

Committee of the Whole. That’s no argument why we can’t 

approve it in principle and move it to Committee of the Whole. 

But your arguments are no arguments for doing what you’re 

doing — namely, one after the other, without cause or reason, 

adjourning. 

 

That’s not a responsible way, if I may say so with the greatest 

respect, in which to conduct oneself in this Legislative 

Assembly as an elected, responsible member of the House. Nor 

is it a substantive way in which to work. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Check your record when you were in 

opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Check your record when you were in 

opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  You check . . . The member from 

Melfort says, check my record in opposition. I invite the hon. 

member to check my record in opposition. 

 

And I invite something else. If the hon. member from Melfort 

has as many years in this Legislative Assembly with the record 

that I have of service in the province of Saskatchewan, he too 

will be entitled to say that with some degree of creditability. I 

doubt that he will be able to have that because come the next 

provincial election, he and almost every one of the Liberals 

opposite will be defeated because of this kind of position that 

you take on this Bill. You will be defeated . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Pardon me? 

 

This is not the question of adjourning the debate. This is not an 

issue of adjourning the debate. The issue is the question of 

whether or not you adjourn the debate after mounting an 

argument of substance for adjournment. And secondly, 

mounting . . . at least giving the opposition a chance to respond 

to your arguments, going back to your side to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

You just simply can’t get up in this legislature and say, here are 

all the arguments — such as they are; I’ve already put my 

minimalist view on them — and I’m not going to give anybody 

on the government side or anybody else who wants to speak on 

this Bill a chance to speak on it. I’m just going to adjourn it just 

like that. 

 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

Well I’m sorry, it just doesn’t work that way in this democracy 

— just does not work this way. So I say to the Liberals 

opposite, you take a look at the history. You take a look at the 

substance of what this Bill tries to do. You ask your 

constituents how you should be voting on this Bill. You want 

time to consult with your constituencies? We’ll give you the 

time to consult with your constituencies, Mr. Speaker, but make 

sure you consult with them in fact and in substance and in all 

honesty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

official. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

today Jim Brickwell, senior policy analyst, Municipal 

Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Welcome to Madam Minister and her official 

this afternoon. 

 

I have already spoken on this and some of the other 

development Authority Acts and I have I think made it clear 

that my position is that — and on behalf of the opposition that 

— while we begrudge nothing for the river valley authorities 

that we have in this province, I am concerned that the river 

valley authorities that were set up in the ’70s get funding from 

the provincial government on an annual basis for now, 

something in the order of 20 years, while the communities that 

were not put on that list 20 years ago, can’t get on that list. 

 

And so the question I have for Madam Minister is, can 

something not be done to equalize it so that, say Prince Albert 

and North Battleford, that also have river valleys . . . we 

weren’t on the list 20 years ago, consequently we can’t get on a 

list now; our residents are in fact paying taxes to support the 

river valley authorities in Saskatoon and Regina and Swift 

Current and Moose Jaw. 

 

And I say I’m not condemning that, I’m just saying that there 

seems to be an inequity here, an inequity that was set back in 

the ’70s under the Blakeney administration. It’s never been 

corrected since. Could something be done so that all cities with 

river valleys that want to start authorities can start them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  As the member knows, we’ve gone 

through a rather difficult several years trying to live within the 

means of what the provincial revenues produce and what we 

can afford to accomplish with that. And certainly the matters  

you raise are matters that members on our side of the House 

have raised as well, who care about the parks and care about 

their development. 

 

I think initially these were meant to be centre-pieces for the 

province, located in areas where there was larger population 

centres and what not, and over the years we haven’t had the 

ability to even fully meet our funding needs for these 

established parks. But certainly into the future, the kinds of 

questions you raise would be part of the regular budget process, 

and like I say, there are certainly advocates who would like us 

to take another look at the urban parks question. 

 

We’re pleased, this budget, to be able to restore funding to the 

general park system in the province; so hopefully there’ll be the 

resources to be able to move along to have the discussion 

you’re talking about in the future. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I’d like to thank Madam Minister for that 

answer. But I would like to carry on for a moment, if I may, and 

say that while there are financial constraints I think we all in 

this province understand, nonetheless does it still not seem fair 

that even within those constraints, if it’s say 2 million or 1 

million that is going to be devoted to urban river valley 

authorities, that each community in the province should have an 

equal chance of getting a share of those funds, rather than year 

after year after year now for 20 or 25 years, the same cities get 

that pool of funding, the same cities do not get that pool of 

funding? 

 

And so I say I understand what the minister is saying, that 

there’s only so much money to go around, but why does it 

always have to go around to the same communities and why are 

other communities shut out year after year? Couldn’t we even 

within these financial constraints introduce a bit of equity into 

the system? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I can only respond that once you’ve 

established a certain level of infrastructure you have to pay 

attention to whether you can sustain the infrastructure you’ve 

already developed. So to add new projects means that you’re 

setting up a continuing expectation for maintenance of a new 

set of infrastructure. And we’ve had a great deal of difficulty 

maintaining the infrastructure that was already established. 

 

In this current year we’re undertaking a review process to 

rethink whether there’s a different way to look at the Authority 

and a different way to resource it and perhaps some of the 

things that you’re suggesting. We may find a different way to 

bring other resources into the Authority without always drawing 

from the general revenue well. But this is . . . the Wascana 

Centre Authority in particular is an award-winning park 

innovation that brought together the resources of three partners 

in the city of Regina to create a park that could be a real 

heritage piece for the province. It’s well used by a large 

population group. It’s a centre of tourism for the province, 

being in the capital city. And it also houses the grounds for the 

Legislative Building and other important activities within the 

capital. 

  



1662  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

So again, there’s no reason that you would not look at those 

things in the future. And we’re certainly doing a self-evaluation 

right now at the Authority because at this point we’re having a 

hard trouble maintaining the infrastructure that was established 

in the ’70s. 

 

So we need to address, first of all, what we’d do with our 

existing infrastructure before we start adding to it. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I accept those answers from the minister for 

now, but . . . And I also accept her assurances that in forward 

planning we will try and devise policies whereby other cities in 

the province can share in these advances. And I hope that the 

day may not be far off where communities like Nipawin and 

Prince Albert and North Battleford may also share. 

 

For now, I accept that. As I say, I do not begrudge the cities that 

are receiving funding at present for their river valley authorities, 

but I look forward to further developments and greater equity in 

the system in the future. Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — We have the same official, and 

welcome the new minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I guess I could repeat my points, but I won’t. 

Again though, I don’t begrudge Moose Jaw what they have 

done to develop their river valley. I congratulate them for it. But 

I just find it unfortunate that, say taxpayers in my home 

community, have had . . . financed that in part for many, many 

years, and we also have a river valley that could use some work. 

Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we’ll be assisted in our 

deliberations this afternoon by Mr. Jim Browne, who is the 

director of vocational services in the community living division 

of the Department of Social Services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Julé: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chair. And I 

welcome the minister and welcome to Mr. Jim Browne. And, 

Mr. Minister, I have a few questions regarding this Bill. I notice 

that this Bill will help reduce spending at the government level. 

But will it also reduce spending . . . (inaudible) . . . approval of 

cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, absolutely not, Mr. Chair. The 

matter of funding to our community-based services, residential 

services, is a matter of budget debate, both in the preparation of 

the provincial budget within government, cabinet level and then 

at the caucus level, and then of course it’s a matter of debate in 

the legislature and all those processes of accountability are 

there, including the Treasury Board process which is within 

government. This is simply a matter of expediting the payments 

so that the community-based organizations have a much simpler 

life, in our view. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

noticed in one clause, and I’m sorry I don’t have the reference 

to it right here, but I noticed that you’ve changed the wording 

from “provide . . . financial assistance to”; and you changed that 

to “enter into agreements with” people, organizations, etc. And 

I’m wondering does this mean that Social Services will be 

contracting out some of its services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, no, Mr. Chair. These services in 

essence are contracted services now, where we will contract 

with a society or a community-based organization to provide 

the services. This just establishes then the contractual 

framework by way of legislation to enable the payments to be 

made that we don’t, we don’t . . . aren’t required to do what 

we’ve been doing for some years now, which is the order in 

council process. 

 

So it’s not a new . . . it’s not any change in real life. The 

community-based services will continue to be providing the 

service. We will continue to fund them to provide that service. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m just wondering in 

regard to your statement, who will be accountable then for how 

that money is being spent? I would like to be reassured that 

there is some accountability going back to the minister and the 

government of the day from the organizations, and I think it’s 

absolutely essential that there is, there is some level of 

accountability. And I ask you if you can give me that assurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Chair. I mean there’s all sorts of accountability. 

 

And I don’t know if the member is suggesting that some of our 

community-based organizations are not accountable with how 

they’re providing, for instance, the group home services. They 

are 100 per cent accountable. There’s officials from the 

department that work with them, that are in contact with them. 

There’s never been, in my mind or my view, an issue raised 

where these community-based organizations providing these 

group home kinds of services are not extremely accountable 

both to the public, their own communities, their own boards,  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

and ultimately to the funder, which is the department. 

 

Of course that accountability comes right from relationships 

with regional offices of our department; it comes through the 

establishment of the contracts; it comes through ultimately to 

this legislature. And if any member of the legislature felt that 

there was a funded agency being funded by public money that 

was not utilizing those funds in the proper way, it would be our 

responsibility, as the elected member, to raise those questions. 

 

So there is, in my view, a very high level of accountability in 

our community-based organizations. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask the question 

because I believe that the organizations out there are not 

accountable; I just want to assure that everything will remain as 

such. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the Bill makes it possible for Social 

Services to enter into agreements with bodies inside and outside 

Saskatchewan. Why isn’t the department keeping the funding in 

Saskatchewan? What is the intent of this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we very often have 

contracted, for instance, with the Salvation Army. Salvation 

Army, as an example, in my home community of Moose Jaw, 

provides the trusteeship services. We often contract with the 

Salvation Army because the Salvation Army is a national, a 

national entity. Then our contract, theoretically, is with an 

agency which is outside of the province. That’s just one 

example; there would be others. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that’s all the 

questions I have regarding this Act. And I thank you and your 

official for answering these questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just before I move the 

committee report the Bill, I’d like to give thanks to Mr. Jim 

Browne, not only for his assistance here today but for all the 

good work that he and others in his division of our department 

are doing on a daily basis. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we are being joined now by 

Mr. Phil Walsh, who is executive director of the income 

security division of the Department of Social Services, 

immediately to my right. Just behind Mr. Walsh is Leanne 

Lang, from the Department of Justice. And directly behind me, 

Mr. Bill Duncan, who is our director in the Department of 

Social Services of financial services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and again welcome to 

your officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering, how did the department 

arrive at the increase to the Family Income Plan payments? And 

what I mean . . . Or in regards to that, how was it decided that 

an overall $3.3 million increase was adequate? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there’d be a number of factors 

in that particular decision. And I do want to say, while the Act 

before us is some of the legislative amendment that is making it 

possible for us to do the transition to the national child benefit, 

this is not the Act which really determines the exact financing 

of any given plan. But I think it’s appropriate that we can talk 

about some of the money involved. 

 

In this budget year we have, as the member indicated, dedicated 

some new monies to the Family Income Plan, which we see as a 

means by which we can begin to make the transition from our 

current situation towards the implementation of the 

Saskatchewan and national child benefit. 

 

The member raises the question: how is it determined that the 

$3.3 million of new resources being added this year is 

appropriate or adequate? Let me say on the adequacy side, I 

don’t believe it is. We’ve not yet reached the adequate levels 

that we hope to achieve — target — but it’s a movement 

forward. And that’ll be based on, sort of, the resources that are 

available to us to work with and how we can dedicate them, and 

we felt that this is one of the best places that we could dedicate 

what new resources we have. 

 

We tried to do this in a fashion that we will not be contradicting 

any change that will be coming along as a result of our 

cooperation and initiatives with the federal government towards 

the national benefit. 

 

So that’s our goal with these new monies. It’s sort of the money 

that we had available that we thought we could target to this 

purpose. It’s intended to move us along the way towards the 

national benefit, and the same thing we’re doing with this 

legislation. It’s putting our legislative house in order that we 

can then quickly move into the national benefit. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will the 

department or the minister have any tools or methods to 

evaluate whether the increased payments under the Family 

Income Plan are sufficient? 

 

And I ask that question because I know that there are numbers 

that you have right now of people that would be receiving this, 

but I also anticipate that with some of the training coming up 

and so on, that there — and people may be, hopefully, getting 

into the workforce — that there will be more. So I’m just 

wondering what methods you have used to evaluate whether 

this amount of money and the increased payments is sufficient. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well again, Mr. Chair, the question of 

sufficiency is a very debatable issue. And I’m of the view that  

  



1664  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

we won’t have a sufficient program until, in cooperation with 

our federal counterparts, we see the road-map to take us to at 

least a $2.2 billion contribution from Ottawa. Then I believe we 

might start looking at some descriptions of sufficiency. We’re 

not to sufficiency; we’re on a movement towards that, I’m 

hoping. 

 

We will be monitoring of course the take-up on the Family 

Income Plan. Like the member points out, that we are seeing 

some growth in employment which means more people coming 

into the workforce that might be eligible for the benefits. We’re 

seeing changes in training programs, hopefully to get people 

into an independent circumstance where the Family Income 

Plan might be more applicable to their situation. 

 

What we’ve done is utilized our best, our best knowledge of 

past experience with the Family Income Plan; the best sort of 

estimations that the officials in the department can make, and 

they have a broad depth of resource and background 

information to work from. And the numbers that we’ve looked 

at, as we expect to be benefiting under the plan, are the best 

estimates that we can give with all that background information. 

 

We’ll be tracking of course very carefully over the next period 

of months to see . . . just to see how it is affecting income of 

families in our province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

refer you to section 3 that was repealed. This Bill eliminates the 

position of the director of income security, who administered all 

income security programs, and now several different people 

will administer income security programs — I understand the 

unit administrators, the program managers and third parties. 

 

It would seem that having one person to administer the 

programs instead of three would mean that the person . . . that 

person could be held accountable for how things are done. So I 

ask you, what is the purpose of eliminating that position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, what we’re trying to do in 

fact is two things: one of them is to in fact improve 

accountability; and two, bring the decision making and the 

service as close to the client as we possibly can. 

 

And so what in essence has happened, we’ve moved that 

important role of decision making to our unit managers, i.e., 

into the regions. So it’s as close to the client as is possible. 

 

But then to ensure the accountability, we have now made our 

regional managers directly responsible to the deputy minister of 

Social Services. And so that accountability now is directly to 

the most senior official in the department. 

 

So it’s two things — to that layer of accountability right to the 

deputy, but equally to move the decision-making choices closer 

to the client. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I could refer you now 

to section 10 that was repealed. This Bill removes the social 

assistance levy from municipalities. And I’d like to know how  

much money for social assistance came from municipalities 

before this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps I can suggest to the 

member while we’re getting that, the specific . . . we’re going to 

have the information here in a matter of seconds. Someone had 

to leave the room to get the precise number. If she wants to 

move on to another question we could do that, and then we’ll 

get that number here in a matter of seconds. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and we will do that. 

 

If you could move to section 14 please, amended. I note that 

this Bill also makes provisions to set up appeal procedures for 

people who do not feel that they have been assessed fairly. 

Because there are already appeal procedures in place, isn’t this 

just duplication? Can’t the appeals procedure for income-tested 

and needs-tested programs be combined into one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I appreciate the member’s 

concern here but because we are pioneering something 

brand-new here, in terms of the child benefit and the 

employment support programs, this appeal process will be 

quite, quite different than the appeal process that now exists for 

social assistance. 

 

But because we are going to continue to have the more 

traditional social assistance program as well, at least for some 

period of time, we will maintain the appeal process for social 

assistance, which as you will know, involves community 

members — not people from the department but members of 

the community — again on a regional basis so that they can be 

close to the clientele. 

 

This new appeal process will be for the much simplified 

children’s benefit. It will in essence consist of one person at a 

central point. So that we do have that process of appeal so that 

someone can appeal, but because the new system will be so 

much simpler we believe it can be handled by one person in one 

office. But we want to maintain the appeal process but at the 

same time, in the more traditional social service delivery, to 

maintain the appeal process for that group of clientele. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. There is a . . . Order. There is a 

conversation taking place in the Assembly that is a joyous 

conversation, but I just want to suggest to those members 

engaged that it is somewhat disruptive at times. The noise level 

simply gets a little bit high and I ask you to keep the volume 

down a little bit. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, an 

appointed adjudicator will hear the appeals. I would like to 

know whether or not you have set some criteria whereby you as 

minister will choose those adjudicators. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The answer, Mr. Chair, is no, we’ve not 

worked out that detail yet. And recall that we’re looking 

towards, our hope would be an implementation date perhaps by 

the end of this year. It’s been indicated to us by the federal 

minister that implementation is July ’98. I’m hoping at least we 

could compromise somewhere in between — between the two.  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

But over the course of the summer and early fall, it’s this kind 

of detail we need to work through. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, will you be using past 

criteria that you have used for selecting staff and so on in the 

same way that you will be . . . will you be using that in the same 

way for adjudicators? I’d like to know how the adjudicators will 

be chosen as such. Will they be members — or not members, 

excuse me — will they be staff that presently exist or will there 

be an invitation for these positions from outside of the existing 

staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps just to reflect on the 

current circumstance of our appeal boards, those are individuals 

drawn from the community. We will invite a variety of sources 

within the community to suggest names that might be 

appropriate for appeal board members. On occasion I’ve 

consulted with some members of the legislature on all sides of 

the House around appropriate names of people from the 

community that might serve on an appeal board. 

 

Because here we’re, in essence, finding one person for the 

province, I’m sure there would be some consultation, perhaps 

with agencies in the community; it might be a consultation we 

have within the confines of this legislature. 

 

Will want to be someone for sure who everyone can have a high 

degree of confidence in, that someone that has expertise and 

perhaps some mediation kind of skills and abilities. But it for 

sure will want to be someone that everyone can look at and say, 

there is a fair individual who will fairly adjudicate disputes. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, can you 

anticipate about how many adjudicators there will be in the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, because of the, sort of, the 

simplicity of the administration of the benefit, we’re expecting 

at this point that we will name one. Now if it’s shown that the 

one is not sufficient, then we would look at perhaps expanding 

that. But we’re going to start trying to find one person who can 

do this central adjudication. 

 

It’s just not going to be anything like the current circumstance 

of appeals and the complicated process by which individuals 

access Social Services, defining their needs and balancing the 

needs with the resources and so on. This will be a process . . . 

income tested, family income tested, very responsive to any 

change in monthly income. And so it’s a much . . . it’s an 

income-based kind of a program, and we think will be relatively 

free of complication, therefore relatively free of dispute. 

 

But knowing that in any program there may be some room for 

dispute and there may be some room for error on our behalf and 

so on, that we do want to have a process in place. But we think 

right now that a single person, a single office, can deal with it. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, have you 

been able to sort of determine how much money there will be  

put aside to administer the appeals process, and to pay the 

adjudicator? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Madam Chair, there will be perhaps two 

. . . or, Mr. Chair, there may be perhaps two levels of expense 

here. One will be some administrative expense for that process. 

And I expect we’d absorb that right within the department; that 

that’ll be provided by existing staff and resources in the 

department. 

 

Our current appeal board members that serve in the regions are 

compensated on a per diem basis. They would meet for a day 

and may hear a whole number of appeals in the course of the 

day, so we compensate on a per diem basis. It’s not yet been 

determined if that’s going to be the appropriate way to handle 

this more central appeal officer or not, but I expect something 

like that. This will not present a large or even a very significant 

budgetary expenditure. 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Minister. Is there an evaluation 

planned for the future to assess the new income-tested 

assistance plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  This will be and has been I think already, 

Mr. Chair, the subject of some discussion. But again it’s going 

to have to be a process that we work out on the national, on the 

federal-provincial basis. Because we’re talking now about a 

national program — not a federal program, not a provincial 

program, but a national program — that involves both the 

federal government, provincial governments, territorial 

governments. 

 

And so as we work through all of the steps towards the 

implementation of the national program there has already been 

some discussion I know, among officials about building in 

some evaluation tools and accountability tools and so on, as we 

go. But it’s not something that we can just determine alone. It 

will have to be done in conjunction with the other provinces, 

territories, and the feds. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. And I do thank your 

officials and I would bid them a fine afternoon. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. To the 

minister: I note from this that we’re bumping the amount for 

income supplement from 105 to 120. And I recognize the 

member from Humboldt has asked some questions. What’s the 

criteria that you base this on? And is there a family income 

level that comes into effect before a supplement is paid out? Do 

social services recipients receive this as well? Is this a top-up of 

the social assistance program that’s out there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, before I forget, I want to 

return to the member from Humboldt to give the response to the 

question that she asked earlier this afternoon in terms of the 

social service levy and the total amount. Last year the total 

amount was $3 million. 

 

Now to the member from Moosomin’s question around the  

  



1666  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

Family Income Plan: it is not intended to be a top-up to social 

service. It is intended to be an income support for families who 

have some income — usually through work — but income that 

perhaps through their work is not adequate to meet the needs of 

the family. 

 

Now it can be available to social assistance recipients who may 

be receiving some benefits, and in combination with those 

benefits or work benefits still can get the benefit of the Family 

Income Plan. But it is to assist those families who for the most 

part are working poor, working poor. One, to keep them from 

sliding into the need for social assistance and hopefully to 

provide them benefits that can help them grow in their own 

experience, in their own lifestyle, and so on. What our changes 

this year try to do, because in some ways we’re focusing — not 

in some ways, we are focusing the building, the benefits, on 

children, it’s dedicated to families with children. 

 

And so we want this to be a step forward towards the national 

child benefit, which will then hopefully, when complete and 

fully resourced, will be able to provide for all of the basic living 

needs of a child in our province, not through welfare but 

through a national child benefit. That’s where we’re trying to 

head. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

Mr. Minister, what you’re basically saying then is Social 

Services has, let’s say for a family of five — there’s a couple of 

parents and three children — Social Services has a level of 

support. I’m guessing that it’s in that $1,100 range. I’m not 

sure; it depends on housing and what have you, but I’m 

guessing it’s there. 

 

So what you’re basically saying is if a family income should be 

at that or close to that level, they probably wouldn’t then 

qualify for the supplement? At what level does the supplement 

kick in at? Is it a wage of five sixty, about $800 a month, or is 

there a specific level that it kicks in at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, if your income is 850 a 

month, you would receive the maximum benefit under the 

Family Income Plan. As your income then rises . . . and it’s 

dependent too on the number of children that you have, but at 

850 you would get the maximum benefit per child, given the 

number of children in your family. Then the benefit begins to 

decrease as your income rises. 

 

What is significant also about the change though is that with the 

benefit now we will be providing for children in these families 

the full supplementary health coverage that they now would 

receive as welfare, and that full supplementary health coverage 

carries right on through. Even as your financial benefit may 

shrink with your growing income, the health benefit will carry 

right through until you’ve reached that income stage where 

you’re no longer eligible. 

 

So we think this is the key component to assisting families of 

low income circumstance — of not getting into the welfare 

system just to have to get the health benefit. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when do  

you anticipate this program will get off the ground? As soon as 

the Bill is declared and it will be . . . or are you looking it’s 

going to be July 1 start-up date? Or when do you expect that 

this will certainly come into force? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The Family Income Plan program and 

the changes which I’ve just been talking about came into effect 

on May 1. That’s the initiation of the change here in the 

province. We’re hoping that in working with the other 

provinces, working with the federal government, that we could 

get the national child benefit going as soon as possible. That’s 

been our position — as soon as possible. And it’s not a simple 

thing to bring 10 provinces, territories, and the federal 

government into harmony on how things should flow. It’s not a 

simple process, but we’re working towards as soon as possible. 

 

What the federal Minister of Finance has indicated is that they 

are targeting July 1998 for the implementation of the national 

benefit. Now at that point in time, if we have to wait until July 

’98, we’re still only working on a federal government 

commitment of $600 million to the program. And it’s been 

agreed I think by all — independent observers and others — 

that to make this truly an effective, long-range social program 

for Canadian children from coast to coast that we need an 

injection and a federal commitment of 2.2 billion. 

 

The federal minister has indicated very clearly that the 600 

million that they have dedicated now is seen by the federal 

government as a down payment, that this is not the end of the 

. . . not by any means the end of their commitment. They have 

described it as a down payment. We know that that down 

payment has to reach a commitment of 2.2 billion before we 

can say that the program is essentially altogether in place. But 

the latest then that we see a start to the program would be July 

1, 1998. 

 

We made the changes May 1 this year because we want to start 

moving in the direction. If we’re not getting there as quickly as 

we can with the federal government, we believe it is important 

to move right now in this budget year. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  To ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, 

and members from the opposition. I want to introduce someone 

who I hope maybe someday might even be a future member of 

this Legislative Assembly. And we all introduce very special 

people to ourselves. Today I’m really happy to introduce two 

very special people to me, my daughter Sharla, who came to 

visit the Legislative Assembly, and her daughter and my 

granddaughter — and it’s quite coincidental I might say —

whose name is Alexa. She’s speaking to the House. 

 

So members please join me in extending Sharla and Alexa a 

warm welcome. 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 58 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 

I would have to add that her good looks — I’m not sure where 

they actually came from. But we certainly welcome her here. 

 

Mr. Minister, coming back to this debate on the question here. 

You’re saying, as of May 1, $120 per child is available. How 

does a family apply for this income? 

 

And the other thing I would like to add, Mr. Minister, is you’re 

talking about a federal injection into it. Are you talking of when 

the federal government injects funds into it that they will then 

top this up to another level? Or are they just going to pick up 

and you’ll just back away from part of the funds? You’ll only 

fund like, say 50 per cent of it and they’ll fund 50 per cent. Is 

that how I perceive the program working when the federal 

government comes in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  On the member’s first question around 

the Family Income Plan, it changes on May 1. I hope that he has 

received, I hope every MLA in the House has received 

information about the program. If you haven’t, we’re going to 

get it to you like immediately. But all of that information is now 

in all of our regional offices. 

 

We’ve taken what’s not typical actually in the Department of 

Social Services, but because of what we believe is the 

importance of this and the real difference it can make in some 

people’s lives, we’ve taken a step we don’t often take. We’ve 

taken out a limited number of newspaper adverts to acquaint the 

public with the program and have printed a number of the 

brochures and posters that are now being distributed and 

displayed around the province. 

 

Each and anyone who may be interested could just phone their 

regional office of Social Services and the application . . . It’s 

quite a simple application. It’s not near the kind of application 

that’s called on when you’re applying for social assistance. It’s 

quite a bit clearer; it’s a declaration of income and so on. 

 

And I’m hopeful that your office will have received it and I 

know how that works — may be in Moosomin and here in 

Regina and so on. 

 

On the question of the federal contributions to the national 

benefit, it is a national program and so we are cooperating to 

craft this one program. We’ll each be putting resources to the 

program. 

 

But this province and all provinces, to my understanding, have 

made the commitment now to the federal government, that 

when new monies are made available by Ottawa for the 

purposes of addressing children and families of low income 

circumstance and children and families in need, that we make  

the commitment to them that any monies then that will be freed 

up as a result of that would be redirected within the province to 

programs and issues that touch low income families and 

children. And I know that our federal counterparts will be very, 

very anxious to monitor and to ensure that this happens coast to 

coast. And on this I support them 100 per cent. 

 

We are hoping here to craft a national social program, one that 

Canadians, no matter where you live, can benefit from. And if 

it’s going to have a national component, it needs that federal 

oversight to make sure that all of we provincial jurisdictions are 

moving on a similar track. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you and I 

have had discussions — your former minister as well — have 

had some discussions as far as some kind of income for low 

income families, families who are individuals who choose to 

take a job rather than going to social assistance, but as a result 

of taking it find themselves with a greatly reduced income. And 

we’ve talked about the idea of a supplement. Now this 

supplement basically targets children, as I understand it. 

 

But let’s say a family finds it’s just part-time income and 

they’re at $500. This still doesn’t bring them quite up to the 

point of where they may be if they went to Social Services, say 

a family of two parents and three children. Are you looking at 

maybe some other programs down the road or is this part of that 

additional programing that might be available as the federal 

government comes on stream with their funding of this 

supplement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, with ideas like that there 

would be room in the department for the member if he wants a 

position. This is exactly what we’re trying to do, exactly what 

we’re trying to craft. We’ve started, I think importantly, with 

children. We’ve started, importantly, with children because we 

know that the more that we can do for children immediately, the 

significant long-run benefits are for us all. 

 

But when we . . . And this legislation, this is dead on to the 

discussion about this legislation, because what this legislation is 

doing is giving us the framework to do some of these options 

that don’t currently exist under the current legislation. And 

when those resources start moving from Ottawa to support the 

child benefit thereby freeing up some of our resources, this is 

exactly where we want some of those resources to go. 

 

We’ve described it in our discussion paper as a program of 

employment and maintenance supplements. So that in fact we 

can support those families to make sure that it remains more 

advantageous financially to be supported outside of the welfare 

or the social assistance program than it is within. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and as I’ve indicated 

before, I think we need to certainly work at programs that really 

give people the . . . and allow them the initiative to accept 

whatever job may be available and to work with them to help 

them to at least create a level of income that certainly will help 

sustain their family. 

  



1668  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

One further question, Mr. Minister, and this is a concern I have. 

In view of the fact we do hear on a number of occasions with 

the expansion of gambling, the VLTs that are available 

throughout the province, the access to some of the gambling 

programs, and then one thing that really concerns me is two 

weeks ago that program CBC did on child prostitution and 

talking to children, and some of the comments were made about 

the fact they needed more money to actually put food on the 

table. 

 

Is there . . . do you have something in place, Mr. Minister, to 

monitor the fact that while you’re targeting and this supplement 

is going to be made available on the basis of children, is there 

something in the program to indeed make sure that the money 

goes to the utilization of providing for children rather than 

being taken and abused by the parents and maybe used to cover 

such as a gambling habit or another habit they may have? 

 

I think we all agree that we want to provide and make sure our 

children are getting the benefits. And that’s one of the concerns 

I would have at the end of the day, is that indeed we are 

addressing this and that those monies indeed go toward . . . 

where you’re aiming or the intent of the legislation. So, Mr. 

Minister, maybe you could respond to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think we’re all sensitive to 

that desire, that where we have resources, we want the resources 

to be going to where the need is. And if we have resources 

dedicated to children, we want to be sure that the children are 

benefiting from those resources. I guess we will never, ever 

discover the perfect mechanism to guard against all human 

foibles. I don’t think we’ll ever do that. 

 

In the current circumstance of individuals, for instance, who 

will be receiving social assistance in our province — and it’s 

demonstrated to us that some of the benefits may not be 

reaching the children as we would hope they would, in that 

circumstance those families very likely will be put into a trustee 

situation. 

 

And I spoke earlier to the member from Humboldt about the 

Salvation Army serving that role in some of our communities. 

And so the benefits then are provided to a trustee; in the Moose 

Jaw example it would be a Salvation Army trustee. That person 

then works with that family to ensure that the monies go to 

provide the benefit. There is never a perfect solution. 

 

I do want to say though that — this is maybe a little off subject 

— but earlier today I had the experience of meeting with a 

number of people who are involved in the Anti-Poverty 

Ministry here in the city of Regina. And a number of people are 

leaving this city to travel to Edmonton to a conference that will 

bring together people who are actually themselves living in 

poverty, to start discussing solutions about empowerment for 

themselves, looking at options of co-op job creation, and that 

sort of thing. 

 

I was very pleased that we could play some small role in 

assisting this because so often I think we have solutions — and 

some of them are good; some of them maybe not so good — but 

very often if you really want to know the solution to a  

problem, you go and talk to the person who’s living with the 

problem. 

 

In this case, these are folks who are living in these 

circumstances daily. And I think they’re going to come back 

with some very significant ideas about how their lives could be 

empowered, and share that with others in our community. 

 

So there are some, I think, some very good things happening. 

At the same time we need constantly to be vigilant about the 

public money. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Deputy Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 

that’s important. I think the more you look at working with 

local groups and local agencies, that goes a long way in 

addressing some of these concerns. And that input is certainly 

positive. 

 

I think when you look at what groups are doing . . . I’m just 

reminded just recently I believe, the food bank here in Regina 

setting up a greenhouse. I think that’s excellent. 

 

There are certainly ways and means in which people work 

together, and I just met with one of the . . . not a recipient, but 

one of the young individuals who completed the occupational 

health and safety program. He’s part of a group of volunteer 

individuals going to help Manitoba residents. And I think that’s 

just a good indication of how people can work together, even 

not only in their own communities but reaching out to other 

people who are less fortunate. 

 

So the more we can do together, the more we can bring groups 

together . . . and certainly this conference, I think is positive. So 

I thank you for your comments, your responses, Mr. Minister, 

and I thank your officials for being here this afternoon. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, before reporting the Bill, I 

want to say again to the officials who have joined us, our thanks 

for their support in the deliberations of committee this 

afternoon. 

 

But I particularly want to thank these officials for the work they 

have done in preparing this legislation, and in fact in preparing 

the concepts that now are reflected in this legislation — the 

concepts of a national child benefit. 

 

It’s very often, I think, we who are elected and are on the public 

platform that receive some of the credit when in fact so much of 

the work, so much of the creative thinking, happens in our 

offices within departments of government. And I want to extend 

my deepest thanks to the Department of Social Services in this 

province for its very able and creative thinking. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the Bill 

without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 

The Deputy Chair:  Will the minister introduce her officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 

Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Education; to my right is 

Michael Littlewood, executive director of third party funding 

and legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

Thank you, Madam Minister, for being present with your 

officials this afternoon so we can begin our first discussion of 

some of the clauses under Committee of the Whole. 

 

And I understand that we are under a time restriction and indeed 

we’ll probably spend about 15 minutes on this Bill in terms of 

some introduction, okay. 

 

As I indicated before, Madam Minister, I think the clauses that 

we have before us regarding the structuring and restructuring of 

the school year, the school day, the indeed clarification of 

whether or not the extension of a school day was in the old Act 

or is in the . . . Those are things that I will not raise today 

because I think they are necessary and indeed we have not had 

the comments from stakeholders regarding any disapproval with 

those. 

 

Where I would like to begin, Madam Minister, is in clause 17. 

And that is for review of designation, placement, or program. 

And I’d first like to begin by asking you, under the existing Act 

or the existing regulations, what process is in place to deal with 

that very concern by parents of students who may be designated 

or may not be designated. What exists currently? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The present wording in the legislation 

has been seen . . . has been reviewed by Justice, and it has been 

found to not be legally binding. And at present what parents can 

do, even though apparently the legislation has no power 

because it’s not legally binding, parents can ask for a tribunal to 

review the school board’s designation of their young person, 

and the tribunal’s decision is binding. But as I said earlier, 

Justice has found this not to be legally enforceable. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, while I see the need to 

address the concerns of designation or non-designation, and in 

fact the program that is to be in place . . . And I see that by the 

legislation you have indicated that the board must put in place a 

process to ensure that these appeals can indeed be heard. Have 

boards reacted to this already? And are you aware of whether or 

not boards have in place, based on what the regulations 

currently say, an appeal process for program and for 

designation or non-designation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The current regulations don’t require a 

board to have a process in place, and what happens is the parent 

can apply to the regional director to have an inquiry set up. But 

as I said earlier, these procedures have been found not to be  

legally binding by the Department of Justice and that’s why 

we’ve introduced the amendments to The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Two quick questions to that then, Madam 

Minister, is why did you see the need to include placement as 

far as an appeal process? And then secondly, who will be 

responsible for the costs of that appeal procedure that would be 

followed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We expect that boards would set the 

process up. This is not expected to be a quasi-judicial process. 

This is a reasonable process in order that parents might be able 

to appeal to a group of people to have the recommendation of 

the school board reconsidered. Now obviously it’s a review 

panel; it is not a binding panel. The recommendations of the 

panel are not binding, but it does give parents a place to go 

when they’re concerned about the recommendation of the 

school division. 

 

In terms of where did this come from, I can share with you that 

I’ve had representation from parents, the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living, as an example, for the 

department, the government, to do something, given that what 

we thought we had in place is not legally binding. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. My final 

question around that particular section I guess looks at, do you 

see this as a potential of precedent setting for other parents of 

students not in . . . not with students with disabilities or anyone 

who may be designated, but students of some particular other 

interest who suddenly say, well I would like to be able to appeal 

the placement of my child as well? Is there a problem that that 

may occur? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think it’s fair to say that the special 

needs students that we’re talking about have a number of issues 

surrounding their program and placement. It has to do with 

integration, segregation and so on. One of the issues is, will a 

high school student be placed at their local high school if they 

are a special needs student, or will they be transferred to some 

other school? 

 

And we don’t expect there to be many, many, many appeals by 

parents. What we do think is that this will give a parent a place 

to go that will provide an independent look at a decision of the 

school board in terms of program or placement. The panel 

recommendations will be that — they are simply 

recommendations. They’re not binding on the school board as 

the old legislation was when it came to designation. 

 

And we think that this does not have to be an expensive 

process. It’s not a quasi-judicial process, and it’s simply a 

matter of allowing parents access to another process that’s a bit 

independent, that can make recommendations, but obviously the 

recommendations aren’t binding. Sober second thought is what 

I’d refer to it as. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, if I could now refer to 

clauses 19 and 20 of the amendment, specifically section 203  

  



1670  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

and section 204. I’ve stated, Madam Minister, that I believe that 

in . . . for the process of restructuring and amalgamations to 

occur we have to have all stakeholders onside to ensure a 

successful, a successful restructuring in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And you, I believe, have indicated that there are 

a number of projects, of such projects that will be taking place. 

 

I know you’ve described in this House the situation that may 

occur regarding two or three or four or many more school 

divisions. And the question that I have I guess is, do you 

foresee that this could become a very troublesome kind of 

clause if indeed there isn’t a process to bring about the 

negotiation of a new collective agreement for that particular 

entity? And I guess what I’m referring to more so is where there 

is a situation that no school division remains in place and 

indeed you’re putting five or three together and there is a new 

structure. 

 

As I see your amendment, the Acts will remain in place . . . the 

contracts, I’m sorry, will remain in place until a new contract is 

negotiated. Do you see this becoming cumbersome with the fact 

that individual new teachers will join into that, into that mix as 

newly employed people? There will be, I’m sure, transfers of 

teachers where a teacher will, from an existing school in an 

existing school division, may become a principal in another 

school, in another contract. How do you see that working and 

do you see that becoming troublesome? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  From that regard, it’s no different than 

the existing provisions in the legislation. So I don’t really see 

this as being troublesome to the extent that you’re suggesting. 

 

I think I’ve said it several times before that if we are to see 

restructuring go forward in the province — and we’ve agreed 

that in some cases restructuring does make sense — and if we 

are to have all of our partners in education onside, then it’s the 

government’s view that we need to ensure that teachers feel 

comfortable with restructuring in that they can take their 

existing collective agreement with them until such time as the 

school, the newly constituted school division, is in a position to 

negotiate a new collective agreement with all of the teachers 

that have come from a variety of school boards. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With the repeal of section 204 and replacing 

it with something very similar to what we’ve just described for 

the situation where school divisions actually create a new 

entity, have your officials, in consultation with the teachers’ 

federation and locals, looked at any other options in terms of 

being able to arrive at a collective agreement or indeed looking 

at the situation where teachers may have the choice of picking 

one out of three existing agreements? 

 

Has that been something that teachers have raised with you in 

terms of having that ability? Or are you indicating that when 

we’re moving a particular school from an entity that indeed that 

process still has to stay in place where the contract remains in 

force for that one school? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think it’s fair to say that we have 

discussed this particular section with our various partners in 

education. My understanding is that the teachers’ federation  

felt most comfortable with the amendment that we’re putting 

forward in that the belief was that teachers should not 

automatically lose their local agreement if a school was . . . a 

school division was restructured. I understand that we suggested 

a couple of other options but this was the option that they felt 

most comfortable with. 

 

We had a similar discussion with the school trustees. The 

school trustees are of a different view. They were suggesting 

what you’re suggesting — teachers should be able to pick 

which collective agreement they want. But given the nature of 

restructuring and what we’re doing in Saskatchewan and all of 

the school divisions that are presently in the process of having 

the discussions about restructuring, my understanding is from 

the information that I’ve been given by school divisions, that 

wherever restructuring has gone forward, agreements have been 

made with the local teacher associations that they could keep 

their collective agreement until such time a new collective 

agreement was negotiated. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Welcome, Madam Minister, and 

to your officials. Last time I asked you a question about this 

particular issue, you spent a lot of time off the topic ranting and 

raving about how this was the biggest attack you’d heard on the 

STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) since . . . in decades 

or in your history, which didn’t answer the question. And to use 

a phrase that I’ve heard in a few other areas, was it was 

probably an inflammatory phrase, along with a few other things. 

 

The first question that I have and I guess we’re somewhat 

limited on questions today, is when was this legislation ready to 

go, and when was it presented to all the stakeholders, and why 

did we get it so late in the whole series in the House? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I think it’s fair to say that the 

school year, school day, that discussion has been going on for 

some time with our various partners in education. That 

discussion, I believe started early last fall. The issue of the 

technical errors, that’s been ready for some time. 

 

In terms of some of the discussions around the collective 

agreement or successor rights and how we’re going to vote 

when you have an urban-rural school division, that discussion 

came later on because we have a P.A. (Prince Albert), P.A. 

Rural, Kinistino, P.A. Comprehensive High School 

amalgamation which the school board has just agreed to; that 

they’re going to go forward with a restructured school division. 

 

And so some of the issues in this legislation comes out of that 

restructuring. And I think that those issues became apparent in 

March. So I think it’s fair to say that we were still refining the 

legislation, dealing with some of the issues, particularly out of 

the restructuring in P.A. And that’s why the legislation wasn’t 

introduced until, I think at the end of April. But we were still 

having the discussions around restructuring in March and April. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  After the much-touted Sask Valley success 

— and I think on the thing of successor rights Sask Valley has a 

good plan — I’m surprised that you didn’t take what’s 

happening there and happening very successfully and just use  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

that. I mean if something’s working, why look for something 

else that may or may not work as well. 

 

On some of the phone calls that I got, I had some of the 

individuals say, well this whole Bill, which is very much 

wanted by certain groups in our province, is now going to 

disappear and it’s going to be gone for ever, and it’s the 

opposition’s fault that it’s going to die and whatever. So I’m not 

sure who’s all fearmongering out there. I have some moderately 

good ideas. 

 

So I had to come up with an answer exactly what was 

happening, so I had three answers. And I want you to tell me 

which one of those is the correct one because I let the person 

choose. I said one of the possible answers is that you yourself 

didn’t like this legislation. So if you bring it in late enough it 

may just up and die and you can blame the opposition for it. 

You can say I presented it, it was a great piece of legislation, all 

my friends like it, but I’m so sorry, I’m the good kid on the 

block and the bullies went ahead and axed it. That was one 

possibility. 

 

The other one is that you might have thought that we were in 

such a rush to go fishing that we would just let this slide right 

on through without asking any questions. And you could say 

hurrah, if I’d introduced this at the start of the session they 

wouldn’t have asked any questions and it would have just . . . it 

would have dragged on and on. Now that I bring it in at the end, 

it’s just real quick and we’re done with it. 

 

The third option was that maybe you really didn’t know what 

you were doing when this whole legislation was being put 

together; that’s why it took so long to create it. Well as I said, 

Sask Valley had a good idea with their succession rights. There 

are a lot of good ideas out there and it just seems amazing that it 

takes till just the very last days of the session till this whole 

package is together. 

 

Those are the three options that I presented to a number of those 

people who asked that question and I guess I’ll let you pick 

behind which door you want to look. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I don’t think it’s the government 

that chooses the last days of the session. I think that we’re here 

until all of the people in this legislature decide that it’s time for 

the session to be over. 

 

In terms of the legislation, it’s as I explained. I can’t recall 

precisely when the P.A. School Division, P.A. Rural, Kinistino, 

and the comprehensive made their formal announcement that 

they were going to restructure. But I do know this: that I met 

with the school division on several occasions to talk about some 

of the needed amendments to the legislation in order for this 

restructuring piece to go forward. 

 

I should say that the P.A. restructuring is a more complex 

restructuring than Blaine Lake and Sask. Valley, which was a 

very . . . it was a well-done restructuring in the province. But 

P.A. is bringing forward a large urban school division, a rural 

school division, the comprehensive high school, which is 

owned by a number of partners, and the Kinistino School  

Division. There are four boards that have decided that they want 

to become one board. And in order to do . . . As well, it is the 

first time in the history of the province where we are going to 

have a rural-urban board. 

 

So there are issues in this Act . . . We tend to have an Act, 

particularly around elections, that deals with: how do we elect 

people in the rural part of Saskatchewan; how do we elect 

people in the urban part of Saskatchewan? We had to work out 

those issues. That’s why we see amendments in terms of the 

at-large and ward system in both the rural and urban area of that 

P.A. restructuring. 

 

In terms of successor rights, there were issues around the 

restructuring, teacher issues around the restructuring, and 

teachers wanted to ensure that they could keep their collective 

agreement until a new collective agreement was negotiated. 

 

We needed to make some amendments to the legislation in 

order to support restructuring in the province where school 

divisions want to restructure. As you know, in order for 

restructuring to occur, we have to have all of our partners in 

education on board. We have to have trustees, we have to have 

teachers, we have to have parents, we have to have the directors 

of education, and we have to have the ratepayers on board. 

 

And in order for restructuring to go forward, the STF has some 

concerns about the present legislation, and that’s why we 

brought in these amendments — in order to accommodate the 

several restructuring initiatives that are taking place across the 

province. 

 

So I guess all I can say to you, member, is that this legislation is 

here because we’re in the midst of restructuring. I suspect by 

next January we will have 10 fewer school divisions in the 

province because of the initiatives that are being taken by our 

various partners in education at the local school division levels. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  To get to Bill 60, I move that we report 

progress. 

 

(1630) 

 

Bill No 60 — The Teachers’ Federation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 

guess, Madam Minister, if we could begin by stating that if Bill 

59 was of some concern to individuals, both teachers and 

trustees, Bill No. 60 is of very, very, very significant concern to 

those groups. And I guess I am most deeply disappointed, 

Madam Minister, that what I see happening is indeed bitter 

feelings developing between the stakeholders in this province in 

the field of education. 

 

And I’ve stated this very, very clearly, Madam Minister, that I 

think in Saskatchewan we’ve prided ourself with the fact that 

there is always that collaborative, cooperative, consultative 

mode that takes place with stakeholders. Whether it be to  

  



1672  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

amendments to The Education Act, whether it be to curriculum, 

or whether it be to The Teachers’ Federation Act, those are the 

kinds of things that I see happening. 

 

The process that has taken place over the last week . . . and I’m 

not looking at what the teachers’ federation is saying or doing 

and what the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association is 

saying or doing. What I am referring to is the fact that I see a 

very negative reaction by both groups to a Bill that seems to 

have some common ground, but there seems to be a lack of 

understanding by one group and the other as to what are the 

intentions of particular clauses, particular sections, and changes. 

And I know that you’ve talked about the possibility of some 

amendments and clarifications. 

 

But I guess I have to begin by saying, in the consultation 

process or the lack of the consultation process, did you foresee 

that there would be such bitterness created between the two 

groups? And indeed the kind of reaction that you have had, that 

we have had, that the teachers’ federation is concerned about, 

that the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association is 

concerned about, did you foresee that this could happen? And 

what could you have done to have stopped that kind of 

reaction? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well the key provisions of this Bill 

were first included in a similar Bill in the spring of 1993. And 

this year all of our partners in education were advised of the 

government’s willingness to consider these kinds of 

amendments to The Teachers’ Federation Act at an inter-agency 

retreat in Watrous on October 17, 1996. 

 

And in attendance were SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials), the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association), the STF, LEADS (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), and the 

department. There were direct discussions with the SSTA and 

the government — or the department — during the winter. And 

there were further discussions with the SSTA on specific 

provisions and concerns in April of this year. 

 

Now the department did not engage all of the partners in 

extensive joint discussions of this Bill, as it has done this year 

on other issues contained in The Education Act. And this is 

because this Bill includes contentious issues that deal with 

teachers in a capacity as members of the STF. And the depth of 

the disagreement between the SSTA and the STF indicated that 

these kinds of joint consultations that we’ve had on numerous 

other issues in terms of educational policy just wasn’t likely, 

and it wasn’t very constructive. 

 

So what I can say is that I believe, in principle, that when we’re 

developing education policy in this province that we need to 

have all of our partners on board in order to advance 

educational policy. And there needs to be full consultation with 

all of our partners. And this certainly has been the practice of 

the Department of Education before I became the minister and 

since I became the minister. 

 

Now I understand the view that on this Bill that we did not 

engage in sufficient consultation. I understand that position.  

But given the depth of the disagreement, member of the 

opposition, between some of the partners in education on this 

particular Bill and given that essentially many of the issues 

contained in this Bill are internal to the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation, it was not clear to me that joint consultation would 

have led to further consensus. Because I think that there are 

issues in this Bill that fundamentally people are simply going to 

disagree with each other on. And we have taken the view as the 

government that we needed to move forward with some of the 

issues contained in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  While I realize that we’re not on Bill 59, 

which is The Education Act, but you’ve indicated that The 

Education Act and The Teachers’ Federation Act are two Bills 

that you’ve had time to deal with in this session, and that a 

different process has been followed. And I guess when we have 

amendments to The Education Act, we’re dealing with all 

partners — we’re dealing with the trustees association, the 

teachers’ federation. 

 

And I guess the question that I would have is relevant to both 

Acts. Did your officials share drafting notes, the initial drafting 

regulations, with all groups regarding The Education Act as 

well as The Teachers’ Federation Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As I said, there were many issues in 

The Education Act that were shared with our partners in 

education. There were some issues that came up as a result of 

the P.A. amalgamation that came later. And my understanding 

from the officials, that the drafting notes and instructions were 

not shared, but the principles of the legislation was shared. 

 

Now what I want to indicate to you, that as we move through 

the Bill — The Teachers’ Federation Act — I’m going to 

propose five House amendments. They have been discussed 

with both the teachers’ federation and the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association. They’ve all been given advance copies, as 

have you and the member of the third party, of these draft 

amendments. And that is in keeping . . . and I believe you got 

those last Friday, member, as I said I would commit to give to 

you. 

 

I believe that the House amendments . . . I understand the 

House amendments will address some of the concerns which 

have been raised and they will clarify the intent of the 

legislation. And they all fall under clause 27 of the printed Bill 

before us today, and deal with section 45(1) of the Act. And we 

will deal with each of these House amendments in turn when 

we get to the appropriate section. 

 

And I can say to you that I have taken very seriously the 

concerns of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and 

I think that the amendments that we’re about to introduce will 

alleviate some of their concerns. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I move that we report progress. 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is Bill Werry, the acting director of arts and cultural industries 

and multiculturalism; and on my right, across the aisle is 

Andras Tahn, the senior arts policy consultant. 

 

And I’d like, before we begin as well, Mr. Chairman, if I may, 

to introduce some people in the gallery who are here. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. The minister has requested 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d ask the 

people there, who have been very patient, to stand as I call their 

name. Mr. Vic Cicansky, a visual artist; Ms. Valerie Creighton, 

the executive director of Saskatchewan Arts Board; Ken Sagal, 

president of the Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Associations 

. . . or Organizations, sorry, SCCO; Mr. Brian Gladwell, 

president of the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance; Mr. Patrick Close, 

executive director of CARFAC Saskatchewan; and Ms. Pat 

Middleton, executive director of the Regina Symphony 

Orchestra. 

 

As well, there is a person who was introduced earlier. Jade 

Rosin was introduced by Suzanne Murray during introduction 

of guests. She’s a writer . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. I suspect the minister 

recognizes the inadvertent error of naming a sitting member and 

I caution members not to do so. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I apologize for my 

overzealousness and I would identify the member from Regina 

Lake Centre. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 51 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 

the minister and the officials and to the guests. Madam 

Minister, the opposition is delighted about the positive features 

of this Bill. 

 

We recognize that you now have the ability to bring more 

private sector funding into the arts by setting up an endowment 

fund. We recognize that there are four arts community 

representatives on the board of directors, and there’s now an 

ability to pursue equity investment in our projects, which allows 

the board to invest rather than just give a straight grant. And 

there’s the protection of the aboriginal traditions concerning the 

use of names, stories, songs, and other art forms. 

 

In general we support the Bill, but we’d just like some 

clarification about regulations to be developed and the pooling 

of funding for professional and avocational artists. Currently  

professional artists are supported with government funding 

through the Arts Board and avocational artists and art activities 

through the lotteries. 

 

We’re concerned that combining the government grant with 

lottery funds will pave the way for government to withdraw the 

funding from arts and leaving it to lotteries. I’m also concerned 

that the provisions for an endowment fund and the equity 

investment may in tough economic times provide an 

opportunity for government downloading the arts funding onto 

the private sector. 

 

Madam Minister, what assurances can you give us the 

government will not withdraw from arts funding as a result of 

this legislation? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. And I think that 50 years of public 

support . . . We had the first arts board legislation in North 

America, the first independent, arm’s-length relationship. 

We’ve supported public funding of the arts for — strongly — 

for the last 50 years. So I can’t . . . Obviously there aren’t 

guarantees. 

 

But I can say that based on the record, it would not be accurate 

to project that that was a goal. And I predict that public funding 

and public support for funding of the arts will continue in the 

same tradition that it has. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 

assurance. Could you just briefly summarize for me about the 

establishment and the operation of the endowment fund, and 

how the equity investment by the Arts Board would work. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I should say that this 

legislation is enabling only, and it will be left to the Arts Board 

and the SCCO and the other organizations to develop or to 

evolve into the single arts agency that is contemplated here. So 

there is no time frame. It’s enabling only. 

 

With respect to the endowment fund, it does specifically say in 

the legislation that the money will not go to the General 

Revenue Fund, even in the event of some changes in the 

structure of the board, for example. It’s clear so that donors 

understand that any investment that they make in the 

endowment will always accrue to the arts and never to the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. Can you tell me what the 

split will be in funding between the avocational and the 

professional artists? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well that will be something that will 

be part of the evolutionary process. And right now as you 

correctly observed, the Arts Board receives an allocation from 

the General Revenue Fund and the other organizations do 

receive money from the lotteries. 

 

So we would take into consideration the advice of those  

  



1674  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

organizations in how we evolve and what direction the funding 

would take. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So there hasn’t been a decision made 

specifically on this list right now. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no, there hasn’t been. 

And we will certainly . . . If there are any changes, it would be 

done in full consultation with the community affected. 

 

Ms. Draude:  With the avocational and professional artists 

under one roof, so to speak, what criteria will be applied in 

approving grants for artists in each category? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that again will be part 

of the evolution. As it is right now, the Arts Board makes a 

decision vis-a-vis the professional artists, and the SCCO, their 

board makes the decisions for others. So they will work out a 

process that’s mutually agreeable to them. And when they reach 

that point, we will certainly concur and do what we need to do 

to facilitate it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I understand what you’re saying is 

the Arts Board will make all the decisions then on the criteria 

and developing these regulations. 

 

I just have one more question on the regulations. Are the 

regulations being developed in consultation with the arts 

community at this time, and are they being worked on at this 

time? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. Actually just 

prior to the introduction, we had a meeting with the groups that 

were, you know, represented on the working group that led up 

to the legislation. And we assured them, and I give that 

assurance today, that the arts community will be fully involved 

in the drafting of the regulations, and that work should start 

very soon. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I just have one final question, Madam 

Minister. Will the arts community’s approval be sought before 

the regulations are finalized and gazetted so that they are in 

complete agreement with them? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  In so far as there is a consensus, we’ll 

undertake to do that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and to your 

officials. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam 

Minister, and to your officials. The question that I have . . . the 

particular Bill we’re talking about talks about making the board 

more accountable to communities — I think is the phrase that’s 

come through this. And my first question is basically which 

particular communities are being referred to when we’re talking 

about making the boards more accountable? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not quite certain. 

If I get the reference wrong, the member will restate his 

question. I think the portion that he refers to is the nomination  

by . . . from within the arts community of members of the 

board. Informally we’ve had that in a sense, but at the end of 

the day they’re all orders in council by the cabinet on 

recommendation of the minister. 

 

Now it will be clear. And of course we try to appoint people 

that will be acceptable and representative of the arts 

community. But now we’ll be dealing in the future with actual 

nominations from organizations. 

 

And the legislation describes a floor — a minimum number — 

that would be appointed in that way, but it could very well be 

more. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  You mentioned, Madam Minister, you’d be 

looking at nominations from organizations. Which 

organizations are entitled to do the nominating? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that will be one of the 

issues that will be defined in the regulations, to make that . . . to 

clarify that point. And the regulations, as I’ve said, will be 

drafted in consultation with the arts community. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  As you know, from time to time, because of 

various items that show up under the heading of art or come out 

of the arts community, there’s a bit of a public furore and 

outrage at some of the ways that some of the dollars are spent. 

How far abroad are you going to go in allowing the rest of this 

province, aside from just the arts community, involvement in 

this new structure? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I would 

just like to remind the member from Rosthern that I believe that 

beauty is in the eye of the beholder; and while we may not all 

have the same tastes, the peer jury method of allocating 

resources to artists has served us very well and we will continue 

to support that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Well beauty may be in the eye of the 

beholder and that may have been a beautifully evasive answer, 

but I think we need to stay with this direction a little longer. If 

they’re going to be judged by their peers and that’s the only 

group that’s allowed any input in, which is what I think you just 

said, then why shouldn’t that also be the only group that’s 

involved in the financing of it? Why are you taking the whole 

financial responsibility that comes out of every person in 

Saskatchewan and saying, you’re responsible to do some 

financing but you have no say in it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the government 

does, through the order in council process, appoint citizens at 

large to be members of the arts board, so in that sense they are 

represented. And I think based upon the allocation of money 

from the treasury to the arts board, with a million people in 

Saskatchewan it costs each person approximately a penny a 

day; so it’s not a lot of money. 

 

But I think that while some people may not appreciate it, that 

one of the roles of the Arts Board and the arts community is to 

support creativity at the individual level; to support innovation. 

And so sometimes some of the projects that they might  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

undertake to support might be considered unconventional by, 

say our generation; they may be recognized later as very 

important works. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I’m not sure what the minister means when 

she says “our generation,” but if we’re talking two generations 

away here or what specifically . . . You mentioned that the cost 

per day wasn’t a whole lot but then possibly every second day, 

every citizen should be allowed to have their two-cents-worth 

of input into it, which might be interesting. 

 

You referred to the fact that by order in council there were 

people from the society at large that could be appointed. And 

I’d like to have some information as to how that procedure 

takes place and if there’s a group out there that says we want 

some names to be considered. Is that possible or is this kind of a 

closed little club that picks names from, as you mentioned 

earlier on, their particular peer group and that’s the beginning 

and the end of the selection process? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this procedure too will 

be defined in the regulations. But we have on the current Arts 

Board — I don’t have a list of the names of the people with me 

to cite for you — but we have a chartered accountant for 

example; we have a broadcaster; we have a wide range of 

expertise represented on the Arts Board. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  You may have a large range of expertise as 

far as their professional backgrounds; that still doesn’t address 

the question that I’m getting at, is why aren’t people of various 

different kinds of opinions and views on the whole arts 

community allowed in there? 

 

So you have a closed shop and you say, well that’s fine because 

we have an accountant and we have a butcher and a candlestick 

maker and whatever else happens to be in there. But my 

question is with people who have other views than are presently 

sort of held as the core set of views by the Arts Board. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this legislation 

will change the practice and make the terms of the directors 

longer, or the board members, and then there’ll be a system put 

in place likely, where they would rotate. 

 

But up until now, the orders in council have only been of one 

year’s duration, so there is potential change on an annual basis. 

And I don’t think, for the quality of the people, for example, 

you would be aware of a member of your community who is 

very much involved with the Station Arts Centre that is 

currently a member of the board, and I think you would agree 

that her credentials for that role are excellent. And I would think 

that all the other board members come from different walks of 

life, different artistic pursuits or professional pursuits, but I 

would suggest to you they are all of equal calibre. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I don’t argue with the artistic ability of the 

people that are on there and the enthusiasm and concerns that 

they have for it. And the individual that you mentioned I know 

very well and has a long history of work with the arts, and it’s a 

quality work with the arts as well. 

 

Having in another life worked in other communities, there’s a 

question that I think becomes very important, because if you 

happen to come down to my particular little hole-in-the-wall 

office that I have here, you’d see some native art on the wall, 

which is beautiful. Why, as far as I can see it, are there no 

requirements for first nations groups to be represented on that 

particular committee? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, again this will be 

defined, and the nature of the membership will be defined in the 

regulations of the new Act. But in fact we currently do have 

board members that represent the aboriginal community of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Is that by accident or by design? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would suggest it’s a 

pretty good design. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Somehow I think that question was evaded. 

 

Given that the board uses lottery funds, why is there no 

requirement for charitable organizations to be represented 

because their activities are impacted by the board’s use of 

funds? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the regulations again 

will be used to define that. But I want to make it clear that in 

the current structure, the Arts Board has only appropriations 

from the General Revenue Fund, and the SCCO and the other 

organizations are funded from the lotteries. But the regulations 

will further clarify and define those issues. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The first set of 

questions I had aimed in one way or another at the public’s 

input and involvement in Arts Board policies and how they 

could get on to that particular board, and it seemed like it was a 

fairly closed shop from the answers that were given. What other 

avenues would the public have to give input to Arts Board 

policies? 

 

(1700) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

raises a very important point, and I hasten to point out that even 

at the current time, the membership of the Arts Board, the board 

of directors, is from the general public. The board members 

don’t all represent organizations or certain sectors of the arts 

community. There are people from the general public. And the 

new legislation, while it specifies and the regulations will 

clarify that arts organizations, people from the arts community, 

are going to be asked for nominations, there will continue to be 

representatives from the general public on the board. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  There’s a whole vast number of that general 

public we’re talking about that seems to feel they have no input 

into it. And so when something occurs, they end up getting a 

hold of their MLA from Rosthern to ask the minister some 

questions. So that seems to be one area of input that they have. 

And my question basically is, there seems to be that group of 

people that have quite a different view of the arts than the group  

  



1676  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

that’s on that board right now. And repeating my question, how 

can those people ensure that that half a million or three-quarter 

of a million people have some input into that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, anyone can write 

to the minister and make suggestions or suggest nominees that 

they think would be suitable. And we do get letters like that and 

they’re always given due consideration. And I think in terms of 

accountability, there is no better way than the process that we’re 

using now or the kind of questions that members can raise on 

behalf of their constituents, as open and accountable, a public 

place. I think that it’s a good process. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think that’s 

the best answer I’ve had tonight. So now we have some idea 

how anyone in Saskatchewan can have some input, maybe not 

successfully, but have some attempted input into the 

membership on that board, and that’s what I was looking for. 

 

Question on disbursement and funds. I believe this section gives 

the board the power to make equity investments in art projects. 

Could you give some examples about how that whole system 

would work? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, probably the best way 

to illustrate it is by example. One example that’s not quite 

within this area, but is the investment in SaskFILM into 

commercial ventures. And when they are successful, the 

proceeds then come back to be recirculated for other projects. 

 

And the Arts Board might invest in some kind of a commercial 

art venture that might bring profits later on that would come 

back and could be then recirculated in the form of grants to 

other artists. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Just a few more questions, Madam Minister. 

How often does the board sell off art that it has purchased? 

Because I believe it owns quite a good-sized collection. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we do acquire — and 

we have a provincial collection of approximately 2,000 pieces, 

but we don’t sell them because the collection is in the public 

trust. And so we try to acquire pieces for the current and future 

generations to enjoy, but it’s not our practice then to dispose of 

it. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Well a last question, Madam Minister. On the 

off chance that this investment procedure that the board’s into 

or the selling off of art that it has might take place in the future, 

could the government require that the board take some of that 

money and put it into general fund or into dividends like it does 

with some of the other Crowns, or is that money guaranteed to 

stay within the arts community for furthering the art directions 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think I answered a 

question of this nature to the member opposite prior, that the 

money will not accrue to the General Revenue Fund; that it will 

always be used for arts-related purposes. 

 

And I think another . . . I should mention that, and the  

regulations will further define it, but there’s very likely to be a 

cap on the percentage of the annual allocation that could be 

used in that way. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister, for your time 

and to your officials as well. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 34 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right is Trevor Powell, the Provincial Archivist; and on my left 

is Perry Erhardt, legislative officer in the Department of 

Municipal Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth:  Another matter was brought to my attention and 

was deferred, so just a couple of quick questions regarding The 

Archives Act, Madam Minister. We talked about it, we flagged 

a couple of issues yesterday, and I guess the big concern is the 

reasons for the Bill before the Assembly at this time. What was 

the big push to have this Bill before the Assembly, brought to 

the Assembly at this time, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well ever since the freedom of 

information legislation was proclaimed in 1992 there’s been 

some unease about the integrity of the agreements that donors 

entered into prior to that time. And we’ve asked for legal 

opinions several times and so on and didn’t get I think, the kind 

of advice that we needed. And then of course there has been 

request and an appeal to the Privacy Commissioner and it was 

felt that it wasn’t fair to change the rules for donors who 

donated papers prior to the existence of the freedom of 

information legislation. 

 

And to protect the integrity of those agreements that were made 

in different circumstances when we didn’t have freedom of 

information legislation, and to protect the integrity of future 

agreements so that we can continue to attract donations that will 

form part of a well-rounded historical record — and that’s why 

we decided to move in this direction. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, when you’re talking 

about protecting some of the agreements, what types of 

agreements would be entered into? It seems to me when . . . I 

guess my understanding of someone submitting information 

through The Archives Act, you would be submitting it on the 

basis of the fact that some day down the road through posterity 

you would be remembered and that this information would 

eventually become public. 

 

What you’re basically telling me is that there are individuals  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

who actually have put information into the Archives that, if I 

understand you correctly, basically have asked that it never 

really become public — it’s there for study purposes. Is that 

what you’re saying, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, no. I need to correct 

the member on that issue. There is no agreement that they 

would never become public, because our Archives is a public 

institution. 

 

But to protect the integrity of certain people and certain facts, 

the agreements, which have a variety of dates, like somebody 

might say . . . Because don’t forget they’re private papers, and 

we’re one of the few archives, public archives, that does receive 

private papers, which forms an important part of the historical 

record. And usually what the agreement will prescribe is the 

terms of when the documents will become public. And it might 

be 25 years after leaving office, 10 years after the donor’s 

demise — you know, whatever the terms are that the donor 

thinks is appropriate. 

 

(1715) 

 

And you see the balance is this. For instance, our current 

Premier and our past premier in the ‘70s have made substantial 

donations of private papers, as have other legislators. But, for 

example, we have not a record of . . . Like, Premier Thatcher 

shredded his. And it’s kind of a shame. I mean even though it 

might have been a sorry period in our history from some of our 

point of view, the history is lost. 

 

So I think it points out how important it is, if the record in the 

archives of the history of Saskatchewan is to be kept whole, that 

we really need to be able to have terms that will attract all the 

relevant records of people, important people and important 

organizations in the province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So, Madam Minister, when you’re talking of 

these records and you’re talking about agreements that are 

entered into — and from your last comments I would tend to 

think and believe that the reason that this piece of legislation is 

coming forward right now, even though FOI (freedom of 

information) has been in effect since 1992 or about five years 

ago — is there may be some information that had been 

presented by the former premier, Mr. Blakeney, that — and of 

course the current Premier was involved in that era — where 

the two individuals would feel that some of that information at 

this time is . . . it wouldn’t be pertinent that that should be made 

available? Is that why you’re taking this approach at this time? 

 

And I think, Madam Minister, as well at the end of the day 

people will put and offer information that they certainly don’t 

have a problem with eventually becoming public. 

 

But is there a concern that some of this information, especially 

in view of the fact that we happen to have a situation where the 

current Premier was involved in the government back about 20, 

let’s see, 20 years ago? — 60, ’77; I think so, 20 years ago — 

that some of that information might have some sensitivity to the 

current Premier in his current role as Premier, or the current 

government, and that’s why you feel it’s appropriate that this  

clause is in place, Madam Minister. 

 

So that as long as a person remains in the public, or even a 

representative of a certain time period is still involved in public 

life, that they have the ability to say, I’m pleased to present that 

information to you and I’m pleased to have it in The Archives 

Act, but I would prefer that that is not really made public until 

my involvement in public life ceases. Is that some of the areas 

that you’re looking at covering? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well actually, Mr. Chairman, we 

would be looking at covering all agreements that were entered 

into with the Archives, and it would include . . . The particular 

concern has been those that were entered into before freedom of 

information because that changed the rules, and it doesn’t seem 

fair to do that. 

 

It would also cover Premier Devine and members of the 

Conservative government, who I am given to understand have 

also made donations to the Archives with agreements, the terms 

of which I wouldn’t know. 

 

But as I said earlier, there has been this unease ever since the 

freedom of information Act was put into place. 

 

And actually, the truth is that many of the donors will allow 

their consent for a historian or a researcher who outlines the 

purposes of their seeing, having access to the papers. If the 

donor agrees that that’s a good purpose, they will give their 

permission. So it’s not as if they’re totally sealed away from 

anyone’s view. It’s just that, for instance, the motives of a 

journalist might be somewhat different. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So as I understand it then, Madam Minister, 

basically what this piece of legislation is doing, is dealing with 

that time period prior to 1992. When people donated articles or 

information or periodicals or whatever to the Archives Board, 

they were doing it under one set of circumstances. Since 1992, 

with FOI (freedom of information), there’s a different set of 

rules and you’re just trying to address that time period. But 

what I guess it does at the end of the day, it basically brings 

individuals under the same rules and guidelines so that you’re 

operating under the same information, the same rules. Would 

that be a fair estimation of what you’re doing? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, what we’re 

trying to do with this Bill is to set the stage for the same set of 

circumstances that existed prior to FOI vis-a-vis donors and 

potential donors. Because obviously if you have an agreement 

and you have a statute, the statute will always prevail. And so 

we need a statute of equal strength that addresses the integrity 

of the agreements of donors in order to keep attracting 

important donations. So that’s the intent of this amendment. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and thank your 

officials. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

  



1678  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I move that the 

committee report Bill No. 70 of 1997 without amendment. And 

at this time, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the members 

opposite for their questions and thank my officials for their 

diligence. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have with 

me my deputy minister, Stuart Kramer, and back here we have 

Doug Kosloski, the legislative analyst, and Dennis Sherratt, 

director of fish and wildlife branch of the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Now this 

is an important Bill with potentially far-reaching implications 

and impact on wildlife; on those that coexist with the wildlife, 

which are first nations people, farmers, ranchers, oil and mining 

companies; and on those who administer the Act. Except for the 

big game damage compensation fee, which we oppose and 

would like to see abolished, we are in basic agreement with this 

Bill, in particular the protection of the endangered species, 

which is long overdue. 

 

An important improvement in this Act is section 9, which 

empowers the minister to enter into agreements with Indian 

bands respecting conservation and related matters. This is a 

sensible and also long-overdue change that should lead to a 

more constructive dialogue between first nations and the 

government and other stakeholders. 

 

Just a couple of quick questions for the minister. Is there any 

mechanism for entering into dialogue and agreements with the 

Metis Nation? And what role does the minister see for forest 

co-management boards and staffers, the listing of endangered 

species, and the formulation of recovery plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I thank the hon. member for the question. 

We do have a number of mechanisms where groups and 

individuals can participate. We have the Wildlife Advisory 

Committee, which the Metis Nation is a member of, and we 

also have the Saskatchewan Trappers Association, which 

includes a number of people with Metis background, and we are 

also prepared to work with co-management arrangements with 

Metis groups as well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll be asking a 

number of questions as we go along, and perhaps just for the 

convenience of time here you can perhaps jot them down and 

answer once we’re completely done. 

 

Under the new Act, regulations will be issued that list native 

plants and animal species that are determined to be endangered, 

threatened, or vulnerable, and require protection. It is my 

understanding that either the wildlife advisory committees will  

be expanded or ad hoc advisory committees will be established 

to determine candidate species and recommend species for 

listing based on scientific and community-based information. 

 

There will be conflicting views and interests represented on 

these committees, or presented to them. An objective consensus 

decision may be impossible to achieve. First question: in the 

case of a stalemate, who makes the decision — the minister or a 

mutual third party? 

 

The process for developing and implementing recovery plans 

must also be expeditious and as obstacle-free as possible. 

Expediting recovery plans requires timely consultation, 

coordination, cooperation, and input from stakeholders to 

conserve and protect . . . (inaudible) . . . species at risk. 

 

Will the minister also explain in some detail how he envisages 

the process working in a timely and effective fashion? 

 

And as well, the final point, there are three provincial Acts that 

can be said to be companion Acts to The Wildlife Act of 1997. 

These are The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, The 

Conservation Easement Act, and The Environmental 

Assessment Act. Will the minister also elaborate on the 

relationship between these four Acts for clarification? 

 

And finally, there appears to be on the surface at least to be 

potential for conflict between The Wildlife Act and The 

Environmental Assessment Act. It is not hard to visualize a 

situation where a development is proposed in an area where 

habitat and/or species is at risk. And, Mr. Minister, in the case 

of a conflict, is it clear which Act takes precedence and who 

decides? 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

(1730) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry to take so long 

here. You asked a number of questions there and I’ll try to be 

brief and concise in the responses. 

 

First of all, you indicated as to how a species would be 

determined to be threatened or endangered or at risk. This 

information will be based . . . or at least decisions will be based 

on scientific information. We are relying on science to identify 

a species and point out the problems with it. And from there, 

their recommendation will come forward. 

 

From there we will also have an advisory committee. We may 

use the Wildlife Advisory Committee. We may expand it to 

include more stakeholders. We want to be inclusive rather than 

exclusive; so if there are other interest groups which have an 

interest in a particular endangered species we want their input 

as well. 

 

The second item you mentioned, the recovery plan will be 

spearheaded by the department. This would be for a species of 

plant or animal that is at risk. But again we want to be inclusive. 

If it’s a species that’s only found in the Buffalo Narrows area, 

for an example, we would like the input from the  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

various interest groups in the area, and the residents. And this 

would apply to other regions of the province as well. Again we 

want to be inclusive rather than excluding people. 

 

The third component you mentioned was the three different 

Acts that are perhaps involved around endangered species. The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act as well as The Conservation 

Easements Act are pieces of legislation that are available for us 

to enhance the protection of endangered species, at the same 

time working with landowners. This program will only be 

successful if we have the cooperation of landowners, 

stakeholders, and other people. And by using The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and conservation easements, we will be 

able to help secure the habitat required by a particular species, 

at the same time working with the landowner. 

 

The fourth item you mentioned, which Act might take 

precedence. The endangered species Act would probably take 

precedence over The Environmental Assessment Act. The 

Environmental Assessment Act may be implemented to assess 

the impact on endangered species. So in other words, the EIS 

(environment impact study) Act would basically be used to 

determine the impacts on a particular species. So our ultimate 

goal is to protect the species that are at risk. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I just want to rise to thank you 

for your answers and to thank the officials for attending and to 

also, on a final note, encourage and constantly ask the 

government to consult with some of the northern communities, 

the co-management boards in some of these northern 

communities, when it impacts on Acts of this nature, because 

they certainly want to be involved. Thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I know 

that the minister is disappointed that I stood up, but I have a 

couple of questions I would like to ask him. I don’t count very 

well though, as you try to keep pointing out at times. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to deal first off with the big game damage 

fund that was put in place last fall. I assume that part of this 

legislation deals with that, to allow it to proceed. I’m just 

wondering how much money was collected in that last year on 

how many hunting licences? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  We don’t have the final figures yet. 

However, we . . . ballpark figure, $600,000 was raised through 

the $11 licence and about 64,000 hunters — that’s hunters 

rather than licences because hunters only have to buy $11 

licence once. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you very much. How 

many hunters who purchased the habitat certificates did not 

purchase the big game damage . . . didn’t pay the big game 

damage fee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well basically, Mr. Deputy Chair, every 

hunter who bought a hunting licence had to buy the $11 licence. 

Now granted there probably are a few cases where individuals 

did not purchase the big game damage licence. In those cases if 

the hunter was checked and observed not to have that licence, 

he was given a break this year because it was the  

first year it was in place. But this coming year it will be the 

second year, and there will be no forgiveness this coming year. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, I realize the minister is fairly 

hard-hearted on this type of thing so I could understand him not 

having any forgiveness. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you say roughly 64,000 people had licences; 

$600,000 was collected. So you’re looking at probably in the 

neighbourhood of 5,000 or more people who had licences that 

did not have . . . If you just take $10 times 64,000, that’s 

$640,000 so you’ve lost . . . and yet the other $1 left over . . . so 

you’re looking at at least 4,000 who did not purchase them. 

 

And I know that there were a number of hunters around the 

province who did not pay, either because they had purchased 

their habitat certificates before the big game damage fees were 

imposed or because they purchased from retailers who were 

unaware that the big game damage fees had to be collected. So 

would an estimate of about 5,000 be fairly close? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  No, it wouldn’t. Youth hunters, people that 

are younger people buying licences, didn’t have to purchase the 

$11 licence, nor did trappers. 

 

We do expect a handful, but we will have an audit done on the 

final statistics and figures of our previous year’s hunting in the 

coming months, and we’ll have a closer figure. But, no, it 

would not be anyways near 5,000. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, since you say youth 

didn’t have to pay for it can I apply for a rebate? Because my 

son did pay for it. Without . . . Not being happy about it mind 

you, but he did pay for his so perhaps you need to put in place 

an opportunity for rebates. 

 

Mr. Minister, how are the funds that you’ve collected — the 

$600,000 — how are they being held? How are they being 

invested at the present time? And how much of that has been 

disbursed to agricultural producers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Okay. Thank you. This year the money will 

be filtered through the general revenue account into the farm 

financial stabilization fund under the Department of Agriculture 

and Crop Insurance. 

 

And following the passage of this legislation hopefully, the 

money will not be funnelled through general revenue. It will go 

out right from our department to the agriculture financial 

stabilization fund to skip the general revenue process. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. This 

money was collected last year and there was crop damages from 

last year. How much of that has been disbursed? And are people 

still entitled, agricultural producers still entitled to apply at this 

particular point in time? 

 

What I’m thinking of is damages to crops such as fall ryes and 

winter wheat which would not necessarily have been evident 

until the snow melted off of them to see just what kind of 

damages had resulted over the wintertime. 

  



1680  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  There hasn’t been any of the funds paid out 

yet because people are still combining crops that were out over 

winter, and as you say, at this stage, fall rye, winter wheat is 

sort of beginning its spring growth. 

 

But under this fund people can claim throughout the year. For 

an example, if elk are in a canola field in July, a claim can be 

submitted at that time. So it’ll be a year-round operation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. I didn’t know 

elk liked canola, but I know that they like flax. Mr. Minister, 

how will the regulations be . . . have they been established, or 

how will they be established on the pay-out of these funds and 

how will it be determined what an agricultural producer is 

entitled to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The pay-outs and regulations are based on 

Agriculture and Food policy and regulations, which would be 

similar to crop insurance pay-outs, adjustments, assessments. In 

fact crop insurance adjusters will be used. 

 

So it’ll be a standard formula used to arrive at pay-out values, 

and it’ll be of course based on prices of commodities and 

suchlike as well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are these 

pay-outs going to be based on a $500 deductible and then 70 

per cent of the remaining damage, as crop insurance deals 

today? The only difference with crop insurance is you don’t 

have the $500 deductible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The crop in the field pay-outs is a 

minimum claim of $500 instead of a $500 deductible. So if you 

only had $450 damage done, you wouldn’t get anything. But if 

it was $505, it would be based on $505. 

 

But it’s based on 70 per cent pay-out, the same as it is for any 

other crop insurance losses where there is wind, hail, or 

drought, or whatever. And we feel this is fair. 

 

The $500 deductible comes into play on haystack damage, and 

we are going to be looking at that and considering making it 

more fair, I guess, to the producers. So we’ll be looking at that 

angle of it. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When a 

farmer has crop left out in the field, are your pay-outs going to 

be based on, say a no. 1 or a no. 2, which I believe crop 

insurance is a no. 2, is what the pay-out is based on, or is it 

going to be based on the grade this spring? Because most of 

those crops left out in the field are going to be of poor quality 

— may even very well be feeds. What grade of wheat is it 

going to be based on for a wheat crop? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The pay-out this year for big game damage 

will be based on standard grade, no. 2 I believe it will be, the 

same as it is for waterfowl in the fall. So this will be an added 

bonus because there’s very little no. 2 wheat out there after 

being outside or out in the field all winter. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We saw a  

decrease in the number of licences this year, particularly for 

white-tailed deer. I believe it’s 11,000 decrease this year. What 

do you attribute that to? I know you have talked about an early 

winter, but we had an early winter the year before, so that’s two 

early winters in a row that we’ve had. 

 

Has this additional $11 fee had an impact? I believe it’s had a 

major impact on a large number of hunters were in 

disagreement with this particular fee and therefore decided not 

to hunt. I don’t know if that resulted in a decreased number of 

animals bagged, but it certainly has had a decrease on the 

number of hunters that actually bought licences for white-tailed 

deer. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what effect has this fee had on it and what are 

you doing to change that impact? 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  There was a number of factors which 

contributed to the reduced number of hunters in the field. 

Obviously the $11 licence did result in some hunters not going 

hunting this year. There was an early winter which did plug 

many of the side roads; cold weather set in. There was also the 

Metis court decision which said that Metis didn’t have to buy 

licences. 

 

And also if you looked at the availability of white-tailed deer 

licences, in 1995 we sold 64,000 white-tail licences; in 1996 we 

sold 60,500. So on those figures it’s only a five and a half per 

cent decrease in the number of white-tailed deer licences, and 

we expected a 5 to 7 per cent decrease in licence sales due to 

the $11 licence itself. 

 

The $11 licence is in place this coming year, but since last year 

the provincial government, out of general revenue, has put in a 

million dollars . . . $2 million, I should say, and the federal 

government we hope will come through with an additional $2 

million. So the argument that only the hunters are paying will 

not hold water next year because we have got general revenue 

money into the fund. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know 

you have high hopes of the Liberal government, but I have high 

hopes that they won’t be there come this fall, to make a 

contribution. But I’m sure that whatever federal government is 

in place would look more favourably on us than the current 

Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Minister, the change though of 3,500 hunters. You 

suggested earlier in a written question that there was a drop of 

11,000 licences sold. So where is the discrepancy between the 

3,500 you just quoted and the 11,000 that you had suggested 

previously in a written answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The confusion may arrive around the fact 

that there were 7,000 licences not available in 1996 that were 

available in 1995. So because those 7,000 licences weren’t 

available, obviously there was a bigger drop. But when you 

factor in the availability of licences, the decrease is only five 

and a half per cent. 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, Mr. Minister, I realize that there 

had been a drop in the draw licences. And since you’ve taken 

over we’ve seem to have had a decrease again this year in the 

draw licences available. So I’m not sure what that says, Mr. 

Minister, about your management of the resource. I liked it 

better when the other minister was there. At least we had more 

hunting licences available to us. Now I know that the minister is 

not personally responsible for that, unless he’s been sneaking 

out there . . . maybe he got his Metis card, I don’t know, and 

has taken a few extra. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, you mentioned that the Metis hunting has 

been a factor. One of your officials has mentioned that in the 

media. Do you have any idea how many Metis hunters are 

active in the field as compared to what there was before the 

licence structure changed for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  No, we do not have any idea of the harvest 

taken by unregulated hunting, whether it’s Metis or status 

Indian. We simply do not have that because there’s just no way 

of keeping track. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 

the things that this particular Bill does, it changes . . . it gives 

the government the power to have the big game damage fund 

reviewed by auditors other than the Provincial Auditor, which is 

what is normally done with line departments. Why have you 

done this and do you intend to use the Provincial Auditor for 

this fund? And if not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The issue of the auditors — we’ve left it 

purposely open because people were worried about the money 

ending up somewhere else. Perhaps some people would not 

maybe be fully supportive of the Provincial Auditor. So if 

another outside auditor . . . if it’s requested, we would certainly 

oblige an outside auditor to review the books as well. 

 

We want this fund to be accountable. People want to know 

where their $11 goes and we want to show them. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, the general public is 

very comfortable with the Provincial Auditor doing the work of 

auditing these books. I’m not sure I can say the same thing 

about the government members, but the general public is very 

comfortable with the Provincial Auditor being accountable for 

the auditing of these particular books. So, Mr. Minister, I’m 

sure that he can carry out those duties more than adequately. 

 

Mr. Minister, you mentioned it and I’ve mentioned it in the 

past, that hunters and farmers are not the only ones that should 

be paying for the big game damage as a result, particularly 

when hunters are the ones who are helping to control their part 

of the management structure for wildlife. And yet they’re being 

asked to support something that they have no participation in 

other than the enjoyment of the resources, to a limited degree. 

Everyone else in society also has the privilege and the 

opportunity to enjoy those resources. 

 

Now you mentioned the $2 million that was placed into the 

account for big game damage by the government. Every year 

hunters are going to be asked though to pay that money in. At  

some point in time the fund will grow to a level that the 

department will feel comfortable with as being able to satisfy 

the needs for big game damage in any one particular year. 

 

At that particular point in time the general public will not be 

paying into that fund, but hunters will continue to pay into it 

because this is an annual fee on every hunting licence or every 

big game certificate when you buy it. 

 

So hunters will continue to pay; farmers will continue to pay 

with the damages that they suffer being less than the $500 

deductible. So there’s two groups in society that are paying, 

hunters and farmers, whereas the rest of us also have an 

opportunity to enjoy that resource. 

 

Will this fee be rolled back when the levels of funding within 

the fund reach a certain level to be able to pay out the damages 

for one year or two years? Or will the general public be asked to 

match whatever funds hunters are putting into it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well you are quite right. The one thing we 

value here in Saskatchewan and Canada is wildlife is a public 

resource. It’s not privately owned, as in some other places. 

 

And I think when you look at it on a broad scale, $11 is really a 

cheap price to pay once a year to basically gain access to 

millions of acres of land. And traditionally hunters and 

landowners have worked very good together, cooperatively, and 

they respect each other. 

 

And of course one of the things about the $11 licence, if a 

landowner posts his land he does not qualify for damage claims 

— that’s if it’s posted unreasonably. At the same time the home 

quarter or the cow pasture certainly can be posted. 

 

We talk about other people paying as well. We need to look at 

the big game damage prevention program — $350,000 of 

general revenue. We look at waterfowl crop damage prevention, 

waterfowl crop damage payments. This is millions of dollars 

which is coming out of general revenue. So in this particular 

$11 licence case, we have earmarked the hunters. But again, if 

we didn’t put the $2 million in, the fund would be a million 

dollars in the hole already. Again, if the fund is in a deficit 

position next year, general revenue money will go in because 

we’re committed to the program. 

 

So the $11 is a small portion of money paid towards . . . for 

landowners for damage and prevention by a number of wildlife 

species and through a number of programs. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. While 

you may say it’s a small portion, it’s nevertheless . . . it’s $11 

tax on 64,000 individuals, when a million of us get to enjoy the 

resource. So roughly 6.4 per cent of us are paying for the 

enjoyment of the other 93.6 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it does seem somewhat without equity, 

somewhat unfair, that a small percentage is expected to pay for 

everybody. Now I admit you’re putting some extra money in 

from general revenues. Actually the monies that are going in 

from general revenues are coming out of the Agriculture  

  



1682  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

department, which would have been money that was allocated 

to some form of agricultural enterprise or program that was 

already in place, because no new money was added into 

Agriculture for this from the Finance department. It was already 

in place. 

 

So you’re taking it out of farmers’ pockets in one hand and 

putting it back into their pockets on another, and saying that 

you’re doing a great thing. The only new money in the program 

is the $600,000 out of the hunters’ pockets. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, it seems that the same two groups are paying 

for it at the end of the day — hunters and farmers. And general 

society, the general public, is gaining the benefit this June when 

they go driving around looking at all the fawns that are out 

there. They’re not paying for it. But you and I as hunters are 

paying for it, or your and I as farmers are paying for it. 

 

So I think there is still some inequity in that system, Mr. 

Minister, that certainly needs to be looked at. 

 

When you mention landowners that do not qualify for the 

compensation because they don’t permit hunting access to their 

property, I’m wondering what kind of exemptions you have in 

place. You mention the home quarter, you mention the cow 

pasture, but there are times that you’ve changed the law — last 

year — to allow vehicle access to the properties again. 

 

I personally disagree with that. But with written permission . . . 

What if the farmer has his land posted with signs “no vehicles 

allowed” or “hunting on foot only,” does he still qualify? 

Because I know a significant number of hunters don’t wish to 

participate in the sport under those circumstances. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  In answer to your specific question, if it’s 

posted “hunting on foot only,” “no vehicles allowed,” the 

person still qualifies. 

 

But basically the idea is to allow farmers, landowners, ranchers 

to protect their property, i.e., their buildings on the home 

quarter, livestock, fall rye — you don’t want somebody driving 

over that, or an alfalfa field. 

 

So again the adjusters will use common sense, and our 

conservation officers. But there will be a few cases where 

perhaps somebody will post their land and let their friends in 

and then not get their crop off; well there’ll be the odd case like 

that. But we want to use common sense in this approach. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Under section 58 of the Act, which deals with investigations, 

this section, especially 58(3), gives wildlife officers extensive 

powers to conduct investigations without a warrant. They 

contain no provisions for officers to justify this unwarranted 

investigation. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you and I are both opposed to C-68 because 

of that in one of the provisions, unwarranted search and 

seizures. Now it looks like you’re putting it in this very Bill, 

Mr. Minister. 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  I do believe that the investigator, the 

conservation officer, does need a warrant. And this has been in 

place for a couple of decades. They needed a warrant to go on 

the property to look for illegally shot game or trafficking in 

wildlife or whatever. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well it appears to me, Mr. Minister, 

though, that in some of the areas that it would seem that they 

don’t need a warrant though to enter into the properties and to 

carry out investigations to seize vehicles, to search vehicles. I 

know if a police officer wants to search a vehicle on the road 

and the occupants refuse to allow that search, that he has to get 

a warrant to do so. And it would appear in a couple of the 

sections that that would not be the case with The Wildlife Act, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

(1800) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this section the hon. 

member is referring to has not changed for a couple of decades. 

But it does say, for an example, the wildlife officer . . . if, and a 

wildlife officer believes, on reasonable grounds that a delay 

necessary to obtain a warrant would result in danger to human 

life or safety or in the loss, removal or destruction of evidence, 

that he may proceed with action. And this is probably common 

sense, but certainly under normal practices a warrant would be 

required. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, that leaves a lot of 

latitude though for the officer to make that determination. But 

no place in here does it say that after the fact he has to justify 

why he made that seizure, why he made that search. And 

perhaps that needs to be in place; that the way it should read is 

that he should go . . . should have to meet the same 

requirements that he would have had to meet had he had to go 

and obtain a warrant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The courts determine whether the search 

was reasonable or carried out properly. And that’s what we 

have our justice system for. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, also in section 83 I 

have some concerns — liability exemptions for property 

seizures. If an officer or an employee of the Crown was to 

confiscate a piece of property, but that property is not forfeit to 

the Crown, if he leaves your expensive — whether it be rifle — 

laying in the back of the pick-up and it gets all rained on and 

rusty, he’s not liable for it. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think there you have to include some common 

sense that proper measures be taken to protect the property as 

much as possible if it’s seized. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well we do believe in safe storage of 

firearms, and certainly to leave a gun in a truck long enough to 

get rusted is probably not a good example. 

 

However, this section would refer to confiscation of fish on a 

hot July day. By the time the officer got back to his 

headquarters where there’s a freezer to store the fish or the 

game, certainly the meat may have deteriorated, and this is  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

what it is meant to refer to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t say fish or 

game here though. It says: 

 

. . . is not liable for any deterioration, diminution, or other 

devaluation of property seized pursuant to this Act . . . 

 

So that also includes the firearm, the boat, the airplane, the 

truck, the tent, whatever it might be; that if it’s in some way not 

stored properly and the value deteriorates in it, the Crown or the 

officer involved is not responsible. 

 

And I think there has to be some common sense put in there. 

That they have to look after — to the best of their abilities — 

the property. If you seize somebody’s vehicle and you leave it 

along the road someplace and it gets vandalized, surely 

somebody has to be responsible for it, and not just the owner of 

the vehicle. 

 

We saw evidence of that very thing happen this past fall where 

customs seized a truck. It was driving down the road on the 

back of a flatbed and a train hit it. It’s certainly not the owner’s 

responsibility for where it was positioned. Now it may be the 

truck driver’s responsibility, but it was in the possession of the 

Crown so surely either the Crown or the transport owner should 

be responsible for it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it passing 

strange that the hon. member is zeroing in on this. This piece of 

the legislation has been in place for perhaps 50 years and we’ve 

never had any complaints about somebody getting a rusty gun 

back or a boat trailer with no wheels on it. 

 

As I say, it is meant for perishable goods, whether it’s food or 

meat, fish or plants, or whatever the case might be. So I don’t 

think we need to worry too much about it. It’s worked for a 

number of years. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, this is the first time 

this particular pieces of the Act have come forward to be 

discussed. So we have to take our opportunities when we get 

them, and since I wasn’t here to make the changes 50 years ago, 

I have to take my opportunities when I get them. 

 

Mr. Minister, yes we may all be here long enough to collect our 

pensions. Mr. Minister, I’d like to deal some with regulations. 

 

Section (u) in this, it says: 

 

(u) regulating hunters, the number of hunters, and the 

manner of hunting at any time and in any area: 

 

I wonder if you could expand on that a little bit to explain what 

you mean by the manner of hunting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  The manner of hunting could mean a 

number of things that may include such things as the method of 

hunting, whether it’s archery, muzzle-loading or shotgun slug, 

whatever the case might be. A manner of hunting may mean 

hunting on foot; it may mean you can drive in vehicles on the  

property. 

 

The landowner should have the discretion to determine to some 

degree also, the number of hunters. He may not want 50 out in 

his half-section of land but 5 would be all right. So let this . . . 

It’s to give the landowner some discretion as to what he would 

like to see or not see on his property. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was it under 

this particular regulation then, or the next one, which allowed 

the use of crossbows for hunting in the last season? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  With respect to the crossbow, use of 

crossbows for hunting, it was mainly a group in society that are 

disabled and weren’t able to pursue game, that brought this 

forward. And granted there’s certainly mobile hunters that use 

crossbows as well, but again we brought it in with the 

muzzle-loading season as an acceptable means to harvest game 

and provide recreational opportunities for people. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m certainly 

not complaining about crossbows, but I was just wondering if 

this was the piece of regulation that dealt with that permission 

or whether it was the next section, section (v), which regulated 

the manner and use, possession of different types of firearms, 

ammunition, and — this one I’m not particularly sure on — 

missiles — I didn’t realize we were allowed to use missiles for 

hunting — or associated apparatus. 

 

And perhaps you could explain just what these missiles are, Mr. 

Minister, but I’m particularly interested in which one of those 

two regulations, the crossbows would have been dealt with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well the word missile is in there, as we 

might have expected from the legal term, to describe any object 

which is flying through the air and it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Projectile. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  That’s right, it can be an arrow or a bullet 

or a rock or shotgun slug, whatever. So it’s just a legal 

language. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since either 

one of these clauses — I’m not sure which one since you never 

informed me of that — allows you to add or delete types and 

manner of firearms or implements that fire projectiles, since 

you have that ability within this particular area, Mr. Minister, 

have you or your department given any consideration to 

allowing handgun hunting? And that would allow you the 

opportunity — these two pieces of regulation — to set the limits 

on it, to set the calibre, to set the velocities, muzzle velocities, 

and various other things to regulate it. Have your department 

investigated this and have you given it any consideration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well thanks to your friends in Ottawa, 

federal regulations does not allow hunters to use handguns to 

hunt anywhere in Canada. So it’s not an option. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, as you and I both  

  



1684  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

know, they’re certainly not my friends in Ottawa, they’re the 

official opposition’s, the Liberal Party’s friends. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure that it says you can’t have a 

handgun for hunting because I know that a number of people do 

have that opportunity in Canada, not necessarily in 

Saskatchewan, but in Canada. And that one of the major 

stumbling blocks is a lack of enabling legislation in the 

provinces that allows hunting. Because it specifically says 

“rifles” in there in rifle season; it doesn’t say handgun season. It 

describes what a muzzle-loader is, and in no place within the 

regulations or the Act does it permit a handgun to be used. If 

that kind of enabling legislation was in place, it doesn’t 

necessarily mean handgun hunting would result in that because 

of the federal legislation, but it would allow some opportunities 

perhaps to move on to other jurisdictions to attempt to achieve 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  As I understand it, no other jurisdiction in 

Canada allows handgun hunting, and if it did try to, I’m sure 

your friends in Ottawa would . . . legislation would override the 

provincial legislation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, you and I both 

know they’re not my friends. As I stated earlier, they’re the 

Liberals that are in Ottawa presently, and they’re strangely 

silent on this — perhaps not strangely silent. 

 

Mr. Minister, one last piece in this particular Bill that I do have 

some concerns about is vicarious liabilities in section 73. It 

allows a person to be prosecuted for an offence committed by 

an employee or a helper when there’s no evidence that the 

person had any knowledge of the offence. Why is this in place? 

Why is it necessary, and isn’t it unfair that you can be 

prosecuted for something you had no involvement in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  You had to come up with a good one. The 

answer is basically that if an industry or business employs 

people, they’re basically responsible for their actions. And 

whether it’s an oil and gas company or some industry like that, 

they ultimately . . . the company is responsible. Now if the 

company can show that clearly that he had no idea that the 

employee was doing this, we’re certainly prepared to resolve 

the problem. And again if it ended up in court, all of that 

evidence would be there as well; but it’s basically the employer 

is responsible for his employee’s actions. 

 

(1815) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. So if one 

of your officers in the field was in contravention of the Act, 

then you should be responsible for it, and you should face the 

charges, not that employee. Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well as the legislation points out, the 

owner or the operator does have the opportunity to show 

evidence to the contrary, that he should not be responsible. So 

it’s not a black and white situation. So the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Pretty onerous on the employer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well again, ultimately the employer is 

responsible. But yes, there are cases where he may not be, and 

we’re open to that argument. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well let me ask you one final question 

then, Mr. Minister. If one of your employees driving a 

department vehicle is going down the road and is caught for 

speeding, do you pay his ticket as his employer and therefore 

responsible because you didn’t put a governor on that vehicle 

that did not permit it to exceed the speed limit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Now first of all, that charge would not fall 

under The Wildlife Act so I would not be responsible. So the 

answer is no. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 93 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like 

to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 

answering our questions. 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Darcy 

McGovern of the Department of Justice is with me this 

afternoon. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

a couple of questions regarding this Bill. And I know that we’ve 

had opportunity to discuss some of the implications of this Bill, 

and I think in previous discussions were very clear that the 

process of a census occurring every five years and having a 

structure in place that then would redesign boundaries is not in 

our best interests, that is, the people of Saskatchewan. And 

we’ve indicated that the amendment has proposed to ensure that 

the major census, which occurs in the decennial situation, is the 

census that would be the one that is in place for reviewing of 

boundaries. And that is what is proposed in the first portion of 

the Bill and we have no problem with that. 

 

The second portion though, that refers to voter population and 

total population, I think requires some clarifications, and maybe 

some suggestion, if I might. The term “voter population” is 

used in section 14 and I’m wondering how something as critical 

as that occurred in 1993 and how it escaped the scrutiny, the 

very close scrutiny, of members at that time. 

 

What comments do you have in that respect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We just have no explanation. I carried 

the Bill back in ’93 and we had this same debate that we’re  

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

having over this Bill, that is to say, whether the crucial thing 

was the total population or the voter population. The Assembly 

decided in the end to go with the total population. And I don’t 

know why . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  It was a one-sided decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. The member says it was a 

one-sided decision and I think it probably was. I’ve forgotten 

just how we resolved it, but the government made up its mind. 

And I don’t know why section 14(1) was left in that shape. We 

have no explanation for it and no memory of it. We were 

headed in the other direction. And it’s just one of those things, 

one of those mistakes that happen. Sorry I can’t give you any 

more logical answer than that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. While you are 

attempting to clarify section 14 by taking out the word “voter” 

and replacing it with “total,” my suggestion might be is maybe 

we can back up and correct all the other sections, and go to the 

word voter rather than total. 

 

And I know that that’s not something that is before us right 

now. The comments though that I do want to make and I want 

you to take under advisement and see if there is something that 

can be done about this . . . And I know you’ve referred to the 

debate in 1993 and the positions taken by different members of 

the legislature regarding total; regarding voter. 

 

And I guess I want to point out that, you know, as individuals 

we are all elected by the same process and that is one vote, one 

individual. And that is why, as an opposition and as a caucus, 

we’re looking at this Bill and saying, why should the 

determination of a geographical area be different? 

 

And I know that I’ve heard you say in this House, yes, but you 

end up representing all the people in your constituency. And 

that’s very true. But the selection of you or the selection of me 

as an MLA is done by the voters — one individual, one vote. 

 

And I feel very strongly about this position that now with the 

process that’s put in place with the federal government 

enumeration, with the kind of voters’ list that we’ll have that 

will be updated on a regular basis, we can identify very quickly 

who the voters are in a specific geographical area. And 

therefore I think what you’re developing then is a very 

harmonious and consistent process across the province, 

excluding the two northern constituencies. 

 

And I fully realize . . . in fact I must commend the two MLAs 

that represent the North because they represent tremendously 

large geographical areas. So there are provisions within the Bill 

that exclude those two constituencies. 

 

When we’re looking at the rest of the province, we know that as 

we move in Saskatchewan, and indeed our population hasn’t 

changed significantly over the last 50, 60 years, we see 

urbanization taking place. Rural Saskatchewan: the younger 

families that have traditionally been there; we know that the 

size of farms are getting larger. And as a result we’re seeing 

families move to the cities, to urban centres. Not just cities,  

urban centres. And as a result I think you have a greater 

concentration of population. 

 

So when we divide our province, the balance of our province on 

that basis and we end up with a figure — roughly 17,000 and 

some odd is the number that is arrived at — to determine 

17,000 people in a rural area requires a massive area. In that 

situation though the voters that are there become a greater 

number because of the age of the people. 

 

And I know the members have pointed out numerous times that 

there is quite a discrepancy in terms of voters, actual voters in a 

constituency. We have a high in the high 11,000, almost 12,000, 

and we have a low of nearly 9,000. So we have a tremendous 

difference. Those are the people that elect us. Those are the 

voters. 

 

The system of choosing a constituency based on the actual total 

population, I think, causes discrepancies. It causes problems. 

And I would encourage you, Mr. Minister, to take a look. And I 

know we have to put in place the process now, because we have 

just had a census and we need to ensure that that process is 

corrected and indeed we say what we mean and we mean what 

we say. 

 

But I encourage you and your department to take a look at this 

and see whether or not there is the ability to amend sections . . . 

I think they’re very clearly . . . I identified them last time — 

sections 11, 12, 13, 14 — where we can change indeed the word 

“total population” back to the words “voter population” and 

develop a consistency right across this province in terms of how 

the geographical area called a constituency is determined. I ask 

for your input. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s a very interesting presentation of 

the point. And I’m intrigued by the way that the member puts it. 

 

We have reflected on this question since the last time it was 

debated in the House and we certainly understand the 

legitimacy of the argument. I think that our constituencies, 

Canora-Pelly on the one hand and Saskatoon Fairview on the 

other, puts the situation about as dramatically as it can be put in 

this province. 

 

Canora-Pelly, a constituency I know very well, is, as the 

member says, an ageing population, and the young folks have 

been leaving there for years and years, from the time that I was 

young and the time that you were young, and . . . young, I mean 

when we were graduating from high school and deciding on 

what we were going to do with the rest of our lives. 

 

And we see that as a continuing trend in the province. We don’t 

know what it is that could come along and change that in any 

very dramatic way. It seems to go on and on year after year, in 

good times and bad. It just goes on, and it seems to be one of 

the demographic forces that we have to learn to live with. And 

it’s going to result, if we continue on our present path, with 

rural seats getting larger and larger and larger, and more 

difficult to service. And that is an obvious problem. 

 

  



1686  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

(1830) 

 

The permanent voters list, I think makes your argument a 

practical one. Until now it hasn’t been practical because you 

don’t know how many voters you’ve got until you’re halfway 

through an election campaign, under the way in which our 

election Act has been administered up to now. That is, the 

enumeration didn’t start until after the writ was dropped and 

we’re about 10 to 14 days into the campaign before we get the 

first cut of the voters list. 

 

So because you don’t have that information you can’t very well 

draw constituency boundaries and hope to come out with 

anything like equality. The only information we’ve had to this 

point is census data. 

 

Now if the permanent voters list works — I believe it will; the 

federal government thinks it will; this government thinks it will 

— then we’ve got a new ball game. Then we’ve got to come 

back and look at this argument again. And we’re prepared to do 

that. We think we’ll be in a position to do the next provincial 

election on the voters list, and we’re working to that end. 

 

This question’s going to have to be revisited. It’s not as simple 

as I make it out to be nor as simple as you make it out to be. I 

mean we’ve got to balance these two arguments and think very 

hard about it. But I find your argument quite compelling and 

obviously this question is not put to rest yet. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  And I want to thank the minister for those 

comments. I would like to just add one final point, and I think 

that you’ve raised it — you’ve raised it very well. That in rural 

Saskatchewan, indeed we do see an ageing population and we 

do see urbanization taking place. So the point that I want to 

make is that I don’t think we should do sort of a double, a 

double penalty to that area by then saying, because your total 

population is declining, we will now create larger areas for the 

number . . . I don’t know what the number would be if we 

looked at voter population in terms of the averages, but I would 

imagine it’s somewhere between 10 and 11,000 per 

constituency. At least then we’re all working off the same page. 

 

And I know, and I’ve said this, you’ve said this, that we would 

love nothing better than to see a revitalization of rural 

Saskatchewan and a drawing back of young families. And 

hopefully that’s going to occur; I think it can in some areas. 

 

But when we determine the actual constituency sizes . . . And I 

know you’ve made the point that there’s a need to look at 

whether or not the permanent voters list can work. I concur with 

you; I think it can work. I think with our technology as it is 

today, it will work. There will be an election before the next 

census, which is in the year 2001, and by that statute there will 

be a provincial election. So we know that that is fixed. But 

before we get into the year 2001 there may be the opportunity 

in the next session, next winter, to say okay, let’s take a look at 

this, let’s see whether or not it’s practical, and whether it can be 

worked on. 

 

And I fully understand that this is not as simple as I’m trying to 

paint here, it is complicated, but I think it can be worked on and  

I would offer the assistance of the opposition with you as 

minister, to indeed arrive at a system that is fair and equitable 

for all people in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, sir. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Between the 

time that we put this Bill into the House and today, there has of 

course . . . the census numbers have become available and that 

requires us to include a provision in the Bill that makes it clear 

that notwithstanding that fact, the Clerk of the Executive 

Council is not required to obtain a copy of that part of a census 

showing the total population of Saskatchewan or to provide 

notice of the census information to the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, which is what’s provided in the legislation now. And 

more to the point, the Lieutenant Governor in Council is not 

required to establish a commission pursuant to the Act. So . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Minister, I’ve been 

listening. I believe you’re explaining the amendment. The first 

. . . we have no amendment before us. The first order of 

business is for you to read the amendment into the record and 

then proceed from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move an 

amendment as follows: 

 

Add the following Clause after Clause 5 of the printed Bill: 

 

“Transitional 

6(1) In this section, ‘census’ means a census conducted 

pursuant to the Statistics Act (Canada) after the 1991 

census and on or before the date The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 is assented to. 

 

(2) Notwithstanding The Constituency Boundaries Act, 

1993: 

 

(a) the Clerk of the Executive Council is not required to 

obtain a copy of that part of a census showing the total 

population of Saskatchewan or to provide notice of the 

census information to the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council; and 

 

(b) the Lieutenant Governor in Council is not required to 

establish a Constituency Boundaries Commission 

pursuant to that Act for a census”. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 

wonder if the minister could explain a little bit as to why this 

particular change, this particular amendment needs to be put in 

place. 

 

  



May 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, what 

happened is that since this Bill was introduced in the legislature 

the census numbers have become public. And under the . . . in 

those circumstances under the existing legislation is triggered 

the obligation of the Clerk of the Executive Council to obtain a 

copy of the census as it relates to Saskatchewan, and to give 

notice of that census information to the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council. And the present legislation also provides that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council is then required to establish a 

Constituency Boundaries Commission. 

 

So the event that triggered the provisions that we’re trying to 

amend by this Bill happened before we got the Bill passed. So 

we need to put this amendment in to relieve the system of the 

obligations under the former Act. That’s pretty simple, isn’t it? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The question before the committee is 

new clause after clause 5 of the printed Bill. Is that agreed? 

Carried. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Wanuskewin Heritage 

Park Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

Dean Clark, who is the director of the heritage branch in the 

Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Clauses 1 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1845) 

 

Bill No. 10  The Apprenticeship and Trade 

Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

this evening Lily Stonehouse, who is the assistant deputy 

minister in the department, and Doug Muir, who is the director 

of the apprenticeship and trade certification unit in the 

Department of Post-Secondary Education. 

 

Clauses 1 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me  

this evening, Mr. Jim Brickwell, a senior policy analyst with the 

Department of Municipal Government. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

  



1688  Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 1997 

Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 

Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 59 and Bill No. 

60. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1645 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1645 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1645 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1646 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

  Krawetz.......................................................................................................................................................................... 1646, 1647 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1647 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Koenker ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1666 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1673 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Occupational Health and Safety 25th Anniversary 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1648 

 Apology for Remarks on Federal Leaders’ Debate 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1649 

 Early Safety Training Support Program 

  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1649 

 Indian Head Literary Events 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 

 Indian Head Sports Hall of Fame and Museum Honours Inductees 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1649 

 Pilot Butte School Performs Wizard of Oz 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1650 

 National Literary Contest Winner 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1650 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1650 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1650 

 Police Services Cost-sharing 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1651 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1651 

 Futures Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1652 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1652 

 Crown Corporation Management Salaries 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1653 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1653 

 School Absence Investigations 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1653 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1653 

 Health Care Reform 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1654 



 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 235  The Maintenance of Equality of Senior Staff and Employee Raises (“MESSER”) Act 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1655 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1655 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1656 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1657 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1658 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1659 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1659 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 

  Crofford ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1661 

 Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 

 Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1662 

 Bill No. 58 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1663 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1663 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1665 

 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 

 Bill No 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1671 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1672 

 Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1673 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1673 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1674 

 Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1676 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1676 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1678 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1678 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1679 

 Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1684 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1684 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1686 

 Bill No. 9 — The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 10  The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 64 — The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 



 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 40 — The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 58 — The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 51 — The Arts Board Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 70 — The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1687 

 Bill No. 42 — The Wildlife Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 

 Bill No. 11 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 

 Bill No. 9 — The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 

 Bill No. 10 — The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 

 Bill No. 63 — The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1688 

 

 

 


