



















































Hansard: May 02, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1305 

 May 2, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens from the great community of Melville, and Bienfait and 

Estevan. 

 

The prayer reads in the petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid in the fight against youth crime. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the Minister of Health: (1) are there any Health 

department funds going towards capital construction of 

acute care facilities in the town of Ituna; if so, how much; 

(2) are there any plans for Health department funds going 

towards capital construction of acute care facilities in the 

town of Melville; if so, how much; (3) what other towns 

are currently receiving or will be receiving in the next 

fiscal year any Health department funds for capital 

construction of acute care facilities in the province of 

Saskatchewan; (4) in each case please specify if these 

funds will go towards existing facilities or if they’re 

allocated to new facilities. 

 

I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 

Assembly, 29 students from St. Mary’s School in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you may recall that a 

little earlier this winter we were at St. Mary’s School with the 

hon. member from Regina Elphinstone and my colleague from 

Regina Coronation Park. And we have these students here 

today. 

 

They’re here for a tour of the building and I’ll be meeting with 

them afterwards. Their teacher is Estelle d’Almeida and they’re 

accompanied by their chaperon, Roland Bourgeois. Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of all of the members here, I’d like you to 

welcome these students from St. Mary’s School in my 

constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 

today are a group of 10 students who are part of the Interchange 

on Canadian Studies. This is a national organization which 

provides opportunities for grade 11 students from all across 

Canada to come together in a different province or territory 

each year. 

 

This year it’s in Prince Albert. The Prince Albert 

Comprehensive High School is hosting this conference, which 

is the 26th conference. The students are accompanied by their 

teachers, Dale Reed and Marlyn Keaschuk. I’ll be meeting with 

them later and answering their questions, but for now I’d like 

all my colleagues in the legislature to make them feel welcome 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Labour Party Wins in Britain 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

long night in Britain finally came to a close. After 18 years of 

Conservative rule, the people of Britain, the home of the 

parliamentary system we enjoy here in Saskatchewan, handed 

the Labour Party its largest majority ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1980s were unhappy times for working people 

and middle-class families throughout the world. In the 1980s, 

neo-conservative economics reigned supreme. This theory, now 

widely discredited, preached if the powerful had a large enough 

slice of the cake, the rest of us would be able to subsist on the 

crumbs that fell from the table. Lady Thatcher was Britain’s 

Conservative prime minister at this time. Republicans Ronald 

Reagan and George Bush reigned in the United States. 

Canadian prime minister, Brian Mulroney, also a Conservative, 

loved nothing better to rub shoulders with both of them. And 

right here in Saskatchewan the people of our province were 

subjected to Devine wisdom of our Conservative government. 

 

  



1306  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

Things began to change in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. As always, 

Saskatchewan led the way by defeating the Tories and returning 

New Democrats to power in 1991. Our American friends 

followed by defeating the Republican president in 1992. 

Canadians followed by defeating the Ottawa Tories in 1993. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the battle of Britain at last has been won, 

thanks to the efforts of Tony Blair and his new Labour Party. I 

know that they are more than up to the challenge of rebuilding 

the Britains. To . . . 

 

The Speaker:  The member’s time is expired. The members’ 

statements will continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Melfort Rotary Club 50th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow is the 

Melfort Rotary Club’s celebration of its 50th anniversary of 

service in our community. The Rotarians continue to sponsor 

and promote our fine city, and continue to be very involved 

with many aspects of community life and volunteerism in our 

area. 

 

I look forward to participating in this event tomorrow and I 

would like the hon. members to join with me in wishing the 

Rotarians, happy anniversary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chili for Children Dinner and Auction 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, child hunger is an 

unfortunate problem in our society that everyone must strive to 

overcome. Combating child hunger has been given priority by 

this government, and I want to say, by all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, and this is evident in our action plan for 

children. 

 

Working in partnership with individuals, communities, and 

organizations, we are attempting to enhance the lives of our 

province’s children. But the efforts of individuals and 

organizations that attempt to alleviate child hunger should not 

go unnoticed, Mr. Speaker. Twelve years ago Theresa 

Stevenson witnessed firsthand that aboriginal children in 

Regina’s inner city were going hungry, and out of her own 

initiative and her own money, Ms. Stevenson started a hot lunch 

program for kids in that area of the city. 

 

Tonight, Mr. Speaker, is the fourth annual Chili for Children 

dinner to raise funds and assist the effort in operating the hot 

lunch program. This dinner tonight is more than just a 

fund-raising effort; its purpose is to honour the many volunteers 

and supporters who help make the program a success. Without 

these people, it would be difficult for the program to operate. 

And I would encourage all members of the Assembly to attend. 

 

And I want to extend to Theresa Stevenson and her staff, on 

behalf of all members of the Assembly, a special 

congratulations and hope for a good event this evening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Party Wins in Britain 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity to acknowledge the victory of Tony Blair and 

the Labour Party in yesterday’s British election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I understand the reason they won this 

election is because they adopted the Conservative agenda. They 

won by campaigning as Conservatives. One can only hope they 

will now govern as Conservatives. 

 

However, if they return to their socialist roots, the words of 

British pollster, Anthony King, will probably prove to be 

prophetic, unfortunately. Mr. King said, “The election of the 

Labour Party is like an asteroid hitting the planet destroying 

practically all life on earth.” Of course this is how many people 

in Saskatchewan feel when the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

wins an election here. 

 

Nevertheless, congratulations to Prime Minister Blair, and let’s 

hope he continues to carry through on his Conservative agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

District 1 Health Care 

Auxiliaries Association Anniversary 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, last week I had the opportunity 

to attend the celebration of the 60th anniversary and the 44th 

annual meeting of the District 1 Health Care Auxiliaries 

Association in Unity. 

 

Health care auxiliaries play an important role in sustaining their 

health care centres throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

there are approximately 100 auxiliaries in the province with 

over 4,000 men, women, and teen volunteers contributing hours 

of their time to raise over 1 million annually for health centres. 

Their contributions to our health care system are invaluable. 

 

The Unity Health Care Auxiliary is no exception. Through 

various activities such as catering, holding teas, and collecting 

donations during the Christmas season, they raise money for 

their health care unit — money, Mr. Speaker, that is directed 

into purchasing equipment, bedding, nursing supplies, and 

many other needed items. 

 

Since 1991, this district has raised and spent over 18,000 for 

various items that have been needed for the hospital And since 

they first became affiliated in 1943, Mr. Speaker, they have 

spent over $93,000 in our communities. 

 

The importance of the health care auxiliary is tremendous. We 

all must remember that everything they accomplish is done 

through volunteers, and all the money they raise comes from the 

general public. Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be a part of their 

annual meeting. The health care auxiliary exemplifies what 

Saskatchewan people are all about. Thank you. 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower President’s Travel Expenses 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last few 

weeks the president of SaskPower has gone on a flight of fancy 

over how to gloss over gouging millions of dollars out of 

Saskatchewan people through SaskPower’s so-called 

reconstruction charge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Messer’s flights of fancy over how to gloss 

over taking this loot are not the only flights he’s been taking. 

It’s come to my attention that this political appointee has been 

taking quite a few flights out of the country. I have before me a 

copy of a freedom of information response which shows that 

Jack Messer spent a whopping $7,705.71 in one year to travel 

abroad. Apparently, Mr. Speaker, this political appointee is 

himself pretty adept at making appointments or at least travel 

appointments at our expense — $7,705.71, Mr. Speaker, could 

keep Jack Messer travelling for weeks. 

 

Seeing as the minister has no plans on reining in this happy 

wanderer, I’ll be sending him an envelope to give to Jack 

Messer. In the envelope Mr. Messer will find an assortment of 

travel brochures to study. If the minister won’t stop him, 

hopefully we can at least get him to start bargain shopping and 

save the taxpayers some money. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Aboriginal Art Show 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, one of the privileges of 

working in this building is that we are surrounded by beauty — 

a scenic park and a magnificent building containing wonderful 

works of art — paintings, sculpture, the works. We can even, 

Mr. Speaker, rub Dief’s nose for good luck. 

 

I particularly enjoy the first nations gallery and the collection of 

paintings by first nations artists such as Allan Sapp, and Bob 

Boyer. I mention Bob Boyer because he is not only a nationally 

recognized Canadian artist, he’s also Professor Boyer, head of 

the Indian art program at the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College, University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the fourth annual aboriginal art show 

opened on the second floor of the Regina police station. This 

show features the works of Bob Boyer’s students in the Indian 

art program, the artists whose works will soon be hanging in 

our gallery and in others across the country. 

 

I congratulate the Regina Police Service and the Indian arts 

program under Bob Boyer and all of the contributing artists for 

this exhibit, which lasts until May 30, and I encourage all 

people to visit it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Book Launch 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was pleased to  

attend the launch of a new book on the North-West resistance 

written by two Saskatchewan historians. The book is entitled 

Loyal Till Death: Indians and the North-West Rebellion. It is 

written by Blair Stonechild of the Saskatchewan Indian 

Federated College, and Bill Waiser of the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Blair Stonechild is from the Muscowpetung First 

Nation. When I was teaching a school we used to focus in on 

battles, etc., in regards to history about Indians and of Indian 

people and, Mr. Speaker, very few books focused on 

peacemaking. And when I look at the new book by Stonechild 

and Waiser, this is where they’re looking at the history of treaty 

signing and the peacemaking aspect of the history of Indian 

people. In this new book about the North-West resistance the 

focus is on loyalty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the readers will find new facts, new 

concepts, and new, challenging interpretations and views about 

first nations and the resistance of 1885. While the historians and 

academics will take part in the usual debate on historiography, I 

simply ask people to go out, buy the book and enjoy it. And 

enjoy this integral part of Saskatchewan and Canadian history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Security Guard Legislation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year a tragic 

murder in Saskatoon pointed up the necessity for regulation of 

the private investigators’ industry and the need for the setting of 

minimum safety standards in that industry. 

 

I and the people of Saskatchewan were initially quite pleased to 

see that the minister was bringing in legislation to deal with 

private investigators, but after I read through the Bill, I was 

extremely disappointed to find that what we have is a Bill that 

regulates companies. It really doesn’t deal with the issue of 

safety and security at all. The minister then spoke on 

Wednesday — he didn’t touch on the issue of safety and 

security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be introducing an amendment obliging the 

government within six months of the proclamation of this Bill, 

to regulate minimum standards of safety, security, and 

equipment for security officers. Will the minister commit to do 

something about this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the subject which the hon. 

member refers to is the subject of a Bill before this House. It 

has been debated already; it will be debated in future sessions. 

The member himself indicates that he intends to introduce an 

amendment. No doubt that will be debated at the time. Positions 

can be exchanged, arguments exchanged, and in the usual 

manner, the House will come to some resolution of those 

questions. We certainly can’t resolve them in question period. 

  



1308  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Victims Compensation Fund 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I don’t know why they’re applauding for 

bringing in a Bill that totally misses the point. 

 

But there’s another Bill from Justice that misses the point 

completely, Mr. Speaker. The victims of crime compensation 

fund, the government is worrying and sweating about the fact 

that it’s collecting so much money — they’ve got millions of 

dollars they don’t know how to invest. So they’re bringing in an 

Act about investing the money that they’re holding — about 

three and a half million dollars. 

 

Now the position we take is that instead of getting all in a knot 

about how to invest these millions of dollars, why not take the 

simple solution of using the crime compensation fund to 

compensate victims? They are spending only about 300,000 a 

year compensating victims out of fund that collects close to 2 

million a year. 

 

So why are you bringing in legislation that misses the point 

completely? Instead of worrying about how you’re going to 

invest it, just pay it to victims. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 

legislation misses the point at all, and it hardly lies in the mouth 

of members such as those in the Liberal opposition to start 

raising these questions, considering their track record in this 

House on occupational health and safety questions. They’re the 

people who have criticized our efforts to make workplaces 

safer. We’re trying to make these workplaces safer. It deserves 

their support and not their criticism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipalities 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Communities across 

Saskatchewan are struggling to cope with the massive 

revenue-sharing cuts handed down by this NDP government. 

Many mayors are finding out that the cuts are much more 

drastic than the 25 per cent the minister originally announced. 

 

The towns of Wadena and Kelvington . . . Watson and 

Kelvington are just two of the victims of this government’s 

massive offloading. The mayor of Watson said his town will 

receive a 40 per cent reduction — that’s almost $26,000 — and 

he believes the only choice his town will have is to raise 

property taxes. 

 

Will the minister tell us how many other communities she has 

heard from that are also being forced to hike their taxes because 

of the vicious cuts to revenue sharing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, when it comes to vicious  

cuts, the members in the Liberal opposition know all about that, 

and their cousins in Ottawa know all about that in the way they 

treat the provinces. 

 

We are giving this year $23 million of the infrastructure money 

to municipalities for their use. We announced a year ago the 25 

per cent reduction in revenue sharing so that municipalities 

would have a year or more to plan for that. They also have the 

tax room that was created when we eliminated the need for 

them to collect the health, social . . . public health and social 

assistance levies at the local tax base. They now have that 

municipal tax base to use exclusively to themselves. 

 

So if the member does the analysis, she will find that the 

percentages are not nearly what some municipalities have made 

them out to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, we all know what the percentage 

of cut-backs between the federal government and the provincial 

government were, and we know it’s much, much larger when it 

comes to between the provincial government and municipal 

governments. The mayor of Watson states that pretty soon 

there’ll be no more places to cut, and in fact you’ll see the 

results of years and years of no capital spending. 

 

When the NDP was in opposition, they called the downloading 

of funds to local governments, back-door taxation. Will the 

minister now admit that her government is also guilty of the 

same back-door taxation and it’s directed at the Saskatchewan 

property owners? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, when we asked the 

people of Saskatchewan what their priorities are in spending, 

they identified health, education, social programs, highways; 

and we have in this year’s budget more money for health, more 

money for education, more money for highways. 

 

The communities in Saskatchewan are made up of people. 

They’re not institutions. We have responded with more money 

for the needs that the people of Saskatchewan have identified as 

their priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the cut-backs that the minister 

did not speak about was the ones to agriculture and to municipal 

government — the ones that hit rural Saskatchewan people. 

This government has not only refused to implement policies to 

sustain rural Saskatchewan, every policy and cut-back they 

have is aimed at destroying our rural way of life. 

 

Will the minister do something before the long . . . for the 

weekend and tell people what you’re going to do? Do you have 

any plans to include rural Saskatchewan in the future of this 

province at all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I have been in the last 10 

days or so in a number of Saskatchewan communities. I’ve been 

in Nipawin, in Tisdale, in Outlook, in Swift Current, in Prince 

Albert. The economy of this province, Mr. Speaker, is 

humming. The main streets are full of cars, full of people. The 

stores are full. The mood is good. The people in Saskatchewan 

haven’t felt so good about their economy and their state for 20 

years. The mood out there is very good. 

 

The only doom and gloom in the province, Mr. Speaker, is in 

the Liberal benches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Income Tax Surcharges 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

reason there were so many people in towns last week is they’re 

all trying to scramble to find ways of paying their income taxes, 

which in this province are the highest in the country for a 

family of four earning $50,000. 

 

Yesterday, Madam Minister, I asked you about how it would be 

possible for you to justify to the people of this province that 

you’re taking a debt reduction surtax of $58 million out of the 

people’s pockets and justify to the people who think that’s 

going to the debt, and instead dumping it into the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

Madam Minister, how can you justify that kind of an illusion 

that you’re creating on the taxpayers’ backs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite. I’ve answered that question several times, but let me 

go at it again. What we said to the people of this province is, 

reducing the debt of the province is a priority and there’s a tax, 

and it is dedicated to ensuring that that debt goes down. And the 

debt is going down. By the end of this cycle, the debt will be $4 

billion less than it was in 1994. 

 

And the members opposite can’t have it every way. They keep 

on defending the Provincial Auditor. They say . . . The auditor 

himself says you can’t have dedicated taxes in this province. 

You can have something like the education and health tax, 

which you say is to support education and health, but you can’t 

squirrel it aside. 

 

What the members opposite have to ask the people of this 

province is: is the debt of the province coming down 

dramatically? The answer will be yes. What they have to ask the 

members opposite is, not only how confused they are on taxes, 

but how confused they are on debt. When we sold Cameco 

shares, one wanted to put it to debt, one wanted to spend it, and 

a third, I forget. 

 

This government is clear in its priorities. I ask the same to the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Madam Minister, you’re trying to have it 

both ways. Because if you really believe what you just said in 

terms you can’t have dedicated taxes, then how in the world can 

you justify a dedicated surcharge in name only. Why don’t you 

then get rid of the surcharges and actually put the provincial tax 

at 75 per cent of federal instead of the 50? What you’re really 

doing is perpetrating a fraud on the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Why don’t you come clean with them and admit that if you did 

it properly they’d understand what you’re really doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the members 

opposite, first of all I’m interested to see that they’d like to have 

an income tax at the rate of 75 per cent. Another tax . . . 

(inaudible) . . . But who they need to be talking to, who they 

need to be talking to is Mr. Martin. This is what the provinces 

have been saying to the federal government for years. Our tax 

system is too complicated. You have surtaxes at the top and you 

have tax credits at the bottom. This is what provinces are forced 

to do to ensure that our tax system is fair. It’s the federal 

government that resists changing the system. 

 

But let me go back to my main point. We are clear, the tax 

regime in this province is going down. Not only have we cut the 

sales tax from 9 to 7, in ’95 and ’96 we cut income taxes — 

which particularly benefited low income earners — and we’ve 

increased spending in priority areas. 

 

What I say to the members opposite is, where do you stand? 

Where is your coherent position on taxes and on debt 

reduction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Local Telephone Service Competition 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, you now know that long . . . that local 

telephone competition is coming. You have until October of 

1998 to get ready for it. Will you accept the ruling of the CRTC 

(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission) and start preparing for local competition by next 

year and withdraw your call for an extension of the 

moratorium? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

knows, in spite of the fact that we have a moratorium from 

regulation from the CRTC, which gives us some time to adjust, 

we invited competition in. Resellers and rebillers came in over a 

year ago, last February ’96. We invited the competition — the 

interconnectors — in last fall. We have a self-sufficient and 

competitive mobile telephone company which has always 

operated in the competitive arena. And we are preparing to 

harmonize our activities as though we were regulated by the 

CRTC; and we are preparing to invite local competition as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



1310  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

hear that you’re prepared to invite them in; unfortunately you 

didn’t give a time frame nor suggest that you were going to 

withdraw your attempt to extend the moratorium. Because, 

Madam Minister, as you have said, competition is good. 

Long-distance competition has been good for consumers; it’s 

been good for SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, one way SaskTel could start getting ready for 

competition and give local consumers a break is by extending 

local coverage areas by providing larger exchanges. This would 

make SaskTel more competitive both as a local service provider 

and as a long-distance carrier. More importantly, it would give 

rural residents a break without dramatically affecting the local 

service rates that customers are paying. 

 

Madam Minister, is this something you will consider as you get 

ready for local phone competition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have announced 

publicly and spoken to the people of Saskatchewan about the 

area in the long-distance area exchanges. We are . . . have it 

under active consideration and we think that the role of the 

Crown is to make sure that we have adequate and modern 

communications to every shareholder of that Crown company 

in the province, which includes the rural and remote customers. 

 

And our rural and remote customers have better service than 

any other telephone company in North America, Mr. Speaker. 

And we are proud of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Taxes on Low Income Earners 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 

of Finance. Madam Minister, we just saw your side of the 

House, the NDP, just wiggling with glee over what happened in 

Britain. Madam Minister, the NDP tries to characterize itself as 

helping poor people and low income earners. However, the 

facts say something completely different, and here will be your 

chance to wiggle — wiggle out of it if you can. 

 

According to the Fraser Institute, low income earners in 

Saskatchewan pay 16 per cent of their income in tax, the 

highest of any province in Canada — the highest taxes in 

Canada for low income earners, Madam Minister. That’s the 

NDP record — higher taxes on low income earners than the 

Filmon government, the Klein government, the Harris 

government. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you taxing poor people more than 

any other province in Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I welcome that  

question. First of all, you shouldn’t believe everything that you 

read coming out from the Fraser Institute, especially in the 

newspaper. That study you just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

If the member opposite would like to listen to the answer. 

 

What that study assumes a family has as its income is the 

following: resource revenues are part of a family’s income. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now hon. members will 

recognize that the minister is not that far from the Chair and the 

Chair is having difficulty hearing. I’m sure that the source of 

the question would be interested in the answer and I’ll ask for 

all hon. members to allow the minister to be heard. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I 

would say to the member opposite is, you’ve got to look at what 

they assume is part of family income in that study. They assume 

that family income includes resource revenues. They assume 

that family income has built into it what rent you would get 

from renting out your principal residence. The net income of the 

average person in Saskatchewan in that study comes out at 

$80,000. It is a flawed study. 

 

But I’m very happy that the member opposite has asked about 

taxes for low income people. This government is proud of its 

record when it comes to that issue. We reduced income taxes 

two years in a row. The main beneficiary of that tax cut were 

low income people — 6,000 taken right off the tax rolls. 

 

We reduced the sales tax from 9 to 7. We tax fewer items that 

affect the families of this province than any province in Canada. 

We have a tax system that is fair, that does benefit low income 

people, and we’re proud of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Credit Card Proposal 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The unfortunate part in 

that last answer is the Minister of Finance forgot about all the 

back-door taxation, like the utility rate increases. 

 

But I have a question to the minister of SaskPower. Mr. 

Minister, Anderson-Fast Research is currently conducting a poll 

on behalf of SaskPower and they are asking in this poll whether 

SaskPower customers would support the idea of a SaskPower 

credit card. Mr. Minister, is SaskPower planning on developing 

a SaskPower credit card? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No. Mr. Speaker, I can say that 

there are a number of initiatives that the management and the 

board of SaskPower are looking at. We list and look at a 

number of things on a regular basis as our board meets. 

 

I can say to the member opposite that when we — and if we — 

are to embark on any kind of a relationship with credit cards, 

we would be certainly letting the members opposite know. We 

would be outlining what the proposal would in fact be about, 

and I would be more than willing to share at an appropriate time 

information as it may or may not be pertinent to credit cards. 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the minister; 

according to the questions being asked in this survey, people 

would get points every time they made a purchase using their 

SaskPower credit card. The points would then be used as credit 

against their power bills. So people with a SaskPower credit 

card would get a bit of a break on their power bills, but no one 

else would. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a lot of people in the province who 

wouldn’t qualify to get a credit card. There are a lot of other 

people who don’t use credit cards, just simply wouldn’t want a 

SaskPower credit card. 

 

Instead of coming up with gimmicks to cut the power bills of a 

few people, why don’t you take some of the huge $153 million 

profits and pass them on to all residents of Saskatchewan 

people? Why don’t you use those profits to cut the rates rather 

than offering people specific ways of getting rates, just a few 

people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess there 

you go again. It tells you exactly where the Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan comes from. 

 

The people of this province, the people of this country, the 

people of North America, and in fact the people of the world are 

becoming more and more aware, and I think it would be fair to 

say even Conservatives are starting to realize, that society is 

changing and we are looking at different ways of paying our 

bills; we’re looking at different ways of doing transactions. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that if the member would enlighten 

himself, talk to some of his friends and his neighbours, talk to 

the some of the banking institutions, talk to some of the 

businesses around this province — he would find that what I’m 

saying is in fact true. People are becoming . . . And we’re 

rapidly moving to much more of a cashless society. 

 

Certainly the members, the Conservative Party of this province, 

and the members opposite are living back in perhaps the 1980s, 

the ’60s, the ’50s and the ’40s. But I want to say that we as a 

government, and the Crown corporations, take a very 

progressive and a positive and a forward-looking view of what 

people’s requirements are, the way people want to do business. 

And we’ll continue to follow right along in step with the people 

of Saskatchewan even if that member won’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for City Governments 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I look across to friends opposite 

and I see a lot of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

from Regina and Saskatoon — not one of whom has said peep 

about the 50 per cent cut in grants to municipalities, to those 

cities, that are putting such extreme pressure on property taxes 

to Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Now I know the minister of Municipal Affairs has her stock  

answer in her binder like everybody else, blaming everything in 

this world, all of her failures, on the federal government. But 

my question to her is, now that you have 65 million in new 

money from the federal government, will you revisit these 

devastating cuts you’ve given our cities? Will you quit your 

attack on municipal government and on ratepayers in this 

province and restore that funding to our municipal ratepayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the $65 million — the 

phantom $65 million he’s talking about that the federal 

government is waving around — that government is still adding 

$20 billion a year to the national debt. They’re not even close to 

balancing their budget. There’s no new money. What new 

money are you talking about? 

 

And I want to keep this municipal thing in perspective. I’ll give 

you for an example the city of Saskatoon. This city of 

Saskatoon last year, in 1996, derived 4 per cent of its revenue 

from the government through revenue sharing. This year the 

difference amounts to a cut of 4 per cent of that 4 per cent. Now 

that’s hardly slashing; it’s hardly noticeable — $360,000, that’s 

the cut. That’s very, very moderate. 

 

And they’ve managed to hold their mill rate. So they couldn’t 

have done that if there had been severe cuts. Those 

municipalities know how to manage and everything is fine in 

municipal land; it’s over there that there’s a problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Okay, the minister says she wants to put this in 

perspective. Well let’s put it in perspective then. Eight 

provinces pay grants in lieu of property taxes to their municipal 

governments. Ottawa pays grants in lieu to cities for property 

taxes for government buildings. 

 

This province is the odd man out. This province does not pay 

grants in lieu or property taxes to the various cities. This is 

particularly a problem . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know 

about the Crown corporations. So do you. I said Government of 

Saskatchewan office buildings pay no grants in lieu, no 

property taxes. This is particularly an issue for the city of 

Regina. This is putting extreme pressure on the mill rate in 

Regina. I don’t see any Regina MLAs raising the issue, so I am. 

 

Will you revisit that issue, bring Saskatchewan in line with the 

generosity of other provinces and of the federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take the 

opportunity to answer this question on behalf of the 

government. First of all, we pay millions of dollars a year in 

taxes to other levels of government. 

 

But just listen to what’s happening in this question period. The 

other day we had four positions on taxes over there, four 

different positions from one party. 

 

  



1312  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

Today, as I pointed out, debt — they’re not sure what they 

would have done with the money from Cameco shares. Some 

might have put it to debt, others were going to spend it, and 

there was a third position. 

 

And listen to the spending. Just listen to what these people do. 

Any cause that walks through this door, they’re going to put 

money to it. They’re going to spend and spend and spend. 

They’re not going to talk, as we do, about strategic investments 

in the areas that matter most to the people of Saskatchewan — 

strategic investments that prepare this province for the 21st 

century, strategic investments that enhance our quality of life. 

They’re just going to spend and spend and spend. 

 

And as long as they continue on like this, they’re going to be in 

opposition and in opposition and in opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Aboriginal Taxation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well the Minister of Finance claims to 

perceive some sort of differences of opinion over here. I don’t 

know what they are. But I’ll tell you the conflict, the 

contradiction I’ve noticed over there. When the issue of taxation 

on first nations reserves comes up, we see the Premier saying, 

well we’re going to talk, we’re going to negotiate; this is not a 

time to get heavy, this is not a time to be incendiary. 

 

The Minister of Finance then is quoted in the newspaper as 

saying her officials are to do anything necessary to collect those 

taxes. It doesn’t matter that the first nations say they’re not 

liable for them. Do whatever you have to do. Send in the police. 

I don’t care. 

 

Now my question is: is this the good cop/bad cop routine 

between the Minister of Finance and the Premier, or is there a 

serious conflict on how we should deal with this sensitive issue 

between the Premier and the Minister of Finance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, the position is entirely 

coherent. There’s two separate issues. One is enforcement of 

the existing tax regime. And everybody in this government on 

this side says it is the duty of the government to enforce the 

existing tax laws of the province whether on reserve or off 

reserve. The tax laws have to be enforced. 

 

The other side of the issue is the changes in those tax laws, 

changes in those tax laws. We have said we want to discuss . . . 

or the first nations people have actually said to us, they want to 

talk to us about changes in those tax laws. 

 

But let’s look at what these people are saying. They’re saying, 

let’s just send the whole issue off to the courts and let the courts 

decide the issue. 

 

We’re saying we want to sit down and discuss with first nations 

people the future of the tax regime in this province. In the 

interim, we have to live up to our obligation to enforce the tax  

laws of this province, and that’s exactly what we’ll do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 59  The Education Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of item 

no. 5, Bill 59, The Education Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, 

The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental Affairs 

Vote 30 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister, even though they were 

here yesterday with this same department, to reintroduce his 

officials, please. 

 

I would ask the minister to please reintroduce his officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Seated to my right is the deputy 

minister, Mr. Paul Osborne. Paul has been with our government 

for some time and worked in a number of different areas. Also 

seated, I guess not directly behind me but behind me and to my 

right, Bob Hersche; and also, straight behind me or directly 

behind me is Melinda Gorrill with the Department of 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 

officials here this morning. 

 

Yesterday afternoon I had mentioned that there was a 

considerable amount of additional monies allotted to trade 

policy. I was wondering if the minister might provide a little bit 

more detailed explanation as to what these monies would be for. 

And also, would you provide an explanation as to how this 

doesn’t overlap with federal initiatives, and with initiatives by  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

provincial agencies such as STEP (Saskatchewan Trade and 

Export Partnership Inc.), and . . . well in your own Department 

of Economic Development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well there’s two distinct parts to 

the trade initiative of any government, and that’s true in 

Saskatchewan as well. And at one point not too long ago both 

aspects were in the Department of Economic Development as 

part of the trade unit. 

 

When we set up Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, or 

STEP, as you call it, the portion of the trade operation that deals 

with trade missions and practical application of trade policy to 

businesses and trade missions and trade in general, that unit was 

transferred out of the Department of Economic Development to 

STEP. We have involvement because we have board of director 

positions on STEP, but basically the money was transferred 

over and is appropriated through Finance and through estimates 

to STEP. So that’s one portion of the trade organization that 

was moved out of the Department of Economic Development. 

 

What we have here is that unit that had been in the Department 

of Economic Development that does the trade policy — that 

deals with NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), 

the free trade agreement, other areas of formal negotiations, 

both with the other provinces, with the federal government, or 

gives it advice and comments on trade arrangements. 

 

So there’s the practical side of trade that is now over in 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership and the policy side 

is now lodged in Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to turn now to 

what I’d mentioned yesterday as one of my greater concerns, 

and that’s with the spending increases and with the overall 

direction which the government is taking on a daily basis. And 

this is with respect to the national unity question. 

 

When I sit in this House and listen or read news reports, I see a 

concerted effort by the government to blame virtually 

everything on the federal government, which at the present and 

for the foreseeable time is a Liberal one. I’ve continually read 

news reports wherein Parti Québécois use similar tactics. They 

blame everything on the federal government to try and persuade 

Quebecers that the country doesn’t work. 

 

In this province, I can only suggest that the Premier and the 

government caucus does this so that they can persuade voters, 

well to vote New Democrat rather than Liberal. And that being 

at both federal and provincial levels. 

 

Now you can call it my theory if you want, but I think that a 

good deal of people in this province know that there’s a good 

deal of truth to it as well. 

 

But in any event, I think that fanning the flames of regionalism 

for political gain, to get votes for New Democrats, is unhealthy 

not only for Saskatchewan, but it’s unhealthy for the country. 

 

Sure, not everything’s perfect. But no government should try 

and play politics such that it poses a threat to national unity. 

 

So given that this is overly apparent, that the government 

spends most of its time attacking the federal government, I’d 

like the minister to explain this strategy to us this morning. 

 

I can see it might help the NDP, but why are you already 

attacking what is a fragile national unity just for your own 

political gain? Would you please explain that to us this 

morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think the member opposite is 

very, very misguided if he thinks there isn’t a very close 

working relationship between the provincial government in 

Saskatchewan and the federal government in Ottawa. 

 

I think if you look historically at the relationship between our 

province and the federal government, you will never see a time 

when there has been more collaboration between the federal 

government in Ottawa and the provincial government. In fact 

some people argue that we’re too close and there’s too much 

collaboration. 

 

And your colleague from Arm River says he agrees. And even 

within your own caucus, it’s obvious that you have very 

differing opinions on whether or not we’re attacking the 

Liberals or supporting them. 

 

The member from Arm River again heckles from his chair that 

he doesn’t like it that we’re so close to the federal Liberals and 

not . . . we should be attacking them more. 

 

And I think what you should do before you ask us for our 

opinion on our approach to national unity is get a cohesive 

approach within your own caucus. Because you can’t very well 

have a position of saying we’re attacking the government of 

Ottawa too much, and your friend and colleague and caucus 

member from Arm River saying that they’re too close. And so 

this is, I think, at the provincial level. 

 

Just a word of advice. I think at the federal level, the federal 

Liberals are doing quite well by all polls, and provincially 

you’re doing very poorly. And one of the reasons at the 

provincial level you’re doing so poorly is because you have no 

cohesive message on anything — very poorly. There are polls 

around that show you in third place behind the Tories even 

though you have more seats. 

 

The fact of the matter is you’re doing very poorly, especially 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Arm 

River continues to heckle from his seat saying that they’re 

doing very well. But I want to tell you that since your new 

leader, Melenchuk, was elected as leader of the Liberal Party, 

you have gone down continually in the polls. Now I think that’s 

because of the disunity that exists in your party. That’s my 

opinion. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that when it comes to 

national unity, I want to get clear from you — as a provincial 

party — whether you believe as a party that there should be a 

closer relationship between the provincial and federal  

  



1314  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

government? Is that the party position? Or is it, as the member 

from Arm River says, that there should be even more bickering 

and fighting between the provincial and federal government? 

Because that’s very, very unclear. 

 

I want to conclude my remarks by saying there is a close 

relationship, working relationship, between members of our 

government — our cabinet — and the federal cabinet. I meet on 

a regular basis with Mr. Goodale on issues of Economic 

Development. I have a good relationship with Lloyd Axworthy 

in Winnipeg, where we can phone each other on a very regular 

basis. Other members of the federal cabinet have great 

relationships with members of the Saskatchewan cabinet. 

 

So I’m not sure where you come from with the fact that we’re 

attacking the federal government all the time because it simply 

isn’t accurate. In fact there’s much less bickering and fighting 

between Ottawa and Saskatchewan than I have ever seen since 

coming to the Assembly in 1978. 

 

Now I want to get to the point of why the federal government 

and Prime Minister are in trouble in Quebec — it’s got nothing 

to do with Saskatchewan. The polls on the radio and TV this 

morning that showed that Prime Minister Chrétien is in a neck 

and neck race in his own seat personally, where he’s tied and at 

risk of being defeated, cannot be blamed on the Saskatchewan 

government. 

 

He won the seat last time with 6,000 votes. Polls this morning 

out of that same constituency showed that he’s tied with the 

Bloc competitor. 

 

But for you to say in this House that somehow that can be 

tagged to the provincial government in Saskatchewan is indeed 

drawing a very, very long bow. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t think it’s such a 

long bow to draw given . . . The minister was in the House this 

morning, he was in the House this morning. He heard his 

Minister for Municipal Government with respect to federal 

transfer payments and cuts to federal transfer payments as being 

vicious. Well the sort of rhetoric that we’re hearing in here all 

the time is not one that you would hear amongst colleagues 

federally and provincially that are getting along in a manner 

that’s better than . . . that’s unprecedented. 

 

So certainly . . . and also too, in terms of taking out of context 

comments made by the member from Arm River in an aside 

conversation, I mean who . . . That sort of little trick isn’t going 

to work either, Mr. Minister. 

 

When I look over the spending, as I did yesterday and noted 

that there was a great increase in spending for constitutional 

relations, I don’t see the point of that additional spending when 

at the same time this government is making the constitution and 

the very foundation of the country more fragile by fanning the 

flames of regionalism as we’ve just saw evidence of here again 

this morning during question period. 

 

Only yesterday I heard John Solomon was attacking the federal 

government for what it did on social programs, saying that it’s  

harming national unity. Believe it or not, it’s harming national 

unity by the government attacking the deficit. 

 

Well, Mr. Chair, in contrast I would say that getting the deficit 

under control in all the provinces and at the federal level will 

make it possible for the federal government to prove that 

Canada works. We’ll be able to deal more effectively with 

national problems and strains upon national unity if that deficit 

problem is gone. 

 

My question therefore is, why would you spend more on 

constitutional affairs while on the other hand you continue to 

attack a fragile national unity by fanning the flames of 

regionalism like Mr. Solomon? Particularly in light of the fact 

that the Liberal federal government is our only hope for a truly 

national government at this sensitive point in our history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  First of all I want to clarify one 

thing: that for the member opposite to say that in the middle of 

a federal campaign that you’re not going to have candidates 

debating and making points, political points, party to party, that 

somehow this is . . . that the constitution or the country is so 

fragile that you can’t have a campaign where Tony Merchant, 

inadvertently I think, takes credit for saving the airbase in 

Moose Jaw, never having been there or having anything to do 

with it, some would say that that kind of politicking where the 

mayor of Moose Jaw and others have to say this, that, and the 

other thing, that’s unfortunate. I agree with that. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that in a campaign, politicians are 

going to campaign against the record of the government. I’m 

sure the member doesn’t mean what he said when he says that 

candidates shouldn’t be talking about the shortcomings of the 

government they’re running against, or that the government 

shouldn’t argue against the shortcomings of the opposition — 

surely that’s not what you mean — and that the country can’t 

survive that kind of a public and open debate during an election. 

It’s the very thing that has made Canada and makes democracy 

work. 

 

(1100) 

 

So I totally disagree with you when you say that candidates of 

any political stripe, whether it’s Reform, Conservative, Liberal, 

or NDP, can’t make their statements during the election 

campaign. And for you to come here and say that John Solomon 

shouldn’t be putting out his party platform during the campaign 

in a very forceful way, I just think that is not accurate. 

 

I want to get back to where we have cooperation with the 

federal government. On economic development, in the area that 

I work in, I think I have had a good relationship with the 

various ministers who deal with economic development at the 

federal level. We have shared resources. 

 

We have a common office in Saskatoon where my department 

staff and the federal government’s department staff, in 

cooperation with Minister John Manley, decided that we were  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

going to co-locate in the same office building. Our staff get 

along; we have a common library, use common computers. And 

this is happening in a number of areas in the province. And 

there’s great cooperation that’s going on. 

 

And there are other areas where we have collaboration and 

support. On the issue of environment, you know that we have 

worked very diligently to cut back on the amount of red tape 

and duplication and we’ve signed some interesting agreements 

with the federal government as it would relate to the 

environment. 

 

The one area where we have a great deal of difficulty though 

and is becoming an issue in the campaign is the whole issue of 

fiscal responsibility and how you get the debt under control — 

and how you get the debt under control. Some of you will argue 

that the Finance department in Ottawa is doing a great job and 

that they’re solving the debt in a wonderful way by breaking 

their promise to get rid of the GST and keeping it, in order to 

solve the debt; to cut social programs, particularly health, to 

solve the federal debt. 

 

We argue vehemently that it’s being done in a ham-handed 

way, some would argue in a vicious way. And we hear this 

from the public — these aren’t words that we use; these are 

words we hear from our constituents. And so when those words 

come to the legislature on behalf of our constituents and you 

bring your words to the legislature where you attack our 

Minister of Finance or someone else for how they operate, this 

is common in the legislature. And I would say even at that 

level, the tone of this legislature, there’s much more 

camaraderie than I have seen for many, many years. 

 

And I don’t think the debate that goes on in this Assembly has 

anything to do with the problems that we are having in Canada 

as a nation. I think if there’s a failing, it’s the failing of the 

federal government — failing of the federal government to deal 

with a very, very critical issue. 

 

I think before the last referendum they were asleep at the switch 

as those who wanted to rip the country apart did their work and 

did their campaigning, and your federal counterparts, it’s my 

view, were asleep at the switch and almost lost Canada because 

they didn’t do the selling and the promoting that other 

Canadians were willing to help them with. And my fear is that 

they’re asleep at the switch again, and that they should be 

rallying those forces that want to keep our country whole. 

 

And I think there’s a concern in Canada that we need stronger 

leadership on that issue. And those points we’ll be making. That 

doesn’t mean that we’re opposed to Canada, as you might 

suggest; in fact it’s absolutely the opposite. There is no stronger 

voice for national unity in the past 20 years in this country than 

our Premier, who sits in the next desk to me and speaks 

coherently on international platforms, national platforms, on the 

issue of the importance of Canadian unity. He does it at every 

opportunity. He has high regard, high respect for his 

intelligence and knowledge on the issue, and for anyone to 

come here and start saying that that isn’t the case is absolute 

folly and nonsense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Chair, I find the minister’s 

comments amusing, and when he mentions that the Premier is 

. . . And certainly we’ll give him that — he’s well versed on 

constitutional issues and he has been on national and 

international platforms. Well might I remind you that each and 

every one of you across there are on that same platform on a 

daily basis now. We’re on the web. Every single vicious 

comment that you say is in Hansard. Everybody, not only in 

this nation but across this globe, can hear every comment that 

you make against national unity. So you’re on a national 

platform and an international platform as well. So when the 

Municipal Government minister this morning referred to federal 

transfer cuts as being vicious — vicious — you’re harming the 

whole national unity process. 

 

So I would like to know, is any of the money that we see here 

before us today in these Estimates going to go towards trying to 

take and reprogram your back-bench MLAs and your ministers 

into toning down their rhetoric that does nothing but fan the 

flames of regionalism in this country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I want to tell the member opposite 

that he should not take our arguments to defeat the federal 

Liberals as an attack on Canada. Quite the reverse. We want to 

rid the Canadian public of federal Liberals because we believe 

they are destroying the very fabric of the country by the hacking 

and slashing of social programs that have been forced onto the 

national agenda by New Democrats across this country. That’s 

why we’re trying to defeat the Chrétien government. 

 

We’re trying to create a situation where the Saskatchewan way 

. . . the way of compromise and building partnerships the way 

we have here in the province of Saskatchewan in the last six 

years, by balancing the books of the province in a fair and 

equitable way, by running a surplus and using that surplus to 

enhance social programs, to pay down the debt, and to reduce 

taxes. We’re doing that and we want to sell that program to 

Canadians so that we can rid Canada of Jean Chrétien and the 

Liberals. Because we think that their hacking and slashing of 

social programs is destroying the country and is bad for unity. 

That’s why we’re making the argument. And we’ll continue to 

make that argument as hard as we can — I promise you that. 

 

That if what you’re attempting to do today in the middle of a 

federal campaign is to, in some sort of a phoney way, come 

here and say, lay off our federal counterparts in the middle of an 

election campaign because we’re in fear and risk of losing the 

election, and somehow say that that then would mean that 

Canada would be destroyed, that’s absolute garbage and 

nonsense. The quickest way to save Canada, in my humble 

view, is to rid Canadians of the Liberal government. 

 

That’s my view and I hold that very strongly. And I believe 

quite strongly if the New Democrats, with their platform based 

on what is going on in Saskatchewan, were to have the levers of 

power in Ottawa to balance the budget . . . and I want to 

challenge you today on the budget of the federal government. I 

challenge you to tell me how much debt was added to the total  

  



1316  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

federal debt in the last four years. Do you know? — $117 

billion added to the debt in the last four years by the Liberal 

administration who broke their promise to get rid of the GST 

because they said they needed it to balance the books. They 

broke their promise to keep social programs because they said 

they were balancing the budget. 

 

Do you know what the debt today is in Canada? — $117 billion 

more than it was when they took over. That’s a bigger increase 

than in any period in the history of Canada. A bigger increase in 

the debt in Canada — 117 billion — than in the last four years 

of Mulroney. Did you know that? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Unbelievable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  That is unbelievable; that this is the 

biggest falsehood that has been perpetrated on Canadians, that 

breaking their promise to keep the GST and breaking their 

promise to slash health care was being done to balance the 

books of Canada. 

 

Challenge Paul Martin. Phone him and ask him. Say: Paul, is it 

true that in the last four years the debt of this country has gone 

up more than any other period in Canadian history? And do you 

know what he’ll say? He’ll say yes, and I have to . . . If he’s 

clear about it, he’ll say, I apologize to the Canadian people 

because I have done a worse job on debt and debt management 

than the Mulroney government before me or any other 

government — the Trudeau government — or any other federal 

government in the history of Canada. 

 

Check the numbers. Check the numbers. Not only haven’t we 

solved the debt problem, it’s gone up faster than any other 

period in Canadian history. You’ve kept the GST, which has 

taken thousands of dollars out of every Canadian family’s 

pocket — which you’d promised to eliminate — and you’ve 

also hacked and slashed at federal programs, social programs. 

 

So why is there an anti-Liberal sentiment across Canada among 

social groups, among poor people, among those who believe in 

trust and promises? It’s because on the account of promising to 

balance the budget and get rid of debt. You’ve failed and failed 

miserably at the federal level — it’s gone up faster than ever 

before in the history of Canada. 

 

On the promise to eliminate the GST — those who voted for 

that — you’ve let them down, and 84 per cent of Canadians 

agree with that statement, 84 per cent. And on the issue of 

health care where you promised to keep health care at its same 

level it was, you’ve hacked and slashed. And I could go on with 

the Crow rate, where there were promises made. 

 

But I say to you, if you think you can come here and stop the 

campaign, which is very effective, by the left wing of Canada 

against the cutting that was done in order, as they said, to solve 

the debt problem, which was false, we will not only continue to 

say those words about solving these problems, but we’ll say 

them even louder. Because in terms of national unity, it’s 

important that Canadians are able to trust their federal 

government and federal parties to deliver on what they say 

during federal elections. 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Minister, gleaning from a little bit 

of the rhetoric I . . . Well I shouldn’t be presumptuous. I guess I 

should ask you, because I heard in some of the comments that 

you’ve made that perhaps you and your government might be 

supportive of the Government of Canada in its attempts to 

wrestle the deficit to zero as a part of its overall strategy of 

trying to make Canadian federalism work. 

 

So I would enjoy a comment from you. Are you supportive of 

the federal government in their efforts to wrestle the deficit to 

zero? 

 

We’ve just heard a long statement about how they’re cutting 

and they’re slashing and that’s disruptive to national unity of 

course, according to John Solomon. While then on the other 

hand, you’ve got the federal New Democratic leader talking 

about spending an extra $20 billion a year — I think that was 

your platform that was unveiled yesterday, if I’m not mistaken. 

And you’re talking about a federal government who over the 

last several years has in fact been wrestling with a deficit and 

yes, indeed the deficit and the debt has grown. The deficit has 

dropped, sorry. The debt has grown. But your own federal 

counterparts are proposing an additional $20 billion every year. 

 

And you talk about Mr. Solomon. And he has his rights as a 

candidate, certainly, to make his comments, inflammatory as 

they may be. But you neglected to make any comment about 

your own ministers in this House and the inflammatory 

comments that they’re making on a continual basis. 

 

So I’d just like to know: does your government support the 

federal government in its attempt to wrestle the deficit to zero? 

Yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I’ll just say this: that in 

Saskatchewan in our first term of office we balanced the 

budget. And we had bigger obstacles and credit rating problems 

than the federal government did. And we did it in a sensitive, 

balanced way. 

 

If you’re saying, do we support the federal government’s 

approach to add a bigger chunk of debt to the Canadian debt 

than ever before in the history of Canada while breaking almost 

every promise that it made to the people of Saskatchewan in the 

last election, no we don’t support that approach. 

 

Do we support the approach of a balanced way of getting the 

books balanced and having tax cuts and enhancement to social 

programs the way we’ve been able to do? And I might add, with 

even the support of some opposition members in the last 

budget. I say that’s the way that we should be going at the 

Canadian level. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I believe under Intergovernmental Affairs . . . Well 

maybe first I should welcome your officials here today before I 

get too carried away here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 

no. I wouldn’t want to get carried away because the member 

from Lloydminster is in a bad mood today, and I’m not sure  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

why. But she was over here and didn’t like some of the things 

that we had to say. She disagreed with them and now she’s in a 

bad mood. So we will keep it fairly calm. 

 

Mr. Minister, the protocol office is part of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs jurisdiction and I believe that part of 

the duties performed by the protocol office is to provide for 

small gifts when people from other jurisdictions come to visit, 

such as the premier of a Chinese province or that kind of a visit. 

 

I wonder if you could give us any indication as to any of . . . if 

any of those gifts were of a value in excess of $200, and if so, 

what they were and to whom they were given. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  At this point in time, it would be 

very unusual if there were any gifts over 200. I don’t have that 

list here but I will get that information particularly for the 

member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d also 

wonder if you could provide me with a list of gifts that were 

received by the province, if any of them had a value in excess of 

$200; and if we did receive any, to whom were they given. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  It’s not . . . Intergovernmental 

Affairs does not keep track of gifts that individual members or 

people who go and receive gifts from international guests might 

give. There’s no individual record that is kept in 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Therefore you’re saying that if gifts are 

received by a minister or the Premier or some other member of 

the legislature, given in the performance of their duties, that 

those are gifts that are then owned by that individual rather than 

the gift being given to the province or to the office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think on the question the member 

asks, if you were given a pen set or if you were given gifts from 

visiting dignitaries, I think it’s an option for the ministers 

whether they keep it or use it in their office or whether it’s 

donated to some organization. But as far as I know, the policy 

for ministers or members of the Legislative Assembly is that 

it’s optional. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Well we do have some concerns with this particular department, 

as we don’t see that there is a lot of benefit, or at least a lot of 

activities that take place through this office, other than protocol. 

And yet it spends a significant amount of money overall. 

 

I know that your department was involved last year in the 

development or the administration of Internet developments 

within the province that were funded both federally and 

provincially through the infrastructure works program. How 

many of those was your department involved with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Last year, a year ago, the 

infrastructure program was transferred to Municipal 

Government. So we wouldn’t have any of that money or any  

authority over that at the present time. So if you might just hold 

your questioning on that till Municipal Government comes, you 

would be able to find that out. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you. Mr. Minister, though 

unfortunately, I’m not sure how we would ask questions of 

Municipal Government when the monies under Schedule A are 

under Intergovernmental Affairs. I’m sure the minister would 

direct us to refer them to Intergovernmental Affairs. And some 

of that comes under this department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’m just having . . . The reason it’s 

taking me a little time, I’m having trouble finding the line 

you’re talking about because on the Schedule A that I have in 

front me, I don’t have anything that would relate to the issue 

you’re reading. Can you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Page 143. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Page 143. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Information technology and 

communications (IA10). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  There would be no infrastructure 

money in that vote. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  So the information and technology and 

telecommunications vote does not relate in any way to Internet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  It’s a policy area and didn’t deal 

and spend any money on Internet out of that particular division. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Well 

perhaps you could explain then what that particular area does. 

They were budgeted for $555,000. I see that they transferred 

$405,000 to Economic and Co-operative Development, which is 

one of your departments, Mr. Minister. So perhaps you could 

explain what that area was doing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The whole information technology 

unit and telecommunication unit which you see here, which 

405,000 was transferred to Economic Development, was split 

into two parts. The provincial-federal negotiations on policy 

was maintained in Intergovernmental Affairs, and the 405,000 

that went with 5.5 positions, went over to Economic 

Development but deals very directly in a practical and hands-on 

way with the information technology companies in building an 

information technology centre or nucleus in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So they would deal with companies both large and small, liaise 

with SaskTel to build a bigger infrastructure from information 

technology in a very practical, in a very practical way, hands-on 

way, with companies. What’s left in this department is the 

regulatory policy unit that would deal with the feds or with 

other provinces on a day-to-day or month-to-month basis. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 

the main mandates of your department is to facilitate 

discussions with other jurisdictions. What meetings have you  

  



1318  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

helped to set up? Exactly what was your role in organizing the 

province’s participation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The kind of meetings that they 

would be involved in would be western premiers’ meeting, or a 

fed/prov meeting, or annual premiers’ meetings where this, on a 

regular basis in one way or another, comes up on the agenda 

either in a formal way or an indirect way. And this unit would 

be available to advise and recommend to cabinet, to the 

minister, and to the Premier and the Premier’s office, on issues 

that would relate to technology and telecommunications. 

 

And as we saw in question period today, with the drastic 

changes that are taking place very rapidly in 

telecommunications and announcements by the CRTC, we can 

see how important having this unit can be for a government. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well would not this area also be covered 

by SaskTel? Because that is where your communications 

basically are dealt with in this province, is through SaskTel. 

Wouldn’t the policy development come with the government 

and SaskTel in this area? So isn’t there a duplication here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  It’s a little bit like the trade 

organization. And I make the analogy because I think there is a 

close kind of forum that you can see here, where you could say 

that STEP, or the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 

is really a duplication, because SaskPower has a trading unit 

and Flexi-coil has a trading unit, so what do you really need 

STEP for, and isn’t that duplication? But on the other hand, it is 

really, really important that a province have an umbrella under 

which all the forms of trade are done and negotiated. 

 

And the same is true, we find, of telecommunications and 

technology — that there really is a need on the policy side to 

have one central unit that looks at the bigger picture. I mean 

SaskTel does have units that deal with telecommunications and 

telcos, and in their best interests, gives recommendations also, 

through this unit or directly to government on dealing with the 

private sector. 

 

But really, in this age of information technology, it’s really 

important. And I think I would be correct in saying that most 

provinces and most jurisdictions have gone to a system whereby 

they set up a very tight, concise unit of people who deal on the 

policy issue with other jurisdictions, and internally. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Since your department deals with advice 

to government related to telecommunications, what was their 

advice to the government, to SaskTel then, in relationship to the 

independent Internet providers that were in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I don’t want to go into all the 

detail and machinations of how the program worked. It’s clear 

that after the discussions that went on — and the service 

providers were involved in a big way, SaskTel obviously 

involved as well, and this unit of information technology and 

communications also played a role on the policy side — that 

they were able to come to, I think, maybe not what was wanted 

by everyone but something that has resolved the issue. 

(1130) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the decisions, the policy 

advisement and the decisions made by SaskTel, certainly had a 

major impact on the service . . . the small Internet service 

providers in this province because they took some very 

dramatic hits within their operations. I know that SaskTel did 

offer to purchase their equipment but they had invested 

considerable amount of time and efforts into those areas which 

was not provided for. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, while your Intergovernmental Affairs deals 

provincially between various areas . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . There’s certainly a lot of competition there from the 

member from Regina South in the questioning. But I wonder if 

you could please indicate to me whether or not your department 

is involved internationally as far as advising. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We’re not involved in any general 

way at all, but there’s one specific area where the World Trade 

Organization deals with this issue, and Canadians . . . or Canada 

through the Canadian government is involved in the World 

Trade Organization. 

 

We do advise on needs and aspirations, I guess to put it fairly, 

of this area of telecommunications and information technology 

on behalf of Saskatchewan people. But that would be the only 

bit that we do at the international level. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason 

I’m asking is I just wonder why are we doubling up? Couldn’t 

we have fewer departments here to deal with a number of these 

things? Shouldn’t these world trade questions be dealt with 

through your department of economic trade and development 

and a number of the other areas? Shouldn’t they just simply be 

wrapped up together and have fewer departments dealing with 

the very same issues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I would take the member’s 

view that you can always improve. But having said that, I think 

we’ve gone a long way together — you and I and members of 

the opposition — in getting the per capita spending on 

infrastructure and programs down to a level that I think is very, 

very appropriate. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  One last question, Mr. Minister. What 

services has the constitutional relations branch provided you in 

the past year? Have they provided you with any papers or 

recommendations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just let me . . . I’ve just been 

handed a little note, but basically there’s four main areas that 

we’ve been involved in: developing a strategy for a substantive 

response to the stresses on national unity following the Quebec 

referendum; advised government on how to respond to the 

post-referendum constitutional policy issues — that’s 

government in general but the Premier and other ministers, 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, and others who may be 

involved; assist in the preparation of Saskatchewan’s 

intervention, the federal reference case on Quebec’s right to 

secede from Canada — you know the issue that I’m talking  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

about; coordinate Saskatchewan’s constitutional policy with 

that of other governments; and finally, to advise government on 

how to address a range of issues with constitutional policy 

implications. And that is a vast array of different constitutional 

applications that might apply to various departments. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would there 

be any of those papers that could be tabled to the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Okay. There’s no public documents 

that have been prepared. They would be briefing notes that 

would be done for ministers or for the Premier, so they’re not 

documents that would tend to be tabled. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 

like to thank you for your responses and for your officials for 

coming in and assisting you today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just in closing, I want to say first of 

all, a big thank you to the department — who has been very 

patient with the minister — for providing us with, I think good 

quality answers, and to the members opposite for the questions 

they asked. 

 

And I just remind you if you have other issues on the 

constitution that you would like to get responses to, or if you 

want to use this area of government through the minister’s 

office, we can make fact sheets on issues available to you. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48  The Highways and Transportation 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 46, The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 contains 

several consequential amendments to other Acts. In preparing 

Bill 46, we determined we would have to make amendments to 

The Highway Traffic Act, 1996, and The Traffic Safety Court 

of Saskatchewan Act, 1988, which are on the list of laws to be 

translated into French. As The Highways and Transportation 

Act, 1997, is not being translated, we had to draft a separate Bill 

for these two laws. 

 

Bill 48 contains two sections, both of which are consequential 

to Bill 46. Section 2 repeals those sections of The Highway 

Traffic Act, 1996 which are no longer needed, as the subject 

matter is covered in Bill 46. Section 3 changes a cross-reference 

in The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988. 

 

Should members have any questions, we would be pleased to  

answer them in committee. I now move second reading of The 

Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 44 — The 

Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Wakamow Valley Authority 

is of course an Authority set up in the ’70s to beautify the river 

park in Moose Jaw. And there were in the 1970s a number of 

river valley authorities set up in various communities around 

our province, and they have done good work. 

 

I do have a problem with them, but I wish to first of all make it 

clear that I begrudge nothing to the city of Moose Jaw or Swift 

Current or Saskatoon. However, these beautification initiatives 

are of course paid for by taxpayers throughout the province, and 

what we have found in North Battleford and in the minister’s 

riding in Prince Albert is that the problem is that basically the 

list was closed in the 1970s. Consequently if you didn’t get on 

the list in the 1970s, you can’t get on it now. 

 

Now of course North Battleford and its sister community of 

Battleford are on opposite sides of the North Saskatchewan 

River. They have a beautiful natural environment there at the 

forks of the Battle River, which was of course the initial capital 

of the Northwest Territories. It was where our capital was 

supposed to be, and we are trying to preserve the natural beauty 

and the history of that area. As I say, it would have been a 

marvellous place for this provincial legislature to be standing, 

but unfortunately history ruled otherwise. 

 

But in looking through the Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker, I find 

that in 1995-96, in the last fiscal year, 740,000 — 

approximately three-quarters of a million — went to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority; Wakamow got 125,000; and 

Chinook Parkway in Swift Current got 78,000 — a total of just 

under a million dollars. 

 

And as I say, this was money paid for by taxpayers all over the 

province. And my question is, why can this money not be 

shared for all cities attempting to beautify river valley 

development? 

 

In the preceding fiscal year I find again, three-quarters of a 

million to Meewasin in Saskatoon; another 126 to Wakamow in 

Moose Jaw; and 78,000 to Chinook in Swift Current — a total 

again, just under a million dollars. 

 

(1145) 

  



1320  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

In the preceding fiscal year of ’93-94, we actually had 1.7 

million which was divided between Meewasin, Wakamow, 

Wascana, and Chinook in Swift Current. And in ’92-93, we had 

there 2 million divided again between Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, 

Regina, and Swift Current. And in ’91-92, just over 2 million, 

again divided between those four cities. 

 

So at one time it was 2 million. Now it appears to be about 1 

million that goes to river valley authorities set up in the days of 

the Blakeney government. 

 

And as I say, I do not begrudge those cities that are on the list, 

and I know that the river valley authorities in those 

communities have done great work in beautifying their 

communities, and so I congratulate them. They’re doing well, 

and I don’t begrudge the provincial assistance they’re receiving 

for them. 

 

But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it strikes me as unfair that 

provincial taxpayers continually pay for certain communities. 

Other communities which also have river valleys — Weyburn, 

Estevan, Kamsack, Nipawin, Prince Albert, and the Battlefords 

— we are left to fend for ourselves. And it only strikes me as 

fair that whatever funds are spent on urban beautification of 

river valleys ought to be more equitably distributed. 

 

Now it might be responded that we don’t have river valley 

authorities. Well we do, but we are told that we cannot get on 

the list even if we establish an authority. The Battlefords has 

not established an authority incidentally, Mr. Speaker, but the 

reason we haven’t is that we have been told that the list is 

closed. 

 

So basically if you had an authority in the 1970s, then you will 

continue getting assistance annually from the province and from 

provincial taxpayers. If you were not on the list in the 1970s, 

then the local taxpayers of your municipality will have to bear 

100 per cent of the cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this seems to me inequitable. So while I 

congratulate the thrust of this Bill and I congratulate the people 

of Moose Jaw and the Wakamow Authority generally for the 

good work they have done in beautifying that community and 

the River Park in Moose Jaw, I do have to ask why some 

communities are favoured in being on the list and other 

communities are shut out in the cold. And I would ask that the 

minister consider that inequity in funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 41 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 41 — The Crown 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a  

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 56 — The Trust 

and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 5 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 6 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 

Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Upshall that Bill No. 38 — The 

Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 be 

now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 14 —The Water Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Welcome, Mr. Minister, and to the 

officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that this Bill makes it a lot easier for 

Sask Water to expropriate the land for special projects. Can you 

tell me why this is necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I 

answer the member’s question, I’d like to introduce my 

officials. I have to my right, Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president 

of water resource management; and Micheal McDougall, 

general counsel to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

Mr. Chairman, The Water Corporation Act is in need of some 

amendments. There are four main areas with respect to the 

changes, and what we are trying to do is streamline the process 

by which decisions are made — eliminate red tape. 

 

And certainly one of the issues that the member raises, with 

respect to the process of approval for expropriations, as it 

currently exists, it requires an order in council, which is 

inconsistent with any of the other Crowns, and right of way 

approval for any of the expansion to infrastructure here in 

Saskatchewan. So this would make it consistent whereby it 

would not require an order in council to expropriate an 

easement on land for a Sask Water project. 

 

There are three other areas that I’m sure the member will want 

to question about. It deals . . . one is in section 54, an 

amendment which removes the regulatory involvement of Sask 

Water in approval for internal sewage collection and water 

distribution projects, which I think all municipal governments 

will be satisfied with, in that Sask Water does no longer have to 

get involved in another level of bureaucracy. SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) will 

still do the environmental review. And so I think it will 

streamline and make that system an awful lot easier. 

 

The other deals with the sale of water beds as it relates to 

specific land entitlement claims. And the other is for domestic 

approvals. The provision to provide licences for domestic 

projects under The Water Rights Act would be changed to 

approvals under The Water Corporation Act and it would not 

then require inspections every time a landowner would sell to 

another landowner. It would be an automatic transfer as 

opposed to having to come back to the Water Corporation. 

 

So this really is in tune with cleaning up some of the legislation 

to reduce the regulatory burden and the paperwork that needs to 

be done in terms of the corporation to fulfil its mandate. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I understand that this first 

change is to allow you to be consistent with other Crowns. And 

I guess philosophically you have to wonder whether, just 

because you’re not consistent, doesn’t mean the whole process 

is wrong. Not having to go to the government, to the elected 

people of the province in order to get approval for 

expropriation, seems to me to be wrong. People out there have 

to have one last chance to have their voices heard, so I guess I 

have difficulty with this idea. 

 

Can you explain how much of a delay is faced by Sask Water in 

cases where expropriation now has to happen when they have to 

go through cabinet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, as it would exist now, the 

Water Corporation would have to draft an order in council. An 

order in council is a document that would go to the cabinet, to 

the executive arm of this government. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that it is not a matter that 

is referred to this legislature, to this Chamber. When an 

expropriation is done now as it exists, Sask Water would go 

through all measure of due diligence to ensure that people had a  

voluntary . . . and understood the reasons that the infrastructure 

was going to go through. They offer a reasonable compensation 

for the imposition that they would pose on the landowner. 

 

And for the most part, I would say it’s fair to say that the vast 

majority of people understand that infrastructure has to go 

somewhere. And although there is an imposition, the fact of the 

matter is, their neighbours, their friends, their communities, 

need the infrastructure — water in the case of the Water 

Corporation — and that those facilities are required. There are 

some, for some reasons, where expropriation for legal reasons 

— estates being one example — an expropriation in some cases 

may be required. 

 

The process is now that the Water Corporation would apply for 

an order in council, through their minister, to cabinet. Cabinet 

would then review the order in council. The order in council 

would then be either passed or rejected. I can’t recall a request 

for an expropriation that has been rejected — certainly not in 

the time that I’ve been in cabinet — and then the normal course 

of action would take place. 

 

(1200) 

 

I want to say that it has been my experience that all of the 

corporations have done all measure of consultation with 

landowners in any project that I’ve seen. So basically what 

we’re doing is eliminating the need for a whole pile of 

paperwork; a lot of people being involved in a process that 

certainly can be simplified. And I think that this amendment to 

section 18 would clearly allow that to happen. 

 

So it’s not just a matter of consistency with other Crowns, 

although it is consistent with what the other Crowns do. What it 

would do is eliminate a lot of time that public corporation 

officials spend in terms of putting the documentation together. 

And so for that reason we’re recommending the change to 

section 18. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Well I guess we’ll just have to agree to 

disagree, because I don’t think that two wrongs make a right. 

 

But could you tell me how many expropriations Sask Water 

would normally give in a year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess it would depend on the 

amount of capital construction that’s done in a year. I guess, to 

give you some example of the number of expropriations that 

would be involved in a fairly major project, the 

Humboldt-Wakaw waterline involved 270 . . . 260 landowners 

and there was one expropriation that was required. That was 

done by order in council. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So that’s really not very many. Are the delays 

faced by Sask Water now, given that very low number, 

detrimental to the point that we should have to remove this 

check and balance for approval of these expropriations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think any time that we as a 

government and as elected people can streamline a process for 

decision making, it’s our responsibility to do that. We made a  

  



1322  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

commitment to business people and we make the commitment 

to landowners and all other people of this province that, where 

we identify areas that we can streamline a process, we will 

attempt to do that. 

 

The fact of the matter is that there’s all measure of due 

diligence done prior to an expropriation. That certainly would 

be the last resort, and I think you can understand that. It’s not 

something that any corporation or any individual wants to do — 

to have to, through a process of expropriation, achieve the 

necessary results. Much better to be able to be done through an 

education process, through an understanding both by the 

corporation or the officials and by the landowners; sit down and 

discuss the issue. 

 

And as I’ve indicated, for the vast majority of the cases an 

agreement can be reached. Farmers will want compensation for 

the imposition on their land, and I think that’s fair and that’s 

reasonable. 

 

Ultimately the people who are going to be supplied through the 

infrastructure will be paying for the cost of all of this. And I 

think part of reducing the cost of doing business, internal to 

government, is streamlining the process. 

 

So quite clearly that’s what we’re attempting to achieve here. I 

think that this is a reasoned approach to what is hopefully a 

last-resort type of an initiative. And I think really it is. And it’s 

evidenced by the fact on Humboldt-Wakaw we’ve been able to 

satisfy all but one of the landowners, which required 

expropriation. 

 

On the other hand, I think you will also understand that to be 

able to supply a good quality water to some of the rural 

communities in our province and to some of the cities, there has 

to be infrastructure. You can’t hang a waterline from clouds. It 

has to go somewhere. And if it goes somewhere it goes over 

somebody’s land or under somebody’s land. There will be 

surface infrastructure that will be, I guess, a little bit more of an 

imposition than a pipeline going under. There would be a 

disturbance of people’s land. 

 

But if we’re going to serve the needs of rural communities, we 

really do need to do these kinds of processes in some cases. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, in clause 4 of the Bill you are 

removing the need for Sask Water’s approval for certain 

projects that are within the boundaries of municipalities, urban 

municipalities. Basically that’s because two government 

departments were regulating the same thing, I understand. Can 

you explain the exact nature of SERM’s involvement compared 

to Sask Water’s? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think to the member opposite, as 

in any project that would require environmental due diligence, 

SERM would be the body that would do that. 

 

With respect to urban infrastructure, these are all designed and 

put together by professional engineers. And so it really makes 

for us little sense to have the Water Corporation involved in 

what is being done by professionals who are governed by  

certain standards. It’s a self-regulated body. And the fact that 

they are professionals, and have in the past shown a history of 

doing very good quality work, to involve Sask Water in the 

process really made no sense to us. 

 

So it’s another way where we can streamline the 

decision-making process, and the approval process. And I think 

it will be well received both by the profession and by business. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are the regulations that are required under 

SERM different than the ones that were required under Sask 

Water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes. There are a number of areas 

where SERM will have to do their work, and where public 

safety will be a concern. And those are things that have been 

developed over the past number of years, and those will remain 

in place, and we’ll still maintain there the required duties that 

they have, over the period, developed. The engineers will 

design the infrastructure. The only difference now is that Sask 

Water will not be involved in the process. 

 

But I think that we can be rest assured that SERM will do their 

job, the professional engineers will do their job, and we can all 

be satisfied that we have eliminated yet another unnecessary 

step in the decision-making process. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess I take that to mean that the public can 

be assured that there is as many safety concerns looked at now 

under this new Bill with the new amendment as before. 

 

Mr. Minister, under section (5), we have a whole new section 

where Sask Water has powers in the areas of domestic uses of 

water, including watering of stock. Can you tell me how many 

licences are still being held under The Water Rights Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials there are 

about 6,000 licences under this Act, and that would be the 

number that exists at this time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  As I understand it, Sask Water has the right to 

cancel these licences and issue its own approval for domestic 

water usage? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That’s correct. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So will all these licences currently just be 

automatically renewed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that we 

will be notifying all of these water users and that they will have 

the right to accept the approval or reject, if they so choose, if 

they want to do away with the facility. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What is the procedure Sask Water will then 

follow in giving approvals under the new section? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Really what we’re doing is we’re 

grandfathering. There were some areas where approval for 

transfer had not taken place and an ownership would transfer 

from one person to another. They hadn’t applied for a licence  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

— there’s 6,000 of them and it’s really an unnecessary 

situation, I would suggest. And what we are doing is just 

allowing for, I guess, grandfathering the process that was there 

in the past, and then allowing for an automatic transfer from the 

existing owner to a new owner if in fact a sale should take 

place. 

 

So we’ll be notifying all of the people who are licensed under 

the Act, indicating what the process will be and how it will 

work in the future. And I think basically it’s a matter of 

housekeeping and cleaning up what was maybe at one point in 

time a necessary process. But certainly I think it would make 

little sense to me that the Water Corporation should be having 

to license a facility in a farmyard and then reissuing a licence 

just because of transfer. Really I think we’re just eliminating a 

bunch of unnecessarily burdensome red tape for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So I take that to mean then it would be 

automatically renewed unless some red flag comes up 

somewhere. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That is correct. You know, it’s just 

eliminating what is going to be an unnecessary process. But 

still, the corporation will have the responsibility and the 

authority to ensure that the, you know, the appropriate measure 

are taken. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What kind of bureaucracy will be entailed in 

gaining these approvals? And how long will it take? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  What it will entail really, is 

reducing the work load within the corporation about 75 per 

cent. I guess what would happen is the file would be reviewed 

upon request and the appropriate measure would be taken. 

 

So I think it just really is a common sense approach. It’s going 

to mean cost savings within the corporation; it’s going to be less 

red tape for the farmers. And really, I think you would agree 

with me that that would be an ultimate goal in terms of 

legislation. And any way where we can streamline, downsize 

the process by which a decision is made — as long as we can be 

assured the public safety is still in effect — certainly that would 

be the requirements. And that really is what the changes to this 

Act will do in that regard. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So once these licences are cancelled and the 

new approvals are given, the projects will have to be registered 

by way of some sort of legal documentation against the 

certificate of the title of land. I would think a caveat or an 

easement and that type of thing. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that what will happen is a 

notice will be put on the title so a new owner would be made 

aware that that kind of a facility is there. It’s only a notice, an 

awareness that that is there and that would be, you know, a 

public document. And it would be part of the title and when a 

transfer would be required the new owner would know it’s 

there. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So then it’s not a caveat, it’s not an easement. 

 Okay. 

 

Obviously there are some concerns in the province about the 

settlement of land claims whether they’re specific or not 

specific. So any changes to the Act that deal with the subject 

raises concerns for people in the province. Can you explain 

what changes this provision makes to the land claims? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  What this does is just allows the 

authority to make the transfer, similar to a TLE (treaty land 

entitlements). It’s not mandatory. It allows us the ability to do 

that with respect to a specific land claim. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have one 

question for the minister. But before I ask the question I just 

wanted to make comment on a couple of the comments that the 

minister has made. And the first one is regarding regulation and 

red tape, and of course that’s what we want and of course that’s 

what the people of the province want, is red tape. 

 

But I wouldn’t want the minister to be misleading the public in 

that each and every day as we deal with a piece of legislation in 

this House, we see less and less in the actual legislation and 

more and more in the regulations, which of course gives more 

and more control to Executive Council and the bureaucrats. So, 

Mr. Minister, let’s not lead the public on in that regard. 

 

And the second thing is you talked about communication as the 

way to stop expropriation and to talk to the people affected. It’s 

a little hard to understand it, Mr. Minister, when SaskPower, an 

area that comes under your jurisdiction, has just gone out and 

expropriated land from dozens and dozens of farmers to 

proceed with the project that you want to proceed with. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, let’s not again lead the public on to believe 

that all is well and fine when we expropriate land. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, my question is in regard to 

expropriation and as it relates to flooding, and I’m not sure this 

comes under the jurisdiction of Sask Water but I’m sure you 

can enlighten us. For example, where you have massive 

flooding and land needs to be used to drain a large area of land 

and the landowner maybe isn’t in agreement with the water 

crossing his land, does the expropriation come under your 

jurisdiction for that type of scenario? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Normally the circumstance that the 

member opposite speaks to would be under the jurisdiction of a 

CDA (conservation and development area authority) and they 

would be responsible for managing the control of that kind of a 

project, so it wouldn’t be something that would impact on the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

 

With respect to misleading the public, I want to say to the 

member opposite that he too should not mislead certain 

situations that in fact don’t pertain to this piece of legislation, 

but I can understand the sensitivity, given that was one of the 

members who was subject to a SaskPower expropriation just 

recently, as I understand it. But we won’t get into that, only to  

  



1324  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

say that the CDAs in that kind of a project that you would speak 

to would be the ones that would be responsible for dealing with 

that kind of an issue. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since you raised the 

issue of expropriation and SaskPower, in particular my piece of 

land, does the minister . . . can the minister provide for this 

House a list of the landowners that were involved in that project 

that they did indeed expropriate the land from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well the member will know we’re 

not dealing with any piece of legislation that relates to any other 

corporation other than the Sask Water Corporation. I haven’t 

got any details here other than I brought the officials from the 

Water Corporation who are prepared to deal with the 

amendments to this Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us 

then, is it public policy or Sask Water policy to release the list 

of names that land has been expropriated from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I don’t think we see that it 

would be of any purpose to be posting in newspapers or other 

public places a list of people from whom land has been 

expropriated. That, for the most part, is an initiative between a 

landowner and the corporation, and I don’t know of what public 

policy benefit it would be to buy ads either in newspapers or 

post them on telephone posts around the province. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, I wasn’t advocating that you 

post them on telephone posts or . . . Of course that would be a 

little ridiculous, but coming from that side of the House I’m not 

surprised that you might consider that. 

 

I’m not sure if that’s Sask Water’s policy; if SaskPower has a 

different policy, because you felt quite free to use this 

member’s name in the media. It appeared in the newspaper; it 

. . . You raised it once again today. And so I can assure you, Mr. 

Minister, that I will be checking in to see if it’s public policy 

that you release these names. And the next time that we’re in 

the SaskPower Crown Corps or whatever, I think maybe we’ll 

have a discussion about that. And that is the appropriate place 

to have it. 

 

However, back on the issue at hand and the water rights. I’m 

just wondering how . . . In my dealings over the last couple of 

weeks with some areas out in my constituency regarding 

flooding, there seems to be some concern by the taxpayers of 

the confusion in the Water Corp as well as through Municipal 

Government, that there’s too many players involved; that things 

can’t move quickly enough. 

 

And I’m wondering what role you would play, as Sask Water, if 

there is a project that landowners want to see proceed that 

would mean draining of some water through maybe a 

landowner that is not agreeable to that. What is your role in all 

this and where should these landowners turn to then if it’s not in 

your purview to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  When in fact there is some kind of 

a facility put in place that would transfer water from one  

landowner to another, there would have to be Water 

Corporation approval; they could apply to the Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation. It would then become the responsibility of 

the landowner from whose land the water is flowing to manage 

that flow. 

 

If in fact it became a larger project that Sask Water was 

involved in, all the engineering studies, the appropriate 

engineering studies would be done. A design of the appropriate 

facilities with respect to water management would be as well 

done, and that would be the process that would in fact take 

place. 

 

In terms of water management, I think the member will agree 

with me that when there’s an imposition on someone else’s 

land, there has to be some discussion, and there has to be put in 

place something so you know you don’t want to damage one 

person’s ability to make a living and damage something that 

farmers certainly hold near and dear to them and that’s their 

land. And so it does take some kind of an approval process and 

there needs to be some insurance that that flood water would be 

managed appropriately. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. On this particular type 

of an issue, then who in Sask Water would a landowner or a 

group of landowners contact directly to ensure that the process 

would move on at . . . in a short a length of time as possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The appropriate place would be to 

contact the regional office and the officials there would 

certainly be able to assist the landowners. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think because they indicated a little earlier 

there is some concern by the landowners that the process is too 

lengthy, and I guess to use the terms of some rural councillors, 

that it appears that Sask Water is the den of skunks in the 

culvert — it stops the flow of the water. 

 

If we go through the regional office, we go to head office, and it 

keeps . . . the buck keeps getting passed. Is there not . . . when 

people’s houses are being flooded or people’s Quonsets are 

being flooded, is there not someone a little higher up that can 

get the process rolling so that we don’t have the 

stumbling-block of going through three or four sets of 

bureaucracy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  There could be a number of 

processes. One of the ways would be to contact the president of 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. I can say to the member 

opposite if there’s any unnecessary delay in any request, I’m 

sure the president would be more than willing to look into it. 

 

We have regional offices in different areas of the province to be 

able to give local control and local understanding. And certainly 

no one will deny that on certain occasions a system can break 

down and when that happens we do our best to ensure that that 

is corrected. So if you have a specific concern in any particular 

area, you can bring it to my attention at my office and I’d 

certainly be willing to look at it myself. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Now thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman of 

committees. Mr. Minister, I’d like to welcome your officials 

here today. 

 

I also have some concerns about the expropriation process. And 

I’m just wondering why Sask Water feels it’s necessary — you 

already have the power to expropriate; it’s just a matter of going 

through an OC (order in council) to do it — why you feel it’s 

necessary to move away from that procedure. 

 

Because what that does, it allows the general public . . . The 

member from Arm River said, well I hope that you will provide 

the names for those people under SaskPower that were 

expropriated. At least with Sask Water today if you expropriate 

some land, it’s done by OC. It’s open to the public to see whose 

land was expropriated. 

 

Why do you feel it necessary to do away with that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve 

adequately explained why we felt it was unnecessary to do an 

order in council. The fact of the matter is it’s worked and has 

worked over a number of years in many other utilities across the 

province. And we feel that where we can eliminate the cost to 

the people of Saskatchewan by eliminating yet more 

bureaucratic procedure, we would attempt to do that. 

 

And I think this is a reasoned approach. This is an area where 

we can eliminate a process that I would suggest to you is 

unnecessary, and that’s why we’re proposing the amendments 

in this Bill. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 

there was very little bureaucracy actually added there by going 

through the OCs and that it was a worthwhile effort because it 

did allow the public to know what was happening. 

 

I’d like to ask you a little further though about the 

compensation. Do you support compensation payments for all 

expropriated property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can only speak to the 

expropriation with respect to those under my portfolio, and 

today I’m prepared to speak to expropriation initiatives under 

the Sask Water Corporation’s Act. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well under Sask Water do you support 

compensation payments for the properties which are 

expropriated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The policy of the Water 

Corporation is that we do compensate for easements. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you. At what level should 

those compensations be at? Fair market value? Below that or 

above that? Or what level should they be at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that 

certainly the nature of the compensation would change from 

area to area depending on the value of the land, but sort of the 

 rule of thumb is a fair evaluation plus 15 per cent. 

 

If a landowner is not satisfied with that value, they have the 

right to appeal to the appeals . . . It’s under The Expropriation 

Procedure Act that they have an opportunity to appeal if they’re 

not satisfied with what is being offered. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you. Should compensation 

be paid conditional on government receiving some sort of a 

financial benefit from the easement or a social benefit? Is there 

any requirement for government to receive a benefit in some 

manner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I think what we would look at 

is the infrastructure that’s put in place. And ultimately that is 

there to serve the general public, the people of Saskatchewan. 

So should there be some public benefit? One would certainly 

hope so. 

 

The example of a waterline, an infrastructure to bring water 

from a source to people who need the supply, one would 

certainly think that enhancing the quality of water through the 

development of an infrastructure would be of some public 

benefit. I think any of those people who have been served by, 

you know, by a good source of water that’s treated and ends up 

being top quality, certainly there is some benefit — and should 

be to some benefit To the government per se, the answer is we 

have nothing to gain or to lose, because basically we facilitate 

the financing and in some cases the construction. The costs of 

such infrastructure is paid ultimately by the users. 

 

So does government benefit? You know, I mean we’re not . . . 

that’s really not what this is about. We’re a corporation that’s 

here to provide a public service. We certainly don’t want to be 

subsidizing where, you know, where it’s unnecessary, any kind 

of an infrastructure. So in the case of an expropriation of 

easement, it would be ultimately to benefit the people who are 

using the resource. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know 

you’re kind of wondering where I’m going on this, and I’ll 

explain to you where I was going. And I’m pleased with your 

answers because it shows a clear differentiation between what 

Saskatchewan does with expropriations of property and what 

the federal government does. 

 

The federal government’s belief seems to be that if they do not 

receive a financial reward for the expropriation then neither will 

the private owner receive any compensation for it. So I’m 

pleased to see that your statement says that the provincial 

government does not have to receive any financial reward when 

they expropriate a piece of property before they will provide 

any compensation to the landowner. So I’m pleased to see that, 

Mr. Minister. And I realize you were kind of wondering just 

where I was heading on that one. 

 

Mr. Minister, when I look at the easements, the expropriations 

being carried out under the Sask Water Act, and now moving it 

away from having to do it from order in council, I do see a bit 

of irony here though— perhaps even you might call it hypocrisy 

— that you would proceed with this in light of what  

  



1326  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

happened during the 1980s with the Alameda dam and the 

Tetzlaff farm. 

 

(1230) 

 

At that point in time your members, including yourself, who 

were sitting in the House at that time, fought tooth and nail 

against the expropriation by Sask Water of those lands, and fact 

is that fight still carries on today because those lands have not 

yet been expropriated, even though a portion of them are under 

water today; even though the two brothers whose land still 

remains there now hope to benefit from the water saved in that 

dam and use it for irrigation in that area. 

 

And fact is now they’re trying to hold up another pipeline going 

through the area, through their land — a natural gas pipeline — 

because they want to use water from the dam to irrigate it. And 

I have to wonder: without the dam, where were they going to 

get the water? And fact is, now they can keep their cattle in 

those particular pieces of land all summer long because they 

have water there, which they didn’t have before. They had to 

move their cattle out the beginning of June because they had no 

water. 

 

So it’s a bit hypocritical, Mr. Minister, that you would now 

come forward with a Bill that allows for easier expropriations 

for Sask Water when years ago you fought it tooth and nail. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, under clause no. 4 of the Act, which 

exempts municipalities from submitting detailed plans on 

routine projects, we support the move. Unlike our Liberal 

colleagues, we support the move to less regulation and less red 

tape. 

 

It seemed to me from the member from Arm River’s comments 

that they were favouring more red tape, which I found 

surprising. But if you read the Hansard I believe that’s exactly 

what he said: we favour red tape. It surprised me but, you know, 

perhaps he mis-spoke himself or didn’t mean to say that, but 

that certainly seemed to be what was being said. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what assurances do we have though that with 

the elimination of some of this red tape that it won’t affect the 

public or environmental safety of those projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The Department of Environment 

has regulations and they have a process that they will follow on 

any project. And it will vary, certainly, from project to project. 

It is not the responsibility of the Water Corporation to enforce 

environmental regulations and/or laws. That is SERM, the 

Department of Environment and Resource Management. So any 

changes that we would make to this Act certainly wouldn’t be 

pertinent with respect to environmental due diligence. That 

would be a process that’s done entirely by another department. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  The changes to this Act, Mr. Minister, 

wouldn’t have any impact on the conservation development 

authorities that are in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No. The answer is no. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m also 

interested in the local flooding situations where one farmer may 

be blocking drainage, which impacts on his neighbours’ lands. 

Is it possible for Sask Water to intervene in those cases and 

provide for some drainage if . . . the other landowners perhaps 

have to pay for it, but to allow access, if it has only minimal or 

no impact on the other landowners? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well if, for an example, one person 

is blocking culverts and it’s backing up water onto another 

person’s land, they can apply to the Sask Water Corporation for 

an investigation. And they’ll do an investigation. And if in fact 

there is an infraction, they could order that the obstruction be 

removed. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  What if there was old drainage ditches, 

dating back decades, that have since blown in in the dry years, 

are now filled with blow dirt and are preventing drainage. Can 

Sask Water intervene in those particular cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that the owners of the 

works, if an infrastructure over the course of time has naturally 

closed in and filled with silt or blow dirt, that they can take it 

back by themselves, without approval from the Water 

Corporation, to the state that it originally was. If there is new 

infrastructure or expanded activity in terms of an infrastructure, 

they would have to apply for approval from the corporation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Would this be dependent on the original 

structures having been licensed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, it would. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and your 

officials for coming in today. That’s all the questions we have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the 

minister’s officials leave, I just want to thank them for being 

here today and helping the minister get through the question 

and answers; so thank you. Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

I also would like to say, Mr. Chairman, that thank heavens that 

the Conservative Party has no credibility in this province, let 

alone across Canada. And the comments by the member from 

Cannington today would indicate that; where he can’t even sit 

in this House and get the facts straight when somebody is 

speaking and goes ahead and says something totally off cuff 

and actually no truth to, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. We are on clause 9. I don’t know 

if those remarks pertain to clause 9. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Chair:  Before starting I would ask the minister to 

introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you very much. I’m pleased to 

have with me today from the Department of Justice, Terry 

Chinn, who is the Rentalsman; and Linda Ens, who is the senior 

policy analyst in legislative services; and from Social Services 

behind me is Phil Walsh, from the income security programs. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. There are a 

number of questions I wish to ask because it dealt with . . . of 

the amendments before us this afternoon. And first of all I’d ask 

. . . welcome the officials with the minister, and thank the 

minister and the officials for their attendance this date. 

 

I understand that it is the intention in the case of those persons 

on social assistance, that instead of actually paying the damage 

deposit up front to be held in trust, that there will instead be a 

letter of commitment undertaking the minister’s obligation for 

the amount of the damage deposit in the event that at the end of 

the tenancy it is forfeit. 

 

And what I want to know is that my understanding is that this 

letter of commitment will come along sometime later after the 

tenancy agreement has been entered into. Are these letters of 

commitment automatic? Or will there be some discretion with 

the minister as to which recipients will qualify for a letter of 

commitment, and which recipients, for instance ones who may 

have a bad history in terms of damage deposits, will not be 

given this letter of commitment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It is my understanding that the letter will 

be automatic as long as the person qualifies for social 

assistance. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So then the minister is saying that all recipients 

will in fact get this letter of commitment regardless of history, 

and that the only grounds under which the minister would 

refuse to give a letter of commitment would be say, if the 

person actually isn’t on assistance at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — In the legislation there is a provision for the 

prompt filing of an objection with the Rentalsman if the 

landlord wishes to retain a damage deposit — five calendar 

days. Now I understand and appreciate, and I’m sure tenants 

will appreciate that, and the process should move along quickly 

and not be unduly delayed. But five calendar days seems to me 

very, very short, particularly when we’re dealing with 

weekends and holidays. I wonder if the minister could make 

some comments on that, and whether that issue has been  

addressed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the practical answer to that 

question is that the type of information that needs to be filed is 

very minimal, and this can be filed electronically, by fax, or 

other arrangement. And so practically, we don’t see that there 

will be any problem with the five-day limit. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that . . . 

Take the example of Christmas. If you have Christmas falling 

on a Monday, you have Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, 

all as holidays. Surely it would make more sense to say working 

days than calendar days. 

 

I mean I appreciate that we want this process to move along 

quickly. But in situations of statutory holidays, especially where 

you’ve multiple statutory holidays, I mean is this a requirement 

that landlords spend their Christmas doing out this forms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well it’s my understanding of the 

landlord business that they do their business all the time. So 

practically, we know that they already will work on holidays or 

weekends or whatever to do the work. And it’s my 

understanding from the industry that this won’t be a major 

problem. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, what I am told is that if 

you’re talking about holidays — like I said, I gave the example 

of Christmas being a four-day holiday — there has to be 

inspection of the premises and then preparation of the 

document, filing of the document. I’m told that what landlords 

may start doing is simply automatically filing on the basis that, 

you know, if they don’t file, they’re out. And if they do file, 

they can later advise the Rentalsman, oh I’m sorry, but I guess I 

don’t have a claim after all. 

 

So what I’m being told is that this actually may increase the 

number of files that the Rentalsman is being given, because 

landlords will not have adequate time and adequate notice in 

some situations to prepare and file their material. And would it 

not make more sense if we simply said, within five working 

days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to that basically, is that we are 

working with the landlords to make this whole process as 

accessible as possible. We know that the way things work now 

that we’ll be able to work with the limit that we’ve set out in the 

legislation. And practically, we’re working with the members of 

the residential tenancies industry to make sure that everything 

works in a smooth way. And so the consultation on that will be 

continuing. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask then the minister: if 

you wish to work with everyone to make sure this Act runs as 

smoothly as possible — not biased in favour of one group or the 

other but just simply smooth functioning to the benefit of both 

tenants and their landlords — will you consider an amendment 

then to provide for five working days as opposed to  

  



1328  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

five calendar days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well, okay. So much for cooperation, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a very cooperative government when it may 

suit their purposes. 

 

I’d like to return to your earlier comment that the letter of 

commitment for those persons on social assistance will be 

automatic. And I mentioned, you know, what happens in the 

situation where — and I’m not suggesting this is all of them — 

but where we have a tenant on assistance who’s had a bad 

history of leaving a trail of forfeited damage deposits. What will 

be done in those circumstances? What does the department 

intend to put in place to give these people an extra little bit of 

incentive here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Practically, there will be no advantage to 

a tenant who is also a Social Services client to somehow renege 

or cause a problem. Before there were some advantages there. 

And so practically, there won’t be a maximum number of 

security deposits, but this security deposit that is paid on their 

behalf and there’s an award made because of some damage, that 

amount will be recovered from future payments on social 

assistance. 

 

The other thing I should clarify too is that with the automatic 

letter of commitment, if a person’s in a residence right now on 

social assistance and a security deposit’s been paid, there won’t 

be an automatic letter on October 1 of this year because there’s 

no necessity for that, because they’ll be operating under the 

present scheme. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — May I, Mr. Chairman, go to the other side of 

the equation. And perhaps I should have gone to the other side 

of the equation first. 

 

What incentives will there be in place for those responsible 

tenants on assistance so that they get a bit of benefit, a bit of 

reward, for the fact that at the end of their tenancy agreement 

that they’ve been responsible and there are no damages. Would 

it not make sense, Mr. Minister, that we have in place proper 

incentives and disincentives so that we properly recognize those 

persons on assistance who’ve been responsible about the 

tenancy, and vice versa — that we also recognize those persons 

who have not been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that the way this legislation 

has been prepared provides the incentive, which recognizes that 

most tenants in Saskatchewan, whether they’re on social 

assistance or not, don’t end up having to pay off a security 

deposit to the landlord because of damage. I mean it’s a smaller 

number of people where that happens. 

 

The incentive in the system is the fact that if a security deposit 

isn’t paid based on the letter of commitment from the 

Department of Social Services, then there won’t be a future 

reduction in a social assistance payment. Because practically, 

the people who are on social assistance will now have 

responsibility like any other citizen in Saskatchewan to  

ultimately pay for any damage that they might cause. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, is the minister saying that in all 

cases of forfeited damage deposits, that there will be recovery 

against future assistance payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The normal rule will be exactly that 

unless it’s a situation beyond the tenant’s control, such as a 

family violence situation, for example. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m satisfied with 

the minister’s responses, and as far as I’m concerned the Bill 

may proceed. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m not really going to 

take a lot of time on questions because I’ve been following the 

questioning that the member from North Battleford has given 

and he’s basically covered a number of the areas. 

 

The one concern I just want maybe a bit more clarification . . . 

But as I understand this piece of legislation, we’ve arrived at, if 

you will, a compromise between landlords and tenants 

regarding security deposits. I think it’s been an area that’s been 

under constant review and certainly contention for a number of 

years. And it’s pleased to see . . . I guess I’m pleased to see and 

our caucus is pleased to see that we’ve come to some 

understanding. 

 

Now I think it would be fair to say that maybe not everyone’s 

totally in agreement with the legislation as we currently see it, 

but I think it is a move in the right direction. And hopefully that 

as this comes into play, if there are any areas that maybe we 

haven’t foreseen, some things that could take place or maybe 

need to be addressed, is your department, or are you willing, 

Mr. Minister, to continue to work with tenants and landlords to 

work over any areas where there might be discrepancies, where 

there might be some controversy, to come to an agreement on 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I would say very clearly that the way 

this is set up, and part of the plan of having it start in October 

rather than immediately, is that we can work together with both 

tenant groups and also landlords’ groups to make sure that all of 

the procedures that relate to some of the changes are fully 

understood by the public, and that they work in as clear and as 

efficient way as possible. And we will be constantly monitoring 

this both through the Rentalsman’s office and through our 

policy people in our department. 

 

And I would encourage you and all other MLAs, who often get 

these kinds of questions in their constituency office, to let us 

know immediately if some kind of a problem arises. Because 

our plan is to make this work for . . . so that there’s fair 

arrangements for tenants, but also that landlords aren’t left 

holding the bag after some pretty terrible situations. 

 

Mr. Toth:  And one further question that comes back to 

social assistance tenants, and that is in regard to Social Services 

paying for damage that may have been caused by a client. 

 

As I understand, right now Social Services pays for the  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

damages on a residence if damages have been committed 

against . . . or if there’s damage to that residence, and then that 

residential tenant, social service assistance tenant, can move to 

another property and they just pay the same amount of funding 

to that client. Is that true, and how does the Bill then address 

damages in the future? 

 

I think I heard you mention to the member from North 

Battleford that actually the tenant will then have some reduction 

in the amount of funding that they would receive under this new 

piece of legislation then, but Social Services would still 

continue to pay for any upgrading of damages to residences. Is 

that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think under the present system the 

limit was $125, and then practically there were other deposits 

paid, depending on the situation, but . . . and then an attempt to 

recover. 

 

It’s going to be very clear in the new system that the deposit 

will be up to one month’s rent. It will be guaranteed by the 

department. If the Rentalsman orders that up to one month’s 

rent should be paid to the landlord, it will be paid. Then that 

amount will be recovered from the Social Services client on a 

basis of making a deduction on future Social Services payments 

or some other way if there is a way for that client to pay. 

 

Mr. Toth:  One final question, Mr. Minister, based on what 

you’ve just informed us and also the member from North 

Battleford. With the changes, will Social Services assistance or 

people on assistance be certainly informed — clearly informed 

— as to the changes, and what the implications are if there is 

damage to property, if they happen to be in that property and 

the security deposit is forfeited? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think clearly, the answer to the first 

part of your question is that yes, they will be clearly notified 

about this change. And that will be part of our public education 

campaign as well. 

 

I think the other thing to clarify is that most of the time the 

allowance provided by the Department of Social Services is 

equivalent to the rent for the particular property. There may be 

some situations where a Social Services client will rent 

something that’s slightly more and use some other part of their 

allowance to cover the rent. In that particular case, Social 

Services’ commitment is only up to the housing allowance 

amount they’ve paid, and normally that’s the full amount of the 

rent. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials, I thank you for your responses and we trust that 

this certainly addresses a number of the concerns that have been 

out there for a long time and brings it up to speed. Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you very much. I would like to say 

thank you to the officials who are with me today plus all of the 

 other officials in both the Department of Justice and the 

Department of Social Services who have been working to come 

up with a fair solution in a difficult area for a long time. 

 

I’d also like to thank members opposite for their questions here 

but also over the last number of years that have focused 

attention on some particular problems. And I’d also like to 

thank all of the members of the tenants’ associations and 

student groups and everybody who have helped us identify 

particular questions on the tenants’ side and also the landlords 

and their various organizations who have provided advice in 

various ways over the last couple of years. 

 

And with that thank you to everybody, I move that we report 

this Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1300) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Water Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Residential Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being past the normal time of 

adjournment, no . . . 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I think members here have 

agreed to forego their lunch for another 15 minutes or half an 

hour so that we could proceed to Committee of Finance, and I 

respectfully ask that we go there now. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

The Chair:  Before starting, I would ask the minister to 

introduce his officials please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 

right, I have Ron Woodward who is the president of the 

Research Council, and to his right is Mike Wonnick, financial  

  



1330  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

analyst with the Saskatchewan Research Council. I’ll get my 

tongue going here yet. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 

minister and his officials. I very much look forward to 

reviewing the estimates and the past accomplishments of the 

SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council). I personally, and the 

Liberal caucus as a whole, recognize the vital role of the SRC in 

research and development in the province, as well as its 

well-deserved international recognition. We support the council 

and the government’s funding of it, and commend it for its 

success in securing private contracts. 

 

I believe that research is the lifeblood of human process and 

advancement. It could also of course, threaten and endanger 

mankind at some times — research must be carefully and 

securely conducted and ethically managed. 

 

It’s frequently a double-edged sword, and most recently, we had 

an example of the breakthrough in the cloning of sheep in 

Scotland. The cloning technique promises incalculable benefits 

in medical breakthroughs, productivity, and economic growth. 

It also possesses incalculable risks in the hands of unscrupulous 

people. I suspect that there are — there would be a number of 

things we wouldn’t want to see cloned running around this 

province. 

 

There’s a disadvantage right now in pursuing the SRC 

estimates, because we don’t have the most recent book. I’m just 

wondering if you could tell me when that will be available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I am told by the officials that 

they’re responsible to deliver it to my office by the end of June, 

and so I would assume it would be tabled in the legislature at 

the beginning of the next session; whether that be the fall or the 

spring, I’m not sure. We may be sitting and . . . I’m not sure if 

that would require tabling in June or in the next session, but it 

has to be reported to my office by the end of June. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Last year’s grant to 

the SOC (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) was $7.956 

million, and there was actually an increase and there was orders 

in council. Could you explain that to me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes. As you will know, being 

somewhat familiar with the Saskatchewan Research Council in 

your past life, the corporation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well before politics — B.P. The corporation has undergone a 

major restructuring, and a number of employees are no longer 

with the corporation which would require severance costs. 

 

The amount that you speak of was $1.6 million for the special 

warrant and that was to deal with the cost of restructuring the 

cost of severance and those things. The total costs of that 

initiative was $1.7 million. So the Research Council used about 

$100,000 of internal funds to accomplish that goal. 

 

I think the end result, and what I’m hearing certainly from 

industry and from employees, is they certainly welcome the  

restructuring. It has developed the Research Council into a 

much more effective, I believe, corporation. And I think that we 

can certainly look at good things in the future . . . is the nature 

of all corporate structures. 

 

There comes a time when you have to look internally and see 

how you can do business more efficiently, how you can do 

business better. 

 

And I think since Mr. Woodward has been with the Research 

Council that was one of his primary goals. And that necessitated 

the restructuring and hence the special warrant for $1.6 million 

to cover other than the 100,000 in terms of the restructuring. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, broadly speaking, research and 

development can be categorized as the basic research, applied 

research, and development of a product and process. I’m just 

wondering if there’s going to be more emphasis placed on the 

actual development of processes in the SOC’s future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chair, I think it’s fair to say 

that the corporation certainly is moving in that area. As the 

relationship with industry has been developed over the years, 

it’s become clear that that is the direction that industry requires 

the Research Council to move. So certainly the development in 

that regard is the focus, and really is the primary focus of the 

corporation at this time. And it’s based on industry’s needs, 

industry’s requirements. 

 

Ms. Draude:  When we talk about industry’s needs and 

requirements, part of the problems involved with manufacturing 

firms and firms that actually do have hands on R&D (research 

and development) is the problem we have when talking to 

financial institutions about cash flowing or allowing funding to 

allow R&D to actually go ahead. 

 

At one time the Research Council was trying to be involved in 

working with banks to help them understand the importance of 

this whole issue and help them to decide if the project is 

something, they could actually go ahead. 

 

Has there been any further work on the Research Council’s part 

to ensure that financial institutions understand the importance 

of R&D, and to help them make a determination if this . . . of 

projects that could be considered feasible so that they could 

allow some of this work to go ahead? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, a lot of the work 

that the Research Council does is certainly not visible to the 

general public, as you will know. And one of the ways that 

success can be developed with respect to economic 

development, or a project, or a business is to build a working 

relationship — the Research Council — with the lending 

institutions and people who have the capital and have access to 

capital. 

 

One of the things I am told by the officials that in the past year 

they have helped to develop diagnostic and technical evaluation 

tools so that banks can better understand specific businesses and 

projects. They work very closely with venture capital  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

corporations. SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) 

has been involved in some of the work that has been done by 

the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

So I think it’s fair to say that they’ve taken a fairly broad look 

at where they can enhance and develop and help business 

develop opportunities and create a better understanding and do 

a better and a more, I guess, focused scrutiny of a business. And 

to develop those tools to be able to do that is part of the what 

the Research Council has been working on in the past. 

 

(1315) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, this is good to hear, although I 

guess I hope that we are looking beyond the very narrowly 

focused bounds of SOCO and government ventures like that. In 

the province of Ontario, I understand that there is a provincial 

R&D tax credit that’s allowed to actually piggy bank with the 

federal tax credit, which actually encourages more R&D in 

places outside of . . . places like Innovation park in Saskatoon 

and Regina. 

 

Has there been any thought given to the idea that the provincial 

government here could help with the R&D . . . (inaudible) . . . 

in Saskatchewan and encourage some businesses to be more 

active in R&D by allowing this type of tax credit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s fair to say that that’s one 

of the areas that we are most interested in. As we look through 

and develop our provincial budgets every year and since I’ve 

been involved in putting in place the overall budget for the 

province, it’s been one of the areas that we see a need; we 

understand the need and the advantages to that kind of a, I 

guess, kick start. 

 

Our difficulty has been to try and prioritize exactly where we 

should be spending government money. And thus far, I think 

it’s fair to say that health care and education have taken a fairly 

high priority for us — highways as well. 

 

But the member raises the work that’s happening, or the 

incentive that’s in place in Ontario, and I can only say I wish 

we had been able to find the funding thus far for that kind of an 

initiative. I think it’s important, and it’s certainly something that 

I’m going to keep in mind and bring to my colleagues as we go 

through future budget processes. 

 

Ms. Draude:  That’s probably the best news I’ve heard since 

I came here, so we’re going to be holding you to that. Does the 

SRC hold patents for products or processes at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m sorry. To the member: we 

didn’t hear the question on this side. If you could repeat your 

question please? 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does the SRC at this time hold any patents for 

products or processes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I guess one of the 

recent successes in the Research Council’s operation is that in 

November they recently received a patent that deals with  

converting vehicles from gas to natural gas. 

 

So certainly if we talk about the environmental future of our 

country and our province, that would, if we can adapt that in an 

economic way, in a way that we could become and will become 

commercially viable, cannot only have economic benefits for us 

here in the province but can have environmental advantages for 

us here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there a consideration that there could be 

revenues earned through licensing agreements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, to the member opposite, all of 

the intellectual property is transferred into TecMark And that is 

the body that is responsible for dealing with it from there. 

 

And I’m told by the officials that they’ve just recently received 

their first royalty cheque. Not a large cheque, but it was in the 

amount of about $3,000. So some of the past work and some of 

the past developments is manifesting itself economic benefits 

for the Research Council at this point. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Who owns TecMark? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  TecMark was created in 1996 by 

the Saskatchewan Research Council. It’s a subsidiary of the 

Research Council, so it’s owned by the Research Council. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I take it that means 100 per cent owned by the 

Research Council. 

 

At one time I think the SRC had five vice-presidents, and I 

understand that this has actually been broke . . . there are fewer 

now. Could you tell me what the number is and what the 

divisions are that they represent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As part of the restructuring, the 

number of vice-presidents has decreased from five to two. The 

one vice-president is responsible for resources and 

environment; the other vice-president is responsible for 

ag-biotech and small industry services. So that’s how it’s 

structured. Very much streamlined from what was before. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I understand that with the recent 

dealings between CanOxy (Canadian Occidental Petroleum) 

and Wascana Energy that there is some . . . there was a million 

dollars of R&D promised to the province. I’m wondering what 

type of work the minister is doing to ensure that this million 

dollars is actually done in the province and that the Research 

Council will get more than its fair share of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would want to say that certainly 

CanOxy has indicated in their prospectus that there is some 

financing available. And I think it’s fair to assume that the 

Research Council will be beneficiaries of that R&D money 

from Canadian Occidental as well as the university campuses. I 

was just the other day pleased to be part of an announcement by 

the Research Council and the U of R (University of Regina) 

campus in terms of a partnership arrangement that’s been put 

together that I think can maximize and attract R&D dollars not 

only from CanOxy but from the oil and gas sector in general. 

  



1332  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

 

I’ve talked with a number of companies from Calgary who do 

business here in Saskatchewan who see the opportunity for 

technological development here in our province as it relates to 

heavy oil. And I think frankly we’re very excited about working 

with the universities, with the Saskatchewan Research Council, 

in a partnership arrangement to put together the kind of 

technological advancement — and expand on that advancement 

— that has taken place here in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the blue book this year and last year, and what 

has happened in terms of that resource sector and its growth in 

our province, much of that work has been done because 

companies like Canadian Occidental have focused some of their 

technological developments on our heavy oil resource. 

 

So I’m actually quite excited about it. I think that the Research 

Council, working with our universities here in Saskatchewan, 

can create a nucleus of knowledge that can attract people not 

only from other provinces and other jurisdictions, but I think 

internationally we’ve got an opportunity here that I think we 

dare not pass. 

 

I’ve spoken with people from the universities. I’ve met with Dr. 

Wells just the other day at this announcement. Mr. Woodward 

has built and the corporation has built some very good contacts 

with both campuses, here and in Saskatoon. And I think we can 

look forward to attracting a lot of investment dollars, and a lot 

of high-paying and high-qualified people who will come to 

Saskatchewan, because I do believe that we will be a core for 

heavy oil research and development. 

 

And the Research Council is certainly a very large part of 

making that happen thus far, and I think the opportunities in the 

future can grow exponentially. 

 

So it’s an area that I know you’re very interested in, having 

spent some time working in the Research Council. And I’m 

thinking that you will agree with me that it’s an area where we 

really do need to pursue with some vigour. And I can tell you 

that the Department of Energy and Mines has been working 

with the Research Council, with the universities, and we 

certainly see some very positive opportunities there in the very 

near future. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s not often that 

you and I agree on anything, so this is great. I am excited. It’s 

great to be excited about it, but I think that we’d rather hear a 

commitment of the importance that your government is going to 

put on dealing with the universities, the relationship that we 

have a potential for, for increasing the Research Council. So 

I’m hoping that your government is going to commit to put in a 

lot of time and energy into working . . . developing this 

commitment. 

 

I don’t have any further questions. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A few questions for 

the minister on SRC. 

 

Mr. Minister, just a moment ago — and I just thought I should 

throw this one out — you talked about different areas of  

research and you mentioned about . . . brought up something 

about highways. I would think that if the Research Council ever 

came up with some kind — through their research — some kind 

of a durable surface for highways in this province that would 

have some longevity, that people of Saskatchewan would 

certainly really appreciate that. And they’d certainly get a lot of 

accolades — probably all the funding they ever need to operate. 

That might be an area that we can look at further research as 

well. 

 

But be that aside, in the ‘95-96 annual report, it seems to bring 

out the impression that this was quite an abysmal year for the 

Research Council. We see a number of increases in funding 

from government, and they’re continuing through the current 

year, while revenues dropped by about $400,000 due to declines 

in contracts. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can indicate why there 

were those contractual declines; what has been done to offset 

that declining revenue? Has there been improvement this year 

and what can we expect in the future? 

 

(1330) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think basically the corporation 

and the way the corporation sees development in the future is 

moving much more to a relationship — working relationship — 

with business and selling their expertise and their knowledge to 

business. The reduction in revenue that you indicate is primarily 

as a result of programs cut back by the federal government in 

their last rounds of budget cuts. 

 

In terms of the increase in funding from the province, I think I 

explained that to the other member. Basically it was to do with 

restructuring, the fact that we reorganized the Research Council 

to make it much more focused on the kinds of things that we 

think can attract more business — the two areas that I’ve 

indicated in terms of the structure of the corporation — 

resource and environment. 

 

And we’ve talked a little bit about heavy oil and what we think 

might be opportunities there. Ag-biotechnology — I think it’s 

fairly clear to say that we are becoming here in Saskatchewan 

known internationally as a centre of excellence with respect to 

ag-biotechnology and certainly for us in this province it makes 

an awful lot of sense. 

 

And the other part . . . and the other component of the 

vice-president for ag-biotechnology is small industry services, 

which can and will support a lot of small businesses here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You made comment of the fact that one of the things that we 

certainly could use here is a new surface with respect to our 

highways. And I think it’s fair to say, if in fact the Research 

Council could come up with a patent that would give us a 

durable and a cheap highway surface, we could fund all 

measure of R&D in this province. 

 

And I think just to add to that, there’s probably one more 

element that we could use if they could make a highway with a  

  



May 2, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

good surface, at a reasonable cost and with longevity — if they 

could also make it portable, we’d have very few worries. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Minister, if I 

could just add one more comment to that. If indeed the 

Research Council is able to come up with something of that 

nature, I’d hope they hold off just a little bit until after the next 

election so the next government can really take the credit for it. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I note the council spent about l.3 million 

more on supplies and services and spent about a million dollars 

more on the purchase of capital assets; I note these from pages 

31 and 32 of the annual report. I’m wondering if you could 

explain exactly what these expenditures are in view of the 

reduced revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the 

corporation employs in the neighbourhood of 250 people and 

they are all working on different projects. There are 15 different 

business areas that they’re involved in those activities. And of 

course to support the work that they do, it’s important that the 

Research Council have leading-edge equipment in terms of 

being able to do the work to supply the needs of the customers. 

 

I am told of one contract as an example. The Research Council 

spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in terms of purchasing 

remote sensors for a contract that they were doing with PFRA 

(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration). 

 

So it’s just a matter of over the course of doing business, their 

normal business expenses, to help to support the people who are 

doing work for our client group. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, if I could ask, and I’m not asking 

you to give it today, but maybe if your officials wouldn’t mind 

just taking a bit of time down the road in writing just to give us 

an idea of where some of those expenditures may have went 

and some of the costs. I mean the types of equipment that may 

have been purchased and what they were used for. But I’m 

going to go into another area and you can respond in a minute 

to that. 

 

I was going to bring up the change in the financial position, but 

I think you kind of alluded to that on a previous question. So I 

won’t discuss that because we note in ‘94-95, you had a 

$600,000 surplus and then you went to this deficit. And you 

mentioned about some significant decreases in federal funding, 

which I can appreciate and those would certainly affect the 

bottom line. 

 

But looking at the chart on planned versus actual results on 

page 35 of the annual report, we see there’s a significant 

variance between the SRC’s budget and its actual spending, 

about $850,000. I’m wondering what’s the reason for that 

variance, regarding actual and what was planned, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  . . . if the member could share with 

us those figures and where he got them from again? Could you 

share with us the numbers and where you got them again? 

We’re just looking them up here. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’ll have to tell the member, we have not got an 

annual report with us, but I can have one of my staff bring one 

in and we can come back to that question later, or we can 

review Hansard and . . . If you want we’ll just review Hansard 

and send you the answer in writing. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I can quickly send this over to the 

minister. It’s under comparison of planned and actual results, 

annual report, and there’s a budget of . . . in 1996, a loss of 111 

million, but the actual result of 966, which is about 850. I can 

send you this report quickly just to take a quick look at it . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . You’ve got it. Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, for the 

delay. If you look at the top of that page, under contracts, we 

had in 1996, budgeted in the neighbourhood of 15,536,100. The 

actual for ’96 was 13,793,151. And that was primarily due to a 

loss of some contracts that we had anticipated from the federal 

government, but because of budgetary constraints federally, 

those contracts were not received. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One area I’d just like 

. . . one other question I’d like to bring to your attention, just 

ask about. I guess most of us would think that, and would feel 

. . . and view the Saskatchewan Research Council as being 

established to do primarily scientific research. 

 

Yet in this report you describe a project that was done for the 

Saskatoon Credit Union that would sound more like a market 

research. On page 19 it talks about this project and to me it 

looks more like a phone survey of customers. I’m wondering 

why you would . . . what was the reasons for getting into this 

type of a project? And what areas of expertise does the council 

have in doing this type of research, and for what intended 

purpose was this research entered into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We, Mr. Chairman, had one person 

on staff prior to the reorganization that primarily did market 

research. We are not doing that right now. But it was to assist 

companies in making technical and business decisions. And 

that, under the annual report, is what that is referring to. But we 

no longer have that person on staff, so that role cannot be 

completed for a client base. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That basically 

answers the other question. Because it would seem to me that 

there are a lot of companies out there that could do that type of 

market research, and possibly it may take away from some of 

the direct areas of research that the council would be involved 

in. 

 

And so your comment about the fact that you don’t have 

personnel current hired to conduct that type of research — if I 

understand you correctly, you are not involved in that type of 

research at the current time — and I would think that you’re 

really not looking into branching off into that again. 

 

You’re looking at just keying in on the areas where the 

Saskatchewan Research Council is certainly getting its support 

and providing services that seem to be more beneficial and 

perceived as what the real role of the council is. Is that correct? 

  



1334  Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1997 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of my 

colleague from Regina Victoria, I would like to welcome a 

group of visitors who have joined us in the gallery today, a 

large group. They are part of the University of Regina’s English 

as a second language program. They’re here obviously to watch 

the proceedings of the Assembly today and hopefully learn a 

little bit more about how we do things. 

 

I want to apologize in advance — I trust we won’t be here very 

much longer so you’ll probably only get a very brief look at the 

Assembly. But I hope you enjoy your visit today, and I want to 

welcome you to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s more, I believe, a philosophical 

approach; that we want to work with business in areas — and 

certainly different areas — where we can assist technologically 

in business and in marketing. And sometimes it’s pretty hard to 

define . . . it’s difficult to define where one ends and where one 

begins. Sometimes it has to be part of an overall and 

encompassing package. But I think it’s fair to say that we would 

be there to assist and facilitate business, doing business. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I could while I’m on my feet, I would like to 

introduce three guests in the west gallery, I believe. One of my 

officials, Mike Wonnick, financial analysis analyst with the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, has his parents here today, 

Brian and Joan Wonnick, and as well his brother, Adam. So I 

would ask all members to invite them warmly to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I thank 

you for your responses to our questions that we’ve raised. We 

certainly wish the Research Council well in their ongoing 

endeavours. 

 

I guess I would certainly encourage them to look certainly 

outside of government as well and look at other agencies 

whereby you can start working . . . making agreements that can 

really give a real benefit and a positive influence in research in 

this province, regardless of the area of research that is entered 

into. 

 

(1345) 

 

I would like to certainly thank your officials for being here. 

 

I would like to just take a moment as well to welcome our 

guests. And we’re talking about English as a second language 

— considering the way trade is taking place in this world, 

maybe we should invite some of our guests to start teaching us 

some of the other languages that we have represented here so 

we can learn how to deal with people of other nations and 

nationalities. We thank you for being here. 

 

And I would like to say, I think the member from Regina South 

should certainly thank us for our discussion. It gave him the 

opportunity to introduce a guest this afternoon. Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to 

thank the members opposite for their questions. I think just by 

the line of the questionings, it’s fairly obvious that they too see 

the opportunities in Saskatchewan and the work that the 

Research Council does in assisting business in their day-to-day 

operations. So I thank them very much for their questions. 

 

And I want to wish all the folks in the gallery and the members 

opposite and my colleagues a good weekend. Let’s go home. 

And not all of us should be on the election trail — let’s spend a 

little time with our families. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I just wanted to thank the minister 

and your officials. I appreciate the opportunity to speak with 

them and look forward to hearing of great progress next year. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker:  Now it being past the hour of adjournment, 

and with my wishes that all members will have an enjoyable 

weekend in your constituencies with your families, this House 

now stands adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:49 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1305 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1305 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1305 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1305 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1305 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1334 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Labour Party Wins in Britain 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1305 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1306 

 Melfort Rotary Club 50th Anniversary 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1306 

 Chili for Children Dinner and Auction 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1306 

 District 1 Health Care Auxiliaries Association Anniversary 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1306 

 SaskPower President’s Travel Expenses 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 

 Aboriginal Art Show 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 

 Book Launch 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Security Guard Legislation 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1307 

 Victims Compensation Fund 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

 Funding for Municipalities 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1308 

 Income Tax Surcharges 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1309 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1309 

 Local Telephone Service Competition 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1309 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1309 

 Taxes on Low Income Earners 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1310 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1310 

 SaskPower Credit Card Proposal 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1310 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1310 

 Funding for City Governments 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1311 

 Aboriginal Taxation 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1312 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 59  The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

 Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental Affairs — Vote 30 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1312 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1316 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 48  The Highways and Transportation Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1319 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 44 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1319 

 Bill No. 41 — The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 1997 ............................................................................................ 1320 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 ................................................................................................... 1320 

 Bill No. 5 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 1997 ................................................................................... 1320 

 Bill No. 6 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 1997 ...................................................... 1320 

 Bill No. 38 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 1997 ............................................................................ 1320 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 14 —The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1320 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1320 

  McLane .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1323, 1326 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1325 

 Bill No. 29 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1327 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1328 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 14 — The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 

 Bill No. 29 — The Residential Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1329 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Research Council  Vote 35 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1329 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1330 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1332 

 Supplementary Estimates 1996-97 

 General Revenue Fund  Budgetary Expense 

 Saskatchewan Research Council  Vote 35 ............................................................................................................................ 1334 

 


