



















































Hansard: April 29, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1199 

 April 29, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to present a petition on behalf of residents of the 

community of Kamsack. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise on behalf of 

citizens from the great communities of Balcarres and 

Abernethy. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring forward 

petitions once more on behalf of the Saskatchewan residents, 

people that have been affected by big game damage throughout 

the province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. Assembly 

may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big game 

damage compensation program so that it provides more 

fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and townsfolk 

for commercial crops and stacked hay, silage bales, shrubs 

and trees, which are being destroyed by the overpopulation 

of deer and other big game, including elimination of the 

$500 deductible; and to take control measures to prevent  

the overpopulation of deer and other big game from 

causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are all 

from the community of Carievale, and I so present and hope 

that . . . 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present a petition to do with the creation of regional 

telephone exchanges. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petition humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the creation of regional telephone exchanges in 

order to enhance economic and social development in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The communities involved in this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Odessa and Kendal. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 

Assembly, some 13 students and their teacher seated in the west 

gallery. These 13 students are from O’Neill High School and 

they’re with the work experience education program. 

 

Many members will of course recognize their teacher, a former 

member of this Assembly, Bill Allen. 

 

It will be my pleasure to meet with this group from 2:30 until 

about 3 o’clock. I very much look forward to meeting with 

them at that time. I ask all of my colleagues to help me 

welcome this group from O’Neill. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to everyone assembled here this afternoon, I’d like to 

introduce a group of 20 grade 8 students sitting in your gallery, 

on the west side of it. And they’re with their teacher, Mr. Fred 

Mathieson. 

 

I am looking forward to meeting with them later this afternoon. 

But I just have to let you know I’ll be detained for a brief time  

  



1200  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

in the House this afternoon and my colleague, the member from 

Melfort-Tisdale, has graciously agreed to meet with you 

initially. 

 

Just as a matter of interest to you, I’m sure, because the 

community of Pense is no stranger to problems associated with 

flooding, this afternoon the debate will be on that topic and I 

know since you had your share of experiences with that in this 

past year, it certainly will probably be of interest to you. 

 

So I’d just like everyone to welcome them here this afternoon, 

and we’ll talk to you later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the legislature, a group of grade 6 students that are here from 

Pangman . . . grade 5 and 6 students that are here from 

Pangman, Saskatchewan. There’s 19 students seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied today by their 

teacher, Judy Schwindt, who is a former colleague of mine in 

Prairie View School Division; another chaperon, Cynthia 

Reitler, and Debbie Kessler; and their bus driver Bob Bell. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting them for some, I’m sure, very 

good questions after they have observed here this afternoon, 

and also for some refreshments and a photo. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, four 

students from the Saskatoon district, along with a couple of 

other people. Before I introduce them, I’d just like to say that 

these students raised money here in Saskatchewan to attend a 

conference in Anaheim, California. And this conference was the 

Society of Professionals in Dispute Resolution conference for 

young people. And they attended with young people from all 

over North America discussing dispute resolution and 

mediation. 

 

So now I’d like to introduce Dustin Beuckert and Jillian 

Pochipinski, who are both grade 7 students at Rosthern High — 

they’re right in the back row at the top; also Jennifer Ekstrand 

from Dalmeny High and Hudson Kasko from Aden Bowman 

Collegiate in Saskatoon. 

 

Accompanying them are Shelley Adams, who’s a counsellor 

with the Saskatchewan Valley School Division — she also went 

with them to Anaheim, California; and Lorelie Muta, who’s the 

cultural liaison coordinator in Rosthern Elementary and 

Rosthern High School; as well as Ken Acton, who is the 

director of mediation services. Let’s give them a big welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

take the opportunity through you and to the members of this  

House, to welcome the group that was just welcomed, 

especially Shelley Adams and her group. I’ve worked with 

Shelley in education and she has a real heart for students and is 

great to work with. So welcome here and it looks like you’re 

having an exciting time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you in 

your gallery, a good friend and colleague of mine — and all 

members of the House — Mr. Doug Raynes, and a good friend 

of his today, Lynn Fryklund, who is also an employee, as Doug 

is, with the Department of Justice here in Saskatchewan. 

They’re both in Regina today, meeting with the Justice 

department to further their skills as they go back to their 

communities and continue to work in the Justice system. 

 

So on behalf of all of the members here, I want to welcome you 

to the Assembly, and enjoy the question period later on this day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Students Against Drinking and Driving Awards Banquet 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Saturday, April 26, I was honoured to attend the Students 

Against Drinking and Driving Awards banquet held in 

Humboldt. The Humboldt Collegiate Institute chapter of SADD 

(Students Against Drinking and Driving) hosted that event. 

 

Among those recognized at that banquet were two of my 

constituents; in fact my niece, Aimée Basset of Bruno, and 

another girl, Angel Kleiter, of Cudworth. Both were recipients 

of the Royal Bank Leadership Awards. A total of 22 young 

people were nominated for this award, and 9 were selected. 

 

I would also like to make mention that the Bruno chapter of 

SADD was awarded the Nicole Nakonechny Memorial Award, 

given to the school with the most active SADD chapter. This 

was a proud moment, as it is the second time that Bruno has 

received this award. Last year the award was presented to the 

Humboldt chapter. 

 

Students Against Drinking and Driving is one of the most active 

youth groups in Canada. The young people involved in the 

program are dedicated to the cause of saving lives through 

education and through example. Last year SADD was also 

instrumental in effecting some very significant change to the 

provincial laws here regarding drinking and driving. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I commend you on your part in chairing a committee 

to that effect. 

 

This year Students Against Drinking and Driving, that 

organization, has also been incorporated as an independent 

organization, and I congratulate them all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

Workforce 2000 Conference 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, recently Canada’s national 

newspaper had an interesting column, pointing out that when 

the federal government handed over training to Quebec, it was 

front page news. But when the same thing happened in 

Saskatchewan there was considerably less fanfare. 

 

The difference between the two announcements is more than 

just a difference in the noise level. Quebec sees its control as a 

step toward sovereignty. Here it’s just another example of the 

federal government abandoning its federal responsibilities. 

 

Nevertheless, Saskatchewan is soldiering on alone as it has 

done so often, gearing our training to the needs of the new 

economy — preparing, Mr. Speaker, with the cooperation of 

business, labour, and relevant organizations, with or without the 

federal government along for the ride. 

 

An example of that cooperation is happening today and 

tomorrow in Saskatoon. The Saskatchewan Labour Workforce 

Development Board, a non-profit organization co-chaired by 

business and labour, is hosting a conference titled, “Building 

Skills: Solutions for Workforce 2000.” The conference consists 

of panels, workshops, and addresses by our ministers of 

Economic Development and Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training. 

 

The variety of participants taking part in this highly cooperative 

conference is significant and I congratulate all of them and wish 

them many success in their deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pense Theatre Company 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

particularly appropriate this afternoon, with my visitors from 

Pense here, that I advise the Assembly I recently had the 

opportunity to attend Pense Theatre Company’s presentation of 

Move Over Mrs. Markham. This, in my new role as Thunder 

Creek dinner theatre critic, I do give this one two thumbs up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only was it entertaining but it was a fine 

demonstration of the volunteer spirit of this province. The food 

was good and patrons were even treated to valet parking. More 

than 70 people donated their time and effort to entertain, serve 

food, sell tickets, and park cars. Rehearsals began last fall and 

carried into April. 

 

Since 1994 the Pense fund-raising committee, which sponsors 

the dinner theatre, raised $40,000 through such ventures. The 

money was used to support first responders, rink improvements, 

and many other worthwhile causes in the community of Pense. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the residents of Pense 

for their hard work, and encourage members to travel out to the 

community next year to take in this entertaining event. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New RCMP North-west Region 

Headquarters to be in Regina 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For over 100 

years Regina has been the home of the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) training centre. The city, and indeed the entire 

province, have a long and proud association with the RCMP. 

Our association, along with the tradition, have been reaffirmed 

with the announcement that Regina will be the new RCMP 

regional headquarters for the north-west region, Mr. Speaker — 

thanks in no small part to the efforts of the Minister of Justice 

and his officials. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, in 1874 the first officers of the 

RCMP arrived in the West and made what would later become 

known as Regina, a choice for their outpost location. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, the oldest building in the city today is the RCMP 

chapel on the grounds of the RCMP training academy. In 1928, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan became the first province to have 

the RCMP serve as their provincial police force. 

 

We do have a long tradition with the RCMP, and I am very 

happy to see that this tradition is going to continue. The new 

headquarters will be housed at the training academy, and the 

new deputy commissioner is expected to arrive here at the end 

of this month. 

 

Saskatchewan’s roots are intertwined with the RCMP, and it is 

only fitting that the headquarters of the new north-west region 

be here in Regina, the home of the RCMP. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Beardy’s First Nation Acquires a Hockey Team 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, few 

things make me more proud to represent the 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency than the achievements of 

its first nations. The Beardy’s First Nation near Duck Lake 

recently took another bold step to ensure a better life for its 

people. The Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League announced 

last week that the Minot Top Guns, a team currently based in 

North Dakota, have been purchased by a group from Beardy’s, 

headed by George Cameron. The Beardy’s Rage will be part of 

the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League in the 1997-98 season. 

Home games for the team will be played at the Willow Cree 

Memorial Sports Center west of Duck Lake. The team’s coach 

will be Kal Parenteau, former head of the Saskatchewan Midget 

Hockey League. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nearly every Canadian boy dreams of becoming a 

hockey player. Now thanks to the Beardy’s Rage, 

Saskatchewan first nation people can aspire to another dream — 

owning their own hockey team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Beardy’s First Nation, their chief, Edgar  

  



1202  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

Thomas, and the ownership group headed by George Cameron. 

I know we wish them and the new team every success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Early Childhood Intervention Week 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, being a mother, a grandmother, 

and a former school teacher, I realize that the first few years of 

a child’s life are the most vital in determining their future. It’s a 

time of exploration and growth for the child and for the family. 

These years are critical for all children, but more so for the 

children who are born with some type of mental challenge. 

Providing the best possible start for our children so that they are 

able to achieve their potential is a goal that we must all share. 

 

This week, Mr. Speaker, is Early Childhood Intervention Week 

in Saskatchewan. Throughout Saskatchewan’s action plan for 

children our government works in partnership with individuals, 

organizations, and community groups across the province to 

provide programs and support services that enhance the lives of 

our province’s children and their families. 

 

The early childhood intervention program, Mr. Speaker, 

provides in-home support to children who are disabled or 

developmentally delayed. It’s a goal to help build the child’s 

future. 

 

And the additional 60,000 our government is providing to this 

program, which raises total funding to well over $1.6 million, 

shows our commitment to Saskatchewan’s youth. 

 

This program and the many workers who devote their time and 

energy to helping infants and young children with disabilities 

should be acknowledged by all members of the Assembly for 

the positive impact it’s having in many families and 

communities. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Respected Midwife Celebrates 100th Birthday 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to pay tribute to an outstanding woman in my 

constituency who has recently celebrated her 100th birthday. 

 

Agnes Starchief is 100 years old. She has seen and experienced 

many changes during that century. One of her experiences has 

earned her the respect of her entire community. Agnes has been 

delivering babies since she was 40 years old. She became a 

registered midwife when she was 60. She can’t remember how 

many healthy babies she has brought into this world — she lost 

count at 95 — but they have been many. 

 

Agnes has dedicated her life to midwifery and medicine. Her 

knowledge is immense and the respect she is given in her 

community indicates the admiration and esteem others hold for 

her. Agnes is passing her wisdom on to her children and 

grandchildren in order to continue the tradition of caring she 

has forged. 

 

I want to wish Agnes a very happy 100th birthday and 

congratulate her for the years of dedication she has shown for 

the health and the well-being of the people in her community. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Optimists Oratory Contest 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Based on what I 

heard last Thursday evening, some of us in this Assembly are 

going to have some pretty stiff competition in a few years. I was 

one of three judges at the seventh White City Optimist 

Oratorical Contest, a public speaking event sponsored by the 

Optimists for children under 16. 

 

Irene Temple was responsible for a lot of the organization and 

Russ Taylor did a wonderful job of emceeing. Students from 

three schools in my constituency competed — White City, Pilot 

Butte and Balgonie. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 

judging was honest but it was tough. 

 

These students show remarkable poise, exceptional 

vocabularies, and amazing oratorical pyrotechnics — they 

spoke well. Not only that, they demonstrated a thoughtfulness 

on their topic that was impressive for their ages. 

 

Their topic was, “My Vision of Tomorrow’s World,” a topic 

that could have restricted them to the easy clichés but they 

pushed it to the areas truly challenging to their audience and to 

their judges. They talked about aboriginal involvement in the 

economy, about the challenge of simple values in a complex 

society, about social equality, and about the computer age, and 

many other topics were included. 

 

The winners were both from White City, Brenna Jean LaPlante 

and Chase Cook. They go now to zone competitions in Regina 

with the possibility of an international contest later on. I 

congratulate the winners, all competing orators, and the White 

City Optimists for sponsoring this evening. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Funding 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well Ottawa has 

come again to the rescue of the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government in Saskatchewan. This time, Mr. Speaker, by 

providing millions of dollars in health and social transfers to 

this province. 

 

We so often hear this government point its fingers at Ottawa to 

justify its failure to properly fund health districts, which forces 

them to reduce or eliminate services, and in some cases, Mr. 

Speaker, even close down health care facilities. The case in 

point: the Rabbit Lake Health Centre, which is scheduled to 

close at the end of June; or the Eatonia hospital, which was 

converted to a wellness centre and is now being downgraded to  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

a health clinic or maybe even closed altogether. 

 

Given the fact that the federal government is now back-filling 

for this government, will the Minister of Health explain where 

is he going to spend these additional fundings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this is how the Liberal 

Party opposition defines back-filling: by the announcement of 

the Prime Minister made 24, 48 hours ago. The first penny that 

we will see — if I may say to see — will not take place until the 

calendar year 1998-1999 — $20 million. 

 

This is not new money. This is not new money. It just simply 

means that the level of cutting that they were going to cut is 

going to stop at 1998-99 — $20 million less. They’re waiting 

for a full year. 

 

This in the light of the fact since 1995-1996 to the year 

currently under review, the province of Saskatchewan has lost 

from the Liberals in Ottawa, the province of Saskatchewan 

alone, has lost $200 million — $200 million. 

 

I tell you, Mr. Speaker, every year what the hon. member is 

saying to us is, wait another year; don’t get cut back $20 

million. And he says that’s good news. Well as I said to the 

press the other day, I say here: it’s better than getting another 

whack on the head, but it’s $200 million short and three years 

too late. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that 

Ottawa has found millions of additional dollars which will help 

address some of the funding cuts that this government has 

inflicted on our health care system, in particular on the sick and 

the elderly. 

 

The minister has stated on many occasions that there is no 

better health system than here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we agree with that. However, with these guys in power 

much longer, Mr. Speaker, and with the same deterioration 

we’ve seen since 1991, it soon won’t be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, these additional millions of dollars in 

transfers coming to the NDP government here are contingent 

upon the Liberal Party being re-elected. Will the Premier 

explain what he is doing to ensure that as many Liberal 

members are elected as possible so that Saskatchewan is 

guaranteed these additional monies in health care transfers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, those kind of guarantees 

nobody would ever take to the bank. No Liberal guarantees of 

those nature would you ever take to the bank, including the 

health bank. 

 

We had the Liberal promises about doing away with the GST  

(goods and services tax). What happens? The GST is there. 

 

We’ve had the Liberal promises about protecting the Canadian 

Wheat Board. What happens? Tepid support at the best. 

 

We had Liberal promises about protecting the transportation 

system. What happened? The Crow rate is gone. 

 

We had Liberal promises that the railways wouldn’t be 

deregulated and freight rates wouldn’t go. What’s happened? 

Gone. 

 

Now he says that we should wait for a year, re-elect the 

Liberals, and maybe we won’t be cut back as deeply as they 

said we’d be cut back. How desperate is this Liberal Party in 

Saskatchewan, in Canada? It is incredible that after three and a 

half years of $200 million cuts on the health care system in 

Saskatchewan alone, all of a sudden at election time the Prime 

Minister says, I’ve got the money. Maybe. If you get elected. 

 

And I say that’s a shameful display, a partisan display, and the 

hon. member ought not to raise that in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Endangered Spaces Protection 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So much for this 

government’s commitment to protecting the province’s 

environment. They got a big fat F from the World Wildlife 

Fund when it comes to completing a network of protected areas. 

 

This government made its first commitment to the endangered 

spaces campaign in 1990. However based on this failing grade, 

it appears this government is once again all talk, no action. 

 

The World Wildlife Fund penalized this government for not 

protecting a single new area this year and for not adequately 

protecting the areas already designated. In fact two of the 11 

ecoregions in this province have no protection at all, Mr. 

Speaker. And despite a firm commitment from this government, 

the report card shows that departments such as Energy and 

Mines, Intergovernmental Affairs, and Finance are hindering 

progress for the designation of protected areas. 

 

Will the Environment minister explain to the people of this 

province how and why his government was given a failing 

grade? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

thank the hon. member for the question. 

 

First of all I would like to clarify that the report is totally 

erroneous. We have good cooperation with other government 

departments, with other organizations in this province. We are 

working together in a cooperative fashion to meet our objective 

in the year 2000, which is still three years away. And we are 

making good progress. Granted, the failing grade was based  

  



1204  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

simply on the fact we did not simply designate any particular 

areas. I can assure you we are making good progress in a 

number of areas in this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hear the minister 

saying he’s doing all that they can but they still got an F. I don’t 

know if he’s looking for a grade G. There is no grade G. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP signed on in support before they’re 

elected, pledged their support after coming into power, yet 

continue to do nothing to earn a higher grade. And in many 

cases, such as closing that Big River Tree Nursery and falling 

even further behind in reforestation, it proves to the World 

Wildlife Fund that it has no real desire to earn a higher grade. 

The study indicates it needs to see substantially new protected 

areas in the future if this province hopes to meet its own goal of 

protecting natural areas by the year 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does this government even have an environmental 

conscience, or is the quest for the almighty dollar more 

important than our trees, land, and all our natural resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Environment minister today commit to an 

action plan to make sure we have a legacy to leave to this 

province’s future generations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 

hon. member, an action plan will be released in June or early 

summer as to what areas we will be looking at in areas of the 

province which need protection. 

 

Some examples of the good progress we have made in the past 

year include the Manitou Sand Hills area, where we have a land 

use plan in place in cooperation with oil and gas companies, 

landowners, and other people that use the area. 

 

We’re also working on the east side of the province in the 

Pasquia-Porcupine forest area and this is where we’re setting 

out a forest management area. Unique and fragile and 

representative areas are going to be identified and basically 

excluded from the forest management area before the forest 

industry gets going in that area again. The Great Sand Hills, the 

Butala Ranch, and many other areas, we are making good 

progress on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Highways 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears that the 

pilots in the Cold Lake Air Force Base are mistaking our 

Highway 155 in northern Saskatchewan for the Primrose air 

weapons bombing range. That’s because of the deep and 

numerous craters littering this stretch of highway. In essence, 

Mr. Speaker, it looks like a bombing range. 

 

One of the callers to our pothole hot line, Pat Hackett, said the  

horrendous shape of the highway is why her car has had three 

wheel alignments in the last year and a half. Even worse, the 

jarring on her back that she takes every time she travels is just 

enormous. 

 

Hackett has complained to the government but hasn’t seen any 

action. She says the government should start paying more 

attention to the roads in northern Saskatchewan because the 

people there, like their southern neighbours, deserve something 

better. 

 

Will the interim Minister of Highways start his first day on the 

job right and agree to an action plan to have all the roads 

undergo massive reconstruction in the North within five years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now it would be a little difficult 

to say I can’t hear the hon. member, but if he were able to be 

heard I would not be able to. And I’ll ask all hon. members to 

allow the hon. member, the Minister of Northern Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I was waiting for the 

question from the critic from Battlefords — you know, the 

so-called critic from Northern Affairs — to raise this issue, but 

we haven’t heard a thing from him yet. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the roads in northern 

Saskatchewan, I mean not only did we have a bridge for the 

first time to Cumberland House and the Grandmother’s Bay 

road, Mr. Speaker; on $30 million that we put in on a new 

budget in regards to highways, we have $5 million going into 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, of that 5 million, 

approximately 4 million will be going into that member’s 

constituency. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the member from 

Athabasca should check his books, look at our budget over 

again and see the great stuff that we’ve done in highways, not 

only for the province over the next 10 years but also in northern 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess to respond 

to the question from the hon. member from Cumberland, in 

terms of why I’m asking the question, we weren’t too sure who 

should be asking the question when it comes to fighter pilots 

mistaking our roads for bombing ranges, so they took it upon 

me to do that as a new defence critic. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland speaks 

about the millions of dollars put into the Athabasca 

constituency, and for years and years and years the people of 

Turnor Lake, the people of Dillon, the people of Patuanak, the 

people of Pinehouse, St. George’s Hill, Michel Village — and 

the list goes on and on and on — they have spoken about the 

needs for roads to be fixed up in their area for 20, 25 years; yet 

no action by this government. 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

So in essence, as the Senator Louis Morin pointed before he 

passed on, Mr. Speaker, he said we have been told that we’re on 

the list to be repaired. But after 5, 10, 15 years we realized that 

we can’t travel on a list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the interim minister explain to the residents of 

northern Saskatchewan why this government continues to 

ignore northern roads, other than the ones hauling out our 

natural resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, this guy is jumping all over 

the place, from Environment to Northern Affairs, but I might 

say that in his earlier question on endangered species, he knows 

that the Liberals will be endangered species in northern 

Saskatchewan, you know, after this election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  The reason why they’ll be endangered is 

this, Mr. Speaker: we put $8 million in housing — not a penny 

from the Liberal government in Ottawa. 

 

In regards to doing the infrastructure program, we put in $4.5 

million into northern Saskatchewan in regards to sewer and 

water, plus 2 million on top of that, Mr. Speaker. That is exactly 

what we’re doing in regards to the North. 

 

On the roads, the Liberals used to put in . . . the federal 

government used to put in 60 per cent of the money — not a 

penny from the Liberals on roads. We put in 5 million on the 

roads — Liberals zero. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future of Moose Jaw Airbase 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, when 

the Liberals announced the NATO (North Atlantic Treaty 

Organization) agreement in Moose Jaw last week, everyone 

assumed that it was a done deal. 

 

Now one of the Liberals’ own candidates, Tony Merchant, is 

saying it’s not a done deal. In fact he seems to be blackmailing 

the voters, saying that they better vote for him or the deal may 

not happen. Isn’t this just typical of the Liberals, Mr. Premier? 

The Liberals roll into town and put on a big dog and pony 

show, and then Tony Merchant shows up and eats the dog. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Premier, you’ve been involved in the 

negotiations, I understand, at least in some small capacity. What 

is the real story? Is the NATO flight training base coming to 

Moose Jaw or is the deal still up in the air as Tony Merchant is 

suggesting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the answer that I have to 

give you on behalf of the government is that we believe the  

fight to keep CFB (Canadian Forces Base ) 15 open is a fight 

which many people in Saskatchewan of all political ideologies 

participate in. The mayor of Moose Jaw was very much at the 

forefront of this, as were a number of citizens’ groups and even 

down to the school children. And the provincial government, 

the opposition parties of the day, the former leader of the 

Liberal Party, was very instrumental in this. 

 

I am interpreting this announcement the way that I believe the 

ministers wanted it be interpreted, certainly the way the folks in 

Moose Jaw interpret it. And that is that CFB 15 is guaranteed 

open and successful. 

 

I am puzzled by the Liberal candidate’s questions, but perhaps 

those questions should be directed to him, and perhaps the 

Liberal Party should clarify those answers. 

 

But from my point of view, I’m taking the interpretation of the 

mayor of Moose Jaw and the ministers of the federal Crown 

who came to Moose Jaw to say that CFB 15 is guaranteed; and 

congratulate once again all Saskatchewan people for this 

accomplishment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

unfortunately Tony Merchant is interpreting it another way. Not 

only is Tony Merchant saying that he has to be elected in order 

for this deal to be completed, he appears to be threatening very 

dire consequences for Moose Jaw if he’s not elected and the 

deal falls through. 

 

He goes on to say in his letter to people in that constituency that 

they will be facing reduced population, lower house values, 

higher property taxes, reduced funding for hospitals and 

schools. Those are the consequences outlined in Tony 

Merchant’s campaign literature. 

 

Mr. Premier, have you spoken to the Prime Minister about the 

NATO deal and the future of the Moose Jaw airbase? What 

assurance can you give the people of Moose Jaw that this is a 

done deal and not just some election gimmick to try and get 

people to vote for Tony Merchant? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 

hon. member is that I have addressed the concerns of the people 

of Saskatchewan because I think this is a province-wide 

concern, CFB 15, to the Prime Minister, certainly before the 

announcement that was taken place a few days ago in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

I noted the letter that the hon. member refers to, that was put out 

by Mr. Merchant, and I don’t know what is behind his concern 

here that he sets out. I think that . . . I’m hoping, I’m hoping 

that we can trust the federal Liberals at least to the extent that 

when they send out two ministers to make the announcement, 

that it is a done deal. 

 

That’s what the mayor of Moose Jaw says it is. That’s the way  

  



1206  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

I’m interpreting it for the time being. And that is the way I 

would urge the people of Saskatchewan to interpret it, and to 

de-politicize the issue. I don’t think it should be a political 

issue. This is an Armed Forces presence in Saskatchewan issue. 

 

And I’m not saying you’re politicizing it because it’s in the 

campaign literature of the Liberal Party. All I can tell you is, 

my view is I’m taking the federal ministers at their word until 

further notice. Perhaps somebody else wants to put the 

questions to Mr. Merchant as to what information, if any, he has 

that would make him think otherwise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Investment in Crown Life 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan). In 1992 the then minister of CIC said the 

government is committed — committed — to getting the 

taxpayer out of the Crown Life deal as quickly as possible. In 

1996 CIC annual report repeated that commitment, saying 

HARO and CIC remain committed to transferring CIC’s 

investment in HARO to private ownership. 

 

Now we learn that three different companies are interested in 

buying the company’s share of Crown Life, but CIC refused 

even to talk about a price with them and said the market isn’t 

right. How do you know the market isn’t right if you don’t get 

the offers that are out there? 

 

Mr. Minister, in one breath you’re saying you want to privatize 

your share in Crown Life; in the next breath you’re saying you 

want to hold onto your share for several more years — why the 

conflicting messages? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 

member opposite would raise this issue. The province of 

Saskatchewan has been in a recovery mode since they left office 

in 1991, with a Crown Investments Corporation finally able to 

put some of its assets on a sound basis; the General Revenue 

Fund side of government finally being able to be . . . to put its 

house in order so that we can afford the kind of tax relief we 

issued this year; and now this member is suggesting that he 

knows better how to manage these assets than we do. 

 

Let me say to the members opposite that the assets that are the 

people of Saskatchewan’s assets are assets we respect, and we 

will continue to discuss with others the investments in the 

context of our objectives. Our objectives are jobs for 

Saskatchewan and maximum return to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

We will continue to do that, not in the mode demonstrated by 

the members opposite in their last life in the ’80s, but in the 

manner demonstrated by this government for the last five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

for the minister responsible for SaskPower. The president of  

Guyana has announced that he expects the deal with SaskPower 

to be completed by the end of the week. 

 

There’s something seriously wrong here, Mr. Minister. The 

president of Guyana gives his people regular updates on the 

progress of negotiations, while here in Saskatchewan the 

president and minister of SaskPower keep Saskatchewan 

taxpayers in the dark. So much for an enlightened power 

company. 

 

Why is that, Mr. Minister? Why aren’t you providing us with 

regular updates? Why are you close . . . are you close to 

concluding this agreement? And how much taxpayer money do 

you plan on spending to buy up the troubled Guyana power 

company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin 

by indicating that I’m really quite surprised that the member is 

in such a hurry to see a deal culminated, given the comments 

that he’s made with respect to the country of Guyana and the 

people of Guyana; so I am really quite surprised. 

 

Let me say to the member what I’ve said to him before — my 

door is open. And if he has some questions, he’s more than 

welcome to come to my office and discuss them with me. But I 

want to say this: the process with respect to decision making at 

the Power Corporation hasn’t changed. 

 

SaskPower Commercial is in negotiations with their 

counterparts in Guyana. They will make a recommendation to 

their board of directors, who will in turn make a 

recommendation to the board of directors of SaskPower, who 

will in turn make a recommendation to CIC. After all due 

diligence is done, a final decision will be made whether or not 

this deal is proceeding. It hasn’t come to that point yet, but I 

want to inform the member opposite that he can be well assured 

that as soon as I know anything further, I will be in contact with 

him and bring him up to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems like 

it’s the president of Guyana that’s in a hurry. And, Mr. 

Minister, your door may be open and the lights may be on but 

there’s nobody home. 

 

The minister seems to be a little testy about these questions, 

though. What’s the matter, Mr. Minister, was there something 

in your porridge this morning? 

 

Mr. Minister, your government just blew, your government just 

blew $16 million on the NST fiasco and now your proposing to 

risk another $31 million and possibly as much as 70 to $80 

million in Guyana. And that’s a huge expenditure, one which 

requires neither debate nor approval of this legislature. So much 

for an honest, open, and accountable government. 

 

Mr. Minister, immediately after question period our leader will 

be introducing the Crown accountability Act. This Bill will 

require the legislature to approve any out-of-province 

investments by a Crown corporation of over $1 million. Will  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

you support this legislation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to 

the member, I’ve been listening with some interest. Awhile ago 

his figure was 50 million, and now he’s got the value of that 

corporation up to something in the neighbourhood of 70 or 80 

million. 

 

Now I don’t know where the member gets his figures from; I 

can tell you that if a deal is to proceed, it will be done with all 

measure of due diligence. We will get the best buy that we can 

for the people of Saskatchewan. And that is a process that we 

will take. 

 

With respect to the legislation that he intends to introduce, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to have a look at the legislation, and after 

I’ve had an opportunity to look at it, I can comment as to 

whether or not I would support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Municipal Governments 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, reassessment is of course finally 

occurring in this province but it’s been made unnecessarily 

complicated, confusing, and onerous because the tax rules 

weren’t in place until this year; the assessment wasn’t in place 

— still isn’t finalized. And of course, the reassessment is hitting 

our municipalities at precisely the same time as they’ve got cuts 

up to 50 per cent in every one of our municipalities, including 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

The Leader-Post put this in perspective by saying this was the 

first budget in recent memory that did not even mention the 

phrase, “municipal government.” You had a better chance of 

finding it on the side of a milk carton. 

 

Madam Minister, you have made reassessment far more 

difficult for our municipalities because of the savage cuts to 

municipal grants. Now that you’ve got the extra 65 million from 

Ottawa, will you revisit that? 

 

Will you revisit also the 10 per cent in VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenue you promised to our municipalities and then 

took away? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

have learned well from their Liberal cousins in Ottawa. They 

know all about savage cuts and they know what happens when 

funding from senior governments is reduced. 

 

And with respect to reassessment, Mr. Speaker, as the member 

opposite knows as a former city councillor himself, that our 

reassessment system was outdated, ineffective, and subject to 

legal challenge. What would they do, Mr. Speaker? What would 

you do? Would you have continued to neglect the system? 

 

I think a very interesting assignment for SAMA (Saskatchewan  

Assessment Management Agency) would be, on this issue, to 

assess the fences the Liberals are sitting on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Low Income Family Housing Project 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 

advise you that earlier today Mayor Henry Dayday of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Gary Wilson of Quint Development 

Corporation, and I announced a program to enable low income 

families to purchase their own homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project was proposed to respond to the 

growing demand for secure, affordable housing for low income 

families and increase neighbourhood stability. The core 

neighbourhoods of Saskatchewan’s major urban centres 

currently face a number of challenges. 

 

In Saskatoon the core neighbourhoods have seen their 

populations decline over the past decade. Another challenge 

facing the core neighbourhoods is the number of families 

moving in and out of the neighbourhood during a given year 

and the length of time these families stay. Without stability of 

long-term residents, it is difficult to deliver services, develop 

educational programs, or develop a sense of community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many renters pay 30 per cent or more of their 

income for inadequate shelter. If households are paying too 

much for shelter, they have another problem — they do not 

have enough money remaining to purchase other basic 

necessities. Adequate, safe housing is required to ensure the 

social, physical, and emotional health of people and 

communities. 

 

In Saskatoon the Government of Saskatchewan supports the 

operation of more than 4,000 housing units. The Saskatchewan 

Housing . . . or the Saskatoon Housing Authority — pardon me 

— administers more than 2,000 of these units and provides a 

range of services for their clients, from a youth leadership 

development program to a program to bring socially isolated 

seniors together. Housing, Mr. Speaker, is and needs to be so 

much more than shelter. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan is committed to providing safe, 

secure shelter for Saskatchewan people who would otherwise 

not be able to afford it. But it has been difficult to provide new 

housing units in the traditional manner given the withdrawal of 

federal funding. 

 

However we will be trying new approaches to meet the need for 

housing, approaches such as this project. The needs of low 

income families and the challenges faced by core 

neighbourhoods, coupled with our commitment, has prompted 

the province to form a partnership with the city of Saskatoon 

and Quint Development Corporation to sponsor a small project 

to determine the feasibility of providing home ownership 

programs in the core neighbourhoods of Saskatoon. 

 

  



1208  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

Under this project, 10 families will be enabled to purchase their 

own homes. The province will provide loans for 25 per cent of 

the total cost to be used in part as a down payment. The city of 

Saskatoon will provide each family with an additional grant of 

5 per cent towards the down payment. 

 

Quint community development corporation will form a 

community cooperative to manage and deliver the project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Saskatoon’s first community economic 

development corporation, Quint has created a number of 

partnerships with the private and public sector in Saskatoon to 

provide building inspections, labour for required renovations, 

and appraisals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues in the House to join me in 

thanking all the partners in this project for all of their hard work 

in seeing this project come to fruition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say on behalf 

of the Liberal opposition that we are extremely pleased with 

this new initiative and hope that it will alleviate the housing 

problems in Saskatoon, especially in the Riversdale area, as we 

are aware of some of the problems facing inner-city 

neighbourhoods. 

 

We are sorry that this only applies to the city of Saskatoon, 

because we know that it is a problem in other communities. In 

my own community of North Battleford, the women’s shelter 

recently told me that they have a problem with long-term stays 

simply because there is no decent, adequate housing in the 

community especially for larger family groupings. And so it’s 

very difficult for women and their children to move out because 

there’s nowhere for them to go. 

 

But I guess we are aware that this government’s concerns are 

basically for the two cities, and small town Saskatchewan does 

not figure in your plans. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate the minister for rising to make this 

public announcement today. I note that a couple of weeks ago, 

there was a far larger program for disabled and senior housing 

that was 75 per cent federal funded. The minister did not find it 

necessary to give credit for that much bigger program, 

presumably because it was 75 per cent federal funded, which I 

think proves again, in the words of Machiavelli, that gratitude is 

the weakest of all human emotions, particularly for our friends 

opposite. 

 

But we wonder why . . . I’m glad now that the minister has risen 

to make this public announcement of developments in her 

department. I trust she will continue doing so even when there 

are developments involving 75 cent/dollar programs from 

Ottawa; even when perhaps it’s important that the people of 

Saskatchewan be told when she has lost $16 million on some 

foreign investment she’s gone into. 

 

So I congratulate her on standing to tell us what’s going on in 

her department and I hope that she will continue to do so. And  

I’m pleased with this program. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Yes, also responding to this particular 

program — and maybe we can stay away from some of the 

federal-provincial drivel we’ve been listening to just recently — 

I think this kind of program has some hope, I think, to the sense 

that it creates a stability within communities. 

 

There are schools in Saskatoon that do not have a single student 

that stays registered in that school from the start of the year to 

the end of the year. And that bodes nothing but bad news for all 

those students and for those families as far as their success in 

the educational field is concerned. 

 

To the extent that this program creates some neighbourhood 

stability, it’s an excellent program. To the extent that it will 

give the opportunity for some jobs, we underline that and 

support that as well. 

 

Hopefully with the sense of stability that should come to that 

community, there will be a sense of community and a sense of 

neighbourhood that will be created as well. And hopefully in 

some of those areas, we can have some of what Saskatchewan’s 

become famous for; those rural values of sharing and caring 

would be able to carry over to those communities as well. 

 

The project is a fairly limited project, and I think that’s good. 

It’ll give us a chance to evaluate the basic philosophy of it to 

see if it actually works and to make sure that’s an effective use 

of dollars. And I would hope that we evaluate that carefully, 

and if those aspects are carried out well, that we can continue it. 

 

There are some concerns we do have with it, and I guess one of 

the concerns is why is it just in a city, or why a city in the first 

place. When we look at the requirements that people need to 

have to qualify for that, I’m sure you would find many farms 

and farmers, small town communities, that would apply just as 

well and maybe even more so. Because the incomes that are out 

there in rural Saskatchewan in many cases are very pathetic and 

they need some of that kind of housing help as well. 

 

And we’ll be looking, hopefully, that if this program is deemed 

a success, that it will be carried over to rural Saskatchewan and 

the small towns of Saskatchewan be given that opportunity. 

Because all you need to do is go to many of our small towns in 

Saskatchewan and you will see housing that’s just as bad, and 

probably even more pathetic, than some of the housing that 

they’re referring to here in the cities. And I think that needs to 

be addressed and cannot be left out as this program continues. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member from Saskatoon Greystone 

rises to make a statement and requires leave. Is leave granted? 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to thank the hon. minister for sending me a copy of the 

statement, and commend her for this initial action on this most 

serious, serious challenge. 

 

I’ve received letters and numerous phone calls from low income 

individuals who are very, very worried about their inability to 

raise their families in decent housing. I support the method 

being employed to evaluate this new approach, and I want to be 

on public record for, not only thanking the city of Saskatoon 

and Mayor Dayday, but Quint community development 

corporation; you, Madam Minister; the Government of 

Saskatchewan, for taking this first step in solving such a very 

serious problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 222 — The Crown Corporations Accountability Act 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill, An Act respecting The Accountability of 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the interest of open, 

accountable, and responsible government, I hereby table a 

response to question 47. And with leave, I would also like to 

table the answers to questions 58 and 59. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  And I just want to check through . . . the 

government whip referred to question 47; I think you meant 57, 

question 57? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Correct. 

 

The Speaker:  The answers to items 1, 2, and 3 are tabled. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 4 — Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the spring season, quite often in our province we end up with 

the experience of flooding in some areas of the province. I 

know a number of years ago in my own area, in the Carrot 

River Valley, the river was very high and affected in an adverse 

way, properties of many of the people in that area. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anything in recent memory  

compares to what’s happening in Saskatchewan, and happening 

in the northern United States and southern Manitoba, as we 

currently deal with spring run-off and spring flooding. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, each night we see on television images 

of what is happening to people in their lives. I talked to an 

individual who had to travel out east the other day and as he 

was flying over, the pilot on the aircraft said, look out and see 

the nature of the damage that is happening in southern 

Manitoba. 

 

(1430) 

 

And he said literally, it seemed like an ocean as far as he could 

see from an aircraft travelling at over 30,000 feet of altitude. 

The magnitude was absolutely incredible and devastating. And 

in this great, vast amount of water what you would see were 

little pockets of farms and small communities valiantly trying to 

work and to try to establish a beachhead whereby they could 

protect their properties, and save their equipment, their 

machinery, and their homes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in many instances we realize that that effort 

has been in vain. We saw not very long ago, I believe in Grand 

Forks where not only was the community flooded, but the 

downtown section then was razed by fire; and the whole 

devastation of a community like that is just simply incredible, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we watch with horror when we see what’s 

happening in southern Manitoba. We see that the communities 

were valiantly trying to protect their properties. We see farms 

and individual people valiantly trying to do what they can to 

protect their homes and their investments. And yesterday it 

must have been a horrifying experience to see the wind whip up 

as it did and have huge waves battling against the weak and 

very tenuous kind of dykes that had to be built to cope with this 

unprecedented level of flooding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night we heard where a community had less 

than two hours to evacuate the community because the dyke 

was breached and two metres of water, Mr. Speaker, are now 

consuming over that whole community. I find it very hard to 

imagine what these people are going through, Mr. Speaker, how 

that affects their attitude about their future, about rebuilding, 

and what’s going to be needed as this water recedes and they 

end up with inches and feet of muck and dirt in their homes; 

how you dry out the insulation in the walls and how you cope 

with rebuilding that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think members on our side of the House, and certainly on 

the opposite side of the House, have their hearts go out for 

people that are in that situation. Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to let our 

hearts go out and reach out and express condolences and 

support for people in the United States or in our neighbouring 

province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the same time we’re doing that, we have 

not done what is necessary to do for the people of our own 

province that experience severe flooding through the South and 

now through Lumsden and the Qu’Appelle chain. There is a  

  



1210  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

great number of problems that we’re experiencing in our own 

back door, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And hence the reason why we wanted to engage in this debate 

today is to address the issues that are facing not only our 

families and not only the families of people in other provinces, 

but our families here right at home, Mr. Speaker, and including 

not only the families but the families’ representatives in 

municipal government that have very much of a challenge in 

front of them in order to rebuild the devastation, not only to the 

families’ assets but also to the assets of the community, the 

municipalities. 

 

Across this southern part of our province, municipalities are 

facing a great deal of problems in terms of their roads being 

eroded, in terms of bridges and culverts being washed out, in 

terms of ditches being silted in. They have a huge amount of 

challenges out there in the southern area, where all the flooding 

has occurred, in order to rebuild their infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the purpose of what we need to 

talk about seriously today is how are we going to, as a 

government of the province of Saskatchewan, how are we going 

to deal with those serious concerns and those serious problems 

that our people have, Mr. Speaker. Because they have to be 

addressed. The formula for disaster relief, Mr. Speaker, is not 

adequate, and particularly because of the fact of the new 

reassessment. All the numbers are no longer valid and they’ve 

changed substantially in terms of a formula, resulting in the 

absolute numbers raising dramatically. 

 

But my colleagues, who are much more knowledgeable on how 

this program works and what suggestions we have in terms of 

fixing it . . . are going to work, will talk more about that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in trying to set the tone for the debate this 

afternoon, I think that it’s important that what we talk about and 

focus on is what this does to families. Many people work their 

whole life trying to build an asset. And for most people, their 

main asset is their home. 

 

And a home is a fairly sacred place that we all treat specially. 

It’s not just a raw asset; it’s just not numbers. It’s something 

that we make a part of ourselves. We have the memories that 

we have of raising our children in that home. We have the 

memories of when we fixed up the rumpus room in the 

basement. We have all of those memories that become very 

much a part of who we are and what we are as a family and as a 

community. 

 

And so when we talk about this issue, while the numbers are an 

important consideration to have to make, Mr. Speaker, we can 

never lose sight of the fact that we’re talking about people and 

their memories and their lives and their remembrance of happy 

and good and wonderful, productive times with their families 

and with their friends in their home. 

 

And so to imagine what people face when you have 3 metres of 

water coursing through your home —it must be incredible, Mr. 

 Speaker. We saw on television where people were trying to 

move their possessions from the basement up onto the main 

floor. We see water at 3 metres on the main floor. There isn’t 

enough places you can move things. 

 

And when this is all over, Mr. Speaker, when the water recedes, 

as it eventually will do in every instance, what’s left? I ask you, 

Mr. Speaker, how do you fix the gyproc in the walls? How do 

you get the water and the must out of the insulation in the 

walls? How do you fix the siding? What long-term damage is 

done to that home that will be very difficult to ever replace the 

way it was originally, with all its memories. 

 

How do you go through and ask people to take time from their 

lives, their jobs, in order to even begin to face the challenges of 

replacing their home, of replacing their property, of replacing 

those assets that are so much more than just dollars and cents, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in engaging this debate this afternoon, I 

want us to focus not only on the numbers, not only on the issues 

that are needed in terms of assisting the municipalities and 

municipal governments both rural and urban, we’ve got to talk 

about the fact that we can’t just deal with rural municipalities. 

We also have to deal with the real issues facing small 

communities, the towns and villages that have been affected by 

flooding. 

 

We have to talk about all of these issues, Mr. Speaker, but I 

don’t want us to ever lose sight of the fact that we’re talking 

about people and something that is very precious to them. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion, seconded 

by my colleague from Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to waive the 

deductible on uninsurable damage under the provincial 

disaster assistance program, and further urges the 

government to exempt local governments from cuts to 

municipal grants in jurisdictions eligible under the 

provincial disaster assistance program. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

rise today and speak to the motion presented by my colleague, 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale. Before I begin my remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, I too would like to offer some words of thanks to 

the many people who have volunteered to help with flood 

damage around the province in recent weeks. 

 

Just last weekend when I was visiting the community of 

Mossbank, I spoke with a gentleman there who had spent many 

hours in attempts to sandbag in the Gravelbourg community, a 

nearby community, and thanks to his efforts and those of many 

others, at least one farmhouse in the Gravelbourg area had been 

saved from some severe flood damage. But there’s numerous 

examples of individuals such as that who have volunteered 

much time and effort towards trying to reduce the amount of  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

damage caused by flooding in this spring’s flood problems. 

 

Other examples include many dedicated municipal employees 

who have helped to mitigate and prevent the flood damage in 

recent weeks. I’d also like to thank the personnel of 15 Wing 

Moose Jaw, who donated their time to help sandbag in the 

Moose Jaw River valley. The work of these people is a 

testament to the Saskatchewan spirit of generosity and caring. 

 

Our good wishes also go out to the many military reservists 

who have left Saskatchewan last week to help fight the floods in 

southern Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently in this House the Deputy Premier was up 

suggesting that Saskatchewan residents are lucky we did not 

experience the flood damage which struck the Peace River area; 

Trail, B.C. (British Columbia); and other centres such as Grand 

Forks, North Dakota; and southern Manitoba. And for this, Mr. 

Speaker, we indeed can be grateful. 

 

But while we can be grateful that our major population centres 

escaped the severe damage which hit a community like Grand 

Forks, the same cannot be said of our rural areas. While we do 

send out our prayers to the people of southern Manitoba, we 

must always remember that just because a disaster strikes a 

sparsely populated rural area like that of Coderre and Courval, 

it doesn’t make the damage any less important or any less real. 

Even though there are fewer souls in rural areas, we should 

remain aware that their suffering is real and it has to be 

addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion before us today asks the government to 

reconsider its decision to place a burdensome deductible on 

those hard hit by flood damage. It also asks the government to 

reconsider its revenue-sharing grant cuts to municipalities in 

such areas as this. Particularly victimized in all of this are local 

governments and the many ratepayers who support them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent weeks my office has received many 

enquiries regarding flood damage. I’ve been approached on a 

whole range of problems related to flood damage. A number of 

farmers in my constituency are concerned about the rising flood 

waters that are covering their land. 

 

Other farmers were given permission to build dykes to protect 

their property. In some instances all those dykes have failed and 

now they worry about how many years it will take before the 

flood waters recede and pasture and forage land could be 

re-established. 

 

Other residents in my constituency have called me telling me 

that their Quonsets were flooded, their bins damaged, and their 

grain and feed supplies destroyed or greatly reduced in quality. 

I know of instances as we speak, Mr. Speaker, where there are 

farmers out busily unstacking many stacks of hay bales in an 

attempt to try and at least lessen some losses, try to allow some 

air circulation to dry a certain amount of this feed. And 

anybody who has had to feed cattle this past winter, knowing 

coming off of a very long and difficult winter, if you had to 

purchase forage supplies at the tail end of the winter it was a 

rather costly proposition. 

 

Many constituents of mine have mentioned in terms of over a 

hundred dollars per metric ton that they had to pay for some 

feed at the end of the winter. So it certainly . . . if their attempts 

to recover some of this feed are unsuccessful, it will amount to 

some substantial losses for some of these individuals. 

 

Other people have phoned me and said that their roads are being 

washed away. Highways are nearly impassable and roadbeds 

are very soft. I spoke to an individual this morning who speaks 

about the grid road heading south from the community of 

Marquis as being, from their point of view, a major road that 

they take to access their farm. But given the current conditions 

of the roadbed and the heavy traffic on that particular stretch of 

road en route to grain terminals in Moose Jaw, the road is 

already showing evidence of the beating that can be taken, 

given the severe conditions this spring, and the amount of truck 

traffic that will have to go over these roads in the very near 

future. 

 

(1445) 

 

Others are concerned that water levels are so high around some 

other roads that if a good strong wind will come up, white caps 

will be washing over the roads and damaging them. And I know 

we’ve saw some very dramatic footage of this very thing 

occurring in southern Manitoba in recent weeks. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the grid road south of 

Morse is one that’s much like that. And in fact I think that’s a 

rather famous road in some ways, if we looked historically back 

to some debates that have occurred in this House, I’m sure, over 

the years. The grid road south of Morse that was affected by 

Reed Lake was a source of political controversy in years gone 

by. And certainly the fury of Reed Lake and the winds of this 

current government have again dramatically affected people in 

the community of Morse and district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some other residents of Thunder Creek and 

neighbouring constituencies have been, in fact, concerned about 

being stranded in this spring’s flood. They’ve been concerned 

not only for their own health but also for that of, in some 

instances, of their livestock, of their cattle herds. 

 

I’ve encountered situations where veterinarians were not even 

able to access cattle herds at the request of the owners, given 

the severe circumstances — the flooding and the isolation that 

occurred. And in some of these situations it did lead to some 

substantial losses in terms of the calving season that was 

progressing. 

 

Other constituents — and a number of them, Mr. Speaker — 

have called and suggested their concern over their children 

having to ride buses over the dam on Highway 363, south-west 

of Moose Jaw. Although this dam was needed to save the salt 

mine near Chaplin and the many valued jobs that go with that, 

my constituents want to be assured that something will be done 

to bring this highway and much of the rural infrastructure back 

to normal. 

 

With spring seeding rapidly approaching, many residents are 

concerned that it will be difficult to move machinery from field  

  



1212  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

to field, particularly in the Old Wives, Coderre, and Courval 

areas. 

 

A few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from 

Wood River, and myself wrote to the Minister of Municipal 

Government and we indicated to her that our constituents were 

deeply concerned that the deductible under disaster assistance 

was just too high. While I’m pleased that the minister replied to 

our correspondence, I was disappointed that the minister 

believes that this program is, I quote: “reasonable.” The 

minister argues that the deductible is reasonable and goes on to 

say in her letter that for an RM like Gravelbourg, the 3 mill 

deductible is $16,000. 

 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, municipally speaking, is no small sum 

of money. I’m told that in some RMs (rural municipality) the 

initial deductible will be 7,800; in others as high as $24,000. 

 

And what concerns my constituents most, Mr. Speaker, are 

situations where the damage is so close to the amount of the 

deductible that the difficulty of applying for it will not make it 

possible, or even worthwhile to do. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

regrettable. 

 

Our rural areas in the south-west and south-central areas of the 

province have lost much of their physical and social 

infrastructure over recent years. 

 

According to recent statistics, this area of the province has often 

suffered more than most in terms of . . . and it’s often behind 

other areas when it comes to employment growth. And I know 

I’ve stood in this House on occasions in the past year and 

pointed out this very real regional disparity in terms of 

employment opportunities, where we have lost in the 

south-west many thousands of jobs in recent years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a local area is losing infrastructure, but more 

importantly has few people to cover the cost of repairing and 

replacing damage, even damage that’s covered under disaster 

assistance, is it wise for governments to insist upon having such 

a high deductible? There are few taxpayers in many of these 

areas, and in some of them the damage is very extensive. 

 

Many of these people sit back and watch while they pay for 

deer damage in winter, even though the government has made it 

much harder to hunt. Now the minister wants them to bear an 

unduly large burden resulting from flood damage as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while my constituents and others across the 

province will be grateful for whatever assistance they receive, 

they still will be bearing an unduly large burden if this 

government does not reconsider the heavy burden that’s posed 

by the presence of this large deductible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even if municipalities have enough damage to 

cover the 3 mill equivalent deductible according to the current 

regulations, they’ll have to cover half the cost of the next 3 

mills of equivalent damage, and three-quarters of the following 

3 mills; and then for the remaining damage they’d be forced to 

cover 10 per cent of that cost. Well in one RM in my  

constituency, the total from this flood damage adds up to about 

$60,000. 

 

Well part of the problem here was worsened by the provincial 

decision to no longer cover 100 per cent of bridge replacement 

and repair. That decision alone may cost this municipality 

thousands more dollars, Mr. Speaker. And I do know in 

discussions with the officials of this particular municipality that 

the shame of it is that in 1992, I believe, this one particular 

bridge that has now been destroyed was in fact just constructed 

at a tremendous cost; and now left to start all over again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those costs for a community with 2 to 300 people 

are enormous costs indeed. The damage caused by flooding, 

Mr. Speaker, was made worse by cuts to municipal grants. 

Given the government’s insistence on continuing with these 

cuts, the least they could do for some of these small, rural 

communities is to reconsider the high cost of the deductible. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that they should do both. 

 

The RM of Rodgers recently sent me a letter, Mr. Speaker, and 

in their correspondence they indicate just how upset they are 

with this government’s decision to cut their grants by as much 

as 60 per cent. This government promised in its last budget that 

the cuts would be around 25 per cent for all municipalities. 

While they weren’t happy with those cuts, they had prepared for 

them in good faith. 

 

What they got instead was a shocking 60 per cent cut, and to 

top it off, an unexpected, disastrous flood. The total damage to 

municipal property is estimated at $500,000 in this one 

municipality alone, Mr. Speaker, and also estimates to private 

property damage are something in that neighbourhood and still 

being assessed. The damage is severe, and for a community of 

less than a few hundred souls, this sort of damage is devastating 

and very demoralizing. 

 

I know I’ve spoke, Mr. Speaker, in this House in terms of the 

amount of VLT revenues that are removed from the Thunder 

Creek constituency on an annual basis, in something in the 

order of . . . in excess of 1.3 million in the last year alone. I 

know the community of Coderre, having a VLT location there, 

that it’s particularly saddening that more can’t be done in this 

situation, given that I’ve heard stories that in one weekend 

alone there might be $8,000 removed from the community of 

Coderre in VLT revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion before us today therefore, it’s not one 

about scoring political points; it’s about simply asking for more 

money; it’s about showing some compassion to communities 

and individuals who were hit hard by flooding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently all parties showed their compassion and 

concern for flood victims. They did this for other provinces and 

other jurisdictions. Today I’m asking everyone to show similar 

concerns for residents of their own province. While the pictures 

may not look as impressive as those coming from Grand Forks 

or southern Manitoba, the damage faced by the good people of 

the RM of Rodgers and many other communities like them is no 

less real and deserves no less compassion. 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

Mr. Speaker, we hear on occasion the members opposite 

expressing concern about the future of the transportation system 

and about backlogs in grain movement. If the members opposite 

are concerned about the transportation system like they say they 

are, then I would ask them to match those words with actions. If 

they want to say they are compassionate, then show some 

compassion. If the members want to say they’re concerned 

about transportation issues, then take action and show just how 

concerned you really are. 

 

I ask the members opposite and the government to do whatever 

it takes to fix this damaged infrastructure. They could start by 

reconsidering this high deductible, and reconsider 

revenue-sharing grants to such municipalities. If they want 

grain to move or if they want farmers to be able to move 

equipment to fields to grow it, then they can help by leaving 

money in local communities where it can be used to fix roads 

and rebuild our damaged local transportation network. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before concluding my remarks, I’d like to raise 

one last issue. I know the members as usual will blame 

everything on the federal level and ask us to get our federal 

cousins to provide some more money. Well I can assure the 

members that my colleague, the member from Wood River, and 

I have already written to the federal minister responsible for 

emergency preparedness and we have asked for help. 

 

And it is my hope that the members will support this motion 

and work cooperatively with us and other levels of government 

to see much of this damage repaired in a fair and equitable 

fashion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and express my concerns for 

the people of the south-west and south-central part of 

Saskatchewan, having experienced this two years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, when I was still reeve of the RM of Saltcoats. 

 

We’ve had much flooding and many roads washed out in our 

constituency and I can feel for what these people are going 

through, not only in the destruction it causes but in the costs 

that it leaves behind when mother nature kind of shows her 

wrath out there. And I think, Mr. Speaker, you would have 

found it very amazing to see the damage that could be done 

within a matter of an hour when the water came that spring, and 

I’m sure it’s been the very same in the south-west and 

south-central areas. 

 

We had one piece of road — I can remember it well because 

I’ve never seen anything like that in my life — it was about 100 

feet long and about a 20-foot grade that within . . . I think it was 

about 6 o’clock at night it was in perfect shape, and by 8 

o’clock it was totally gone. It was amazing just to see the 

destruction that could be caused. There was 10-foot by about 

2-foot thick pieces of clay just picked up by the water and gone, 

and when it got down as far as the culvert it was picked up and 

gone. And it was an amazing sight to see, but as a rural taxpayer 

it was frightening because you knew somewhere down the road 

that someone had to pick this up. 

 

And the same I guess, is what we’re talking about here today 

for the people in the south-west, and I don’t think I can even 

say I can imagine what the people in Manitoba and North 

Dakota are going through because I don’t think we’ve ever been 

in that serious a situation. And I’m sure we all extend our 

sympathies to them and would wish them the best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand really how the government 

members can do anything but support this motion. With all the 

pain they have artificially inflicted on local governments, both 

on rural municipalities and communities, the least the NDP 

government could do is recognize the error of its ways and lend 

as much support as possible during these times of natural 

disasters. 

 

Two years ago the 3 mill deductible for municipal governments 

was quite expensive when the flooding ravaged the east-central 

regions of the province, as I have described. In this case the 

government did recognize that additional assistance was 

necessary and lowered the deductible to 1 mill for the rural road 

building program, etc. 

 

But the story was not the same just down the road in 

Langenburg, Mr. Speaker. The town was forced to pay the full 

3 mill cost even though most of the expensive flood damage 

was done within . . . inside of that community. Why was there 

such a double standard, I still don’t know. Were the roads in 

Langenburg viewed as less valuable than the roads in the 

surrounding rural areas? Why didn’t the government offer the 

same level of assistance to both? And I still wonder that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That issue aside though, the fact of the matter today is that 

circumstances have changed. The massive offloading of 

funding cuts onto local governments is making it nearly 

impossible for those municipalities who are suffering flood 

damage this year to even meet the deductible requirements. We 

need not look any farther than the hard and fast budget-slashing 

measures that the members opposite have inflicted on local 

governments of all kinds. 

 

These governments . . . these cuts in municipal revenue-sharing 

grants total more than $25 million, and that’s only what we’ve 

seen so far. I honestly believe that they are far deeper than that. 

That’s $29 million that municipalities are forced to make up on 

the backs of the local taxpayers, or cancel important 

maintenance and construction projects altogether. 

 

This is an extremely serious matter, Mr. Speaker. There is a 

sense of despair among some rural and town administrators, 

who are telling us that they might have enough funding to build 

1 kilometre of road during this coming year, or maybe not even 

be able to repair the streets that are in dire need of it. I wonder if 

the government members can explain just how much can be 

accomplished by funding 1 kilometre of road. I’ll answer the 

question for them — not much. In fact the only objective this 

devastating underfunding of local governments is 

accomplishing is that it is literally tearing up smaller 

communities and rural areas. 

 

People who live on the outskirts of major urban areas only have  

  



1214  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

to drive a few miles down to the nearest road to measure 

exactly what kind of commitment that this government is 

making to these communities. When these same people are 

attending public meeting after public meeting in order to justify 

the operation of their local hospital or health care centre, they 

know exactly what kind of commitment this government is 

making of their communities. 

 

(1500) 

 

When town officials, school board trustees, and rural 

administrators are sitting down to argue who should suffer the 

most pain because of unfair reassessment allocation, and when 

they are deciding just how high they will have to set their new 

mill rates, they know exactly what this government 

commitment is to Saskatchewan communities. Over half of the 

RMs that I have contacted have informed me that they are being 

forced to hike their mill rate dramatically this year. 

 

When Saskatchewan property owners sit down and write the 

cheques for their new reassessment values and realize that this 

NDP government is so seriously underfunding education, that 

they are now picking up 60 per cent of the tab of those costs, 

they know exactly that this government’s commitment is not 

much to local communities. When thriving small towns are 

forced to fight to keep their schools open, even nearby thriving 

industry could mean more families would like to relocate to that 

community, but they know exactly what this NDP 

government’s commitment is to local communities. 

 

Now how can the NDP members opposite stand up and justify 

how they are once again turning their backs on Saskatchewan 

people who are already struggling because of this government’s 

policies. What possible excuses can they find this time to ignore 

the welfare of Saskatchewan people who are doing all they can 

to overcome the disaster at the hands of mother nature. 

 

I believe that waiving the deductible on uninsurable damage 

under the provincial disaster assistance program, and exempting 

some of the communities from cuts to revenue sharing, is the 

least that the government could do. 

 

If we look across the border to Manitoba and the terrible 

destruction that is weaving through the Red River Valley, we 

see all levels of the government working together to help out 

Manitoba people as much as possible. The Prime Minister 

himself was out to survey the damage and what is being done to 

protect the homes, and to offer his assurances that the federal 

government would do what it can to help. 

 

As I was driving into the city this week, I met with one Armed 

Forces vehicle after another heading east. Our Armed Forces 

are pitching in to help build temporary dykes and help with the 

evacuation operations. There are people in nearby communities 

who are giving all they have to help out their neighbours. They 

are working around the clock filling sandbags and whatever is 

needed. 

 

People in towns that are safe from the flood waters are opening 

their doors, Mr. Speaker, to friends, families, and strangers who 

have nowhere else to go. There are people from all across  

Canada who are offering their support, both financially and 

along the front line. 

 

If there can be any good resulting from such widespread 

tragedy and destruction, it is that the community spirit that is 

the foundation of this great country shines through in time of 

crisis. 

 

Likewise in Saskatchewan, the early pioneers founded this 

province on tough determination and gritty community spirit. 

When it was time to harvest the crops, everyone pitched in at 

one neighbouring farm after another to get the threshing 

completed. If someone’s barn was on fire, everyone rushed to 

help put it out; if damage was too severe, then everyone pitched 

in to help raise a new barn. 

 

These are the principles that Saskatchewan was built on. And 

even though the members opposite base their party philosophy 

on this cooperative theme, their own government has done more 

to tear at the social fabric of Saskatchewan during the past five 

years than at any other time in this province’s history. 

 

The savage revenue-sharing cuts, the chronic underfunding of 

Saskatchewan education, and the disastrous health reform 

process are pitting neighbours against each other. Why should 

they have to fight each other in order to preserve essential 

services? Is that what this government’s grand scheme is, to 

divide and conquer? I think so. Because that is exactly what is 

happening out in rural and small town Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now we have municipalities trying to plan their future without 

funding for the futures programs, which this government 

cancelled. Local governments are trying to complete and plan 

new road construction projects without the farm road . . . access 

road program, which this government axed this spring. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those that don’t have enough funding, 

complementary funding, to use their infrastructure money are 

being told to pass it along to the neighbouring RM, and even 

though many don’t currently have agreements in place to 

transfer the funds. And I think, Mr. Speaker, knowing from 

experience, I would really be disappointed if I had to pass along 

federal money and provincial money to a neighbouring RM 

because my RM could not match those funds. 

 

There is a seriously growing sentiment across the province that 

the NDP are abandoning small communities in rural areas. Mr. 

Speaker, I certainly cannot blame people for thinking this way. 

This government gives them proof of this theme every day. 

 

A leaked government memo clearly stated that the Minister of 

Economic Development has no grand economic strategy for 

rural Saskatchewan. The disgusting shape of our highways and 

roads, and the constant fight to preserve health care and 

education services in these areas, is a testament of 

abandonment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that these communities are surviving in 

spite of this NDP government . . . now some mayors, reeves, 

and local administrators who are trying to help people affected  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

by spring flooding, are asking for the government’s help by way 

of waiving the deductible on insurable damage to the disaster 

assistance program. 

 

It is a duty of members opposite to accurately represent the 

people who elected them. So in fact they are democratically 

bound to consider the measures put forth in this motion. 

 

Some communities and municipalities need to overcome 

massive expenses incurred by recent flooding. They are facing 

washed-out bridges, roads, and some farm land. These people 

need help now, Mr. Speaker. Those farmers that can soon start 

their seeding operations will be increasing the traffic flow on 

already damaged roads. Safety of all Saskatchewan citizens 

should be this government’s number one priority. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Government has told the member 

from Thunder Creek that she believes the 3 mill deductible is 

reasonable. She maintains this statement even after dozens of 

communities and municipalities have written and phoned her to 

tell her otherwise. Is this just another case where the 

government believes it knows best and that the people of 

Saskatchewan do not know what is in their best interests? 

 

This government must offer the assistance that these 

communities so badly need. If it chooses to ignore this motion 

and refuses to offer any more practical solutions, Saskatchewan 

residents hit by flooding become further victims to the 

arrogance of this NDP government. This is a sign of a 

government that is losing touch with the very people who they 

say elected them to represent them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will do their best to survive 

the destruction doled out by mother nature. They have done so 

in the past through floods, fires, and tornadoes, and I have faith 

they will do so again. But I have absolutely no doubt that when 

it comes time to mark the provincial ballots, the damage that the 

government has done to Saskatchewan will be reflected in how 

the people vote, and I am convinced the government will not 

survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all the members opposite to seriously 

consider what challenges and struggles the people in flood 

damaged areas of Saskatchewan are facing. If they have 

seriously given some thought, then they will undoubtedly 

support this motion, because it would offer much needed 

government aid in time of crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just like to touch on for a moment some 

of the cuts. And I think why I’m touching on this — because it 

bears touching on — because it shows where some of these 

municipalities have been downloaded on and why they cannot 

afford to pick up the whole tab themselves. 

 

I’d just like to bring to the attention of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

for an example, the RM of Pleasantdale, whose conditional 

grant was $64,000 and is now 15,000. Their unconditional grant 

was 57,000; it’s now 37,000. Their maintenance grant was 

7,000; it’s now 6,200. 

 

So that one RM, Mr. Speaker, is thousands and thousands of  

dollars less than they were receiving even last year and already 

having been cut since ’91. The RM of Kelvington, 54,000 

conditional grant last year; $21,000, Mr. Speaker, this year; 

$61,000 unconditional grant last year; 38,000 this year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I’m saying, the trend goes on all 

across the province and only some of the RMs have responded 

to this time. But I think the message I’m trying to get out there 

is that these RMs are in the same boat, have had their funding 

cut to a degree where they just do not have funding for a natural 

disaster such as flooding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, my area was flooded two years 

ago; so I believe I have firsthand knowledge of what the 

destruction can be caused out there. Mr. Speaker, the 

downloading that has happened in some cases has been as much 

as 95 per cent for RMs. So it leaves absolutely no room for 

unexpected costs that come from flooding. 

 

And I might add to this, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen, grain 

prices went up a couple of years ago and then last year started a 

turn downward. Incomes have gone down and we had kind of a 

. . . I don’t know. It’s kind of a myth out there that agriculture 

and farmers are in good shape. 

 

And I would suggest that this myth is caused by such things as 

the Crow pay-out last year; other things like the Wheat Pool 

equity that was cashed in for some farmers to survive. But in 

doing that, it made the income of farmers look much greater 

than it actually is and I think it’s put a lot of people . . . relaxed 

a lot of people, to think that the problem out there in agriculture 

has gone away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me tell you from experience and from the 

experience of my neighbours and from the farmers I have talked 

to across this province — the problem has not gone away. In 

fact as one lawyer had mentioned to me a couple of weeks ago 

that deals only with farm debt and farm foreclosure, that a year 

ago he had as many as five farmers a day coming in with 

bankruptcy problems, farm foreclosure. And then he said it was 

surprising because that number fell to approximately one a day, 

which was a great turn for the better. But guess what, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re back up to two and three a day. 

 

So I think what that says to me, and it should say to everyone 

here, that the problem is increasing out there in agriculture and 

it’s not going away. What he did tell me, that the difference in 

the problem this time, Mr. Speaker, is he’s seeing much larger 

farmers going under, going through receivership, going into 

bankruptcy. And that tells me the problem is probably even 

worse than before because the amount of dollars we’re talking 

about are far greater. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we have been left with a false sense of 

security that agriculture is doing well when I think most of us 

from rural Saskatchewan, and by that I mean the members of 

the third party, the members of our party, and definitely the 

members of that party across, should know that there’s a serious 

problem out there. Let’s not close our eyes and think it’s going 

to go away. 

 

  



1216  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

Now by not funding these municipalities and these towns out 

there that have a problem right now, I believe what we’re doing 

is once again turning our backs on people in need. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know how these natural disasters draw 

people together out there. And I would suggest that just 

watching out there and watching these people work together 

should be an incentive for the government across to bite the 

bullet and stand behind these people and assist them at a time 

when they cannot assist themselves with money on account, if 

for no other reason than the funding cuts that we have seen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s all I have to say at this time. I 

would say, let’s for once stand beside these people instead of 

standing away back behind them and watching what happens 

out there. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the motion that is before the House today, I think is 

one of grave concern and it is one that must be dealt with 

appropriately by this government. 

 

We have seen over the last three years that not only will floods 

occur in river basins, but they will occur in very, very 

unexpected areas. East-central Saskatchewan faced those 

problems a couple years ago and we saw massive damage, as 

my colleague from Saltcoats has indicated. And I think at a time 

that occurs, when that time occurs, we see people pull together. 

We see people express their support to people that are affected. 

 

And we have tremendous damage. We have RMs today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, who are still struggling with that damage that 

occurred back then. Roads don’t get built overnight or rebuilt 

overnight. We don’t see the replacement of culverts, or pipe as 

they’re referred to, occur very quickly. And as a result, you end 

up with the very poor road condition. We are still facing those 

conditions where massive grades were washed out and the 

attempt to rebuild them during the summer occurred, but as a 

result you still end up with soft spots and you still end up with, 

as my colleague has pointed out, a safety problem. 

 

So we must not look at this question and this whole matter of 

supporting RMs, supporting individuals, very lightly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I think it has such a very strong implication 

that when I look at the conditions that are put forward in the 

motion, I think it is a very, very important issue. And we 

shouldn’t be blinded by partisan politics. 

 

For this reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I urge the members 

opposite to take off the political blinders for the day and listen 

to the logical arguments put forward from this side of the 

House. These are not Liberal arguments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They are the pleas from individuals and communities which 

have been hit hard by the recent floods. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the massive cuts made by this  

government in the last budget, these communities do not have 

money available to put forward the deductible for the disaster 

assistance program. And that is an undeniable fact. 

 

Today we are urging the government to waive the deductible on 

uninsurable damage under the provincial disaster assistance 

program. 

 

I suspect that the government will make the argument that the 

current guidelines have been in place since 1993 and that they 

have served us well thus far. I suspect this will be the argument; 

that this has been the argument put to us by the Minister of 

Municipal Government when previously lobbied to waive the 

deductible. She has made that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It should be noted that in 1993 when the government approved 

the current deductible, which is the equivalent of 3 mills of 

taxation, they increased the deductible by five times the 

previous amount. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if indeed these 

guidelines serve the government well, I might suggest that they 

have not served the municipalities well at all. 

 

Moreover, 1997 saw a record level of flooding in the province, 

which means a higher utilization of the fund than from 1993 to 

1996. Or at least you would expect this to be true, but maybe 

not. I say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 1997 was not only 

a bad year for municipalities because of mother nature that hit 

them hard, but because the members opposite slashed the 

budgets of some municipalities by as much as 95 per cent. 

 

These cuts have left many municipalities which need the 

support of the provincial disaster assistance program in a 

position where they cannot afford the deductible up front. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what will these communities which cannot 

afford the deductible do? Simply not repair the damages? 

 

Everyone in this House who comes from a rural community 

knows full well that’s not a decision that the RM people can 

make. As my colleague has pointed out, we are moving into the 

seeding season and the traffic on roads will be increasing 

steadily. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  And as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a 

result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the conditions must be repaired. 

And they must be repaired now. 

 

The government has suggested that it will wait until all of the 

water subsides to assess the damage before it makes any 

commitment to further fund the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, municipalities are faced with very limited 

budgets this year because of government cut-backs. And as the 

members opposite should well appreciate, if they are going to 

get on with the function of governance, they must have some 

clear indication of the money which will be left after they have 

dealt with the floods. It’s not something magical, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Today we have put forward a reasonable suggestion that this  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

government can adopt immediately to the flood-stricken areas 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government must 

agree to waive the deductible for the provincial disaster 

assistance fund. Communities need an answer and they need 

that answer today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all too often what we are seeing by this 

government is a lack of leadership, and in fact a lack of 

compassion for these individuals and communities of 

individuals which need them the most. First our seniors, then 

our children — now the provincial government is failing to help 

the victims of recent floods. It is bad enough that the 

government slashed municipal government budgets this year, 

but for this government to not reach out and help them in time 

of their need is simply not forgivable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am going to say to the members opposite 

one more time, please, we urge you not to make a political issue 

out of this. The province needs to stick together in times like 

this. We have put forward a good suggestion today in the 

Assembly, one which this government should have no good 

reason to oppose except, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this solution was 

put forward by the opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province have 

stuck together through this disaster. If there is anything good 

which comes out of a disaster, if anything can, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is that communities band together to battle a 

common enemy. And we have seen this happen across the 

province, as indeed it is presently happening in southern 

Manitoba and North Dakota. 

 

Not long ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member opposite from 

Swift Current rose in the Assembly to tell us that the people 

from his constituency worked through the weekend to prevent 

disaster to their city. The Red Cross set up an emergency station 

and the RCMP worked round the clock. Community members 

also worked through Saturday and Sunday to build a 500 metre 

long sandbag wall using 30,000 sandbags. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that the people of this 

province, be it Swift Current or in Moose Jaw, which lost many 

bridges, or in Ponteix, which lost three roads, individuals from 

these communities worked diligently to minimize damage. 

 

I would like to take a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

applaud the many people who worked very hard to save not 

only their land and homes but their neighbours’ homes as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. I think we can all agree that the 

people of this province are truly remarkable people. To 

everyone who helped minimize the damage, we applaud you. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today and in the days to come, 

our thoughts and prayers go out to our neighbours to the east in 

Manitoba, and to the south in North Dakota. The extent of the 

flooding and disaster in those areas are I think, beyond 

comprehension. And I’m sure members will agree that we’ve 

watched — over the last number of weeks — we’ve watched  

the media relay to us through television, the massive damage 

that is occurring. And for adults, I guess we look at possessions 

and we see the homes, we see the yards, and we see the 

tremendous destruction that can occur so quickly. And of 

course this is years of investment, huge dollars that have been 

invested. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the interpretation by someone 

younger than me, a teenager — my daughter — this weekend 

brought to light just how she sees this. And I believe it was on 

Friday night they showed a clip of a farmer who had transported 

his livestock — as many as he could — to areas of higher 

ground, he had transported his produce, and they were leaving 

in a boat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was powered with an 

engine. And as they were leaving the farmyard, and it had this 

nice gate-type entrance, it showed the cat that was at the top of 

the fence. And my daughter was very, very upset that this 

farmer left the yard, and indeed that cat has nowhere to go. 

There’s miles and miles and miles of water, and she was very 

upset with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have committed their time and 

effort to minimize the damage. They have done their part, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but the work is not done. Now that most of the 

flooding is done, the clean-up and repairs will be very lengthy 

and a very expensive process. The communities have done their 

part, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now it is time for the members 

opposite to do theirs. 

 

The first step in doing this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is for the 

members opposite to do their math. The minister for Municipal 

Government continually abdicates her responsibility for the cuts 

made to the municipalities. She excuses the cuts made to the 

municipalities by stating that municipalities received 

forewarning of one year that there would be cuts of 25 per cent. 

That in and of itself certainly is not an excuse. 

 

As we are . . . as we hear the member opposite complain every 

day about federal cuts which constitute a whopping 1.5 per cent 

of the total provincial budget. Members opposite received 

adequate forewarning of federal cuts to the Health and Social 

Transfer. And what did they find out yesterday, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? They found out that these cuts would not be 

happening. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the municipalities were not as 

fortunate as the provincial government. They may have 

received a full year warning that the government would be 

slashing 25 per cent of their budgets, and some municipalities 

did get somewhat prepared for these cuts, but instead of 

receiving good news like the provincial government received 

yesterday from the federal government, the municipalities 

realized on budget day that the cuts would be far worse than 

they had expected. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is time that the Minister of Municipal 

Government, along with the Minister of Finance, go back to 

their budget and admit what everyone else already knows. The 

cuts to many municipal governments far exceeded 25 per cent 

of their budget. As my colleague from Saltcoats has mentioned 

— many, many times the cuts to some RMs produced levels as  

  



1218  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

high as 95 per cent. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, allow me to repeat to the members 

opposite: some of the municipalities which were hit very hard 

by this government’s offloading — I do this in hopes that the 

members opposite are listening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially 

the minister responsible for these RMs, and that they will go 

back to the books, do the math, admit that the cuts are too much 

and the fact that they are in excess of 25 per cent — the list is 

this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: RM of Shellbrook received a 

reduction of 61 per cent; the RM of Rosthern received a 

reduction in conditional grants of 65 per cent. The RM of 

Langenburg received cuts of 74 per cent; RM of Meota, 66 per 

cent; RM of Meadow Lake, 91 per cent; RM of Golden West, 

95 per cent; and there are many that I could add to this list, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister has been suggesting indirectly by her statements 

that the people in these RMs are imagining these cuts. Well let 

me say to the minister that on this side of the House we have 

more faith than that in the people of this province. I find it 

highly unlikely that the people from the RM of Golden West 

have miscalculated the cuts they received by 70 per cent. So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, unless the minister is going to state that 

the municipalities are daydreaming these cuts, she had better 

face the reality that her government has cut municipalities to the 

bone, to the point where the deductible for the disaster 

assistance program has become simply too high. 

 

(1530) 

 

In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to put forward the 

pleas we are hearing from flood-stricken municipalities one 

more time. Many communities in rural Saskatchewan are 

experiencing a great deal of loss because of the recent flooding. 

This damage simply magnifies the continual loss being dealt to 

rural Saskatchewan. In this state of disaster, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we ask the provincial government to relent from their 

tirade on rural Saskatchewan and provide them with much 

needed disaster relief. 

 

The first step in doing this is to admit that many communities 

cannot afford the 3 mill deductible. I urge the members, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, opposite to avoid making a political issue out 

of the loss of Saskatchewan residents and join with us and 

support this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We see the natural 

disaster that’s occurring — as being referred to by other 

members today — not just in this province, but the severe 

natural disaster in Manitoba and the flooding, basically the 

creating of the south-western Manitoba into a lake, the flooding 

in North Dakota and Minnesota, and the damage that it’s 

occurred there. 

 

I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 18 months ago to cross . . . I 

was reading The Globe and Mail last week and saw the bridge 

in Grand Forks that was crossing the river and you could just 

see the top of such a bridge. And I crossed that bridge 18  

months ago when I travelled through the town of Grand Forks, 

and then tried to understand the damage that had taken place in 

that very beautiful community. And trying to understand the 

damage that had taken place in homes and in communities, as 

the member from Melfort-Tisdale talked about — that kind of 

damage. The damage to the farming community — at that time, 

we were seeing them harvest sugar beets and potatoes — and 

the damage to that land. 

 

No, this isn’t a political issue. Natural disaster is not a political 

issue. 

 

What I saw yesterday when there was comment about 

sandbagging in Winnipeg and when someone said there . . . he 

talked about the community spirit and he talked about the 

community spirit of the Prairies and how people come together 

in natural disaster. 

 

We’re not immune just to flooding, Mr. Speaker. We saw what 

the devastation of tornadoes can do in this province in the 

community of Pilot Butte. 

 

We have seen when mother nature can do other cruel things, in 

terms of forest fires in northern Saskatchewan that threaten 

communities, that damage those communities when we have 

forest fires, and where people come together in terms of natural 

disasters. 

 

I refer to the ’80s, Mr. Speaker, and to the members in the 

south-west when we talk about the question of flooding, which 

it’s good to see the water compared to where we were in the 

’80s when we saw a natural disaster that lasted a decade in 

terms of the drought of the ’80s; where water was in short 

supply and a great deal of damage took place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But my comments of congratulations go out to those people, to 

those individuals in communities that work to protect their 

communities. My thoughts and thank you go out to those people 

of this province, in terms of the municipalities that work and 

plan in terms of disaster relief. 

 

My congratulation also goes out — who the members opposite 

forget to mention — to those people who work for Sask Water, 

who work very hard in terms of working with flood protection, 

who work very closely in telling the communities when the 

floods were coming as best they could, in terms of telling 

people there is danger and when it was going to occur — as 

they’re doing in Manitoba right now. These are the people we 

need to thank, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the interesting thing today is that when we heard a 

discussion and a debate in terms of solutions to the problem and 

we try to work with these municipalities and the federal 

government to work with things, the Liberal opposition said it’s 

not being a political problem. Then we got into the discussion 

of reassessment and how that all worked. 

 

I don’t have the time today, Mr. Speaker, to go in and discuss 

the questions of the merits of reassessment or why it occurred. 

That itself would take a great deal of time. 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

But it is important, Mr. Speaker, that we deal with the question 

of those people who have succeeded in providing those services 

to those communities in terms of providing those protections of 

flood relief. 

 

We also need to commend the municipalities and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the 

work that they did with the provincial government, recognizing 

with reassessment the 3 mill deduction had changed under 

reassessment. And we dealt with trying to find a solution to 

that. And I commend those people too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My time is short today, Mr. Speaker. So with that, I would like 

to propose an amendment to this resolution that I think sends a 

much better message to the people of Saskatchewan. And I have 

an amendment, moved by myself, seconded by the member 

from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton. And I will now read the 

amendment: 

 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

Commend the Department of Municipal Government for 

working with SUMA, SARM, and municipalities to adjust 

the provincial disaster assistance program deductible 

formula which was affected by the 1997 reassessment, to 

ensure that the program remains reasonable, cost-effective, 

and fiscally responsible to all residents. 

 

We also commend municipalities across the province for 

cooperating with the provincial and federal governments in 

preserving the benefits of the current 

federal-provincial-municipal approach, and accountability 

by all levels of government. 

 

We also commend all levels of government, agencies, and 

volunteers who are working together through emergency 

measures protocols, to minimize the damage caused by this 

spring’s floods in Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve heard considerable debate on this motion but we also 

would like to proceed to a motion this afternoon which deals 

with a proposal by the federal government that we harmonize 

our tax with them. And so that we can go to the debate on that 

motion, I move that debate on this current motion now be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Motion No. 5 — Opposition to Tax Harmonization 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was very interested to hear in a previous debate this 

afternoon, the member for Thunder Creek, in material 

explanation of his remarks, used a phrase or said something to 

the effect that we in the NDP — that is we in the government 

side — we in the provincial government were inclined to blame  

everything on the federal government. 

 

Not true, Mr. Speaker. Not true. I think there are many 

instances, many instances where we have shown that we want 

to work with the federal government whether it’s on national 

unity issues; whether it’s a national infrastructure program; 

whether it’s issues related to child poverty; whether it’s issues 

related to the Canadian Wheat Board; whether it’s the Moose 

Jaw air force base, I think that we have shown that we want to 

work with the federal government for the betterment of this 

country and for this province, Mr. Speaker. We have 

demonstrated that time and time again. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, where the confusion comes in for us is that 

the federal government seems to be wholly incapable, on many 

issues, of taking a consistent and coherent stand, Mr. Speaker. 

That is what concerns us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have in Canada an old saying that the Liberals in opposition 

tend to act like the NDP. That is to say, they put the interests of 

the people foremost. But in government they govern like the 

Tories; and that is to say they put the interests of big business 

foremost, Mr. Speaker. And that is what we’re seeing from the 

Liberal government in Ottawa and that is what concerns us 

about the Liberals. 

 

And I think the member from Thunder Creek is mistaken, Mr. 

Speaker, when he says that we blame everything on the federal 

government. We are wholly concerned about the direction that 

they have taken. Is it any mistake, Mr. Speaker, that before the 

last federal election the Liberals of the day said that we are 

opposed to the Free Trade Agreement, but their first act as a 

government was, if I remember correctly, to expand the Free 

Trade Agreement. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, before the — let’s take another topical issue 

— before the last federal government the Liberals said, we are 

committed to maintaining the Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation. We are opposed to the cuts that have been initiated 

by the Mulroney PC (Progressive Conservative) government. 

But one of their acts as a federal government has been in my 

mind to gut the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So is it any wonder that we are concerned about their direction? 

Blame, Mr. Speaker? No, not blame, just confusion as to what 

to expect on many issues from the federal Liberal government, 

and for Canadians, Mr. Speaker, who are confused about who it 

is that they elect. They elect a white knight who turns out to be 

Attila the Hun, Mr. Speaker, that is their concern. 

 

And that is why the motion before us, Mr. Speaker, is a timely 

one because it speaks to an issue that is of great concern to 

many Canadians. And that concern is about the goods and 

services tax, the GST as it’s known, and what is to become of 

this tax and what will the Liberal government, if re-elected, do 

with this tax in Saskatchewan if given an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this motion is a timely one. And, Mr. Speaker, at the 

conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion that this  

  



1220  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

Assembly affirm its continuing opposition to the harmonization 

of the provincial education and health tax with the federal 

goods and services tax, as first proposed by the federal 

Conservatives and later implemented by the federal Liberal 

government in some parts of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is the motion that I will be putting forward. That is the 

motion that I think is very timely for all members of the 

Assembly — all members of the Assembly — for the 

government side, for the Liberal opposition, and for the PC 

opposition to make their remarks and to let us know exactly, 

clearly, without any equivocation, where it is that we stand on 

that important issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say this because I don’t know if it will become an issue 

again. Will it impact Saskatchewan people? Will the federal 

Liberal government if re-elected take their harmonization of the 

goods and services tax with the sales tax in the Maritime 

provinces. Will they take re-election as a signal to continue the 

work that they had done? Will they use financial levers to try to 

force the provinces to, if you like, join up with their harmonized 

sales tax, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I think we need to make it crystal clear even while this federal 

election rages around us — to make it crystal clear where it is 

that we, representing Saskatchewan people, stand and where we 

stand clearly on this most important issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a few 

moments to look at some terminology because we’ll be using 

many, not acronyms but initials in this debate, and we’ll be 

using certain terms. And I want to take a few moments to 

explain them. 

 

First of all the PST (provincial sales tax). This is also . . . or 

more correctly is known as the education and health tax. This is 

a sales tax imposed on Saskatchewan people at a rate of 7 per 

cent on a limited range of goods that are transacted in the 

province. Okay. It has limited application. That it is to say it 

does not apply to all items in Saskatchewan. It applies to many 

items in Saskatchewan, but not all. 

 

There are many notable exemptions in Saskatchewan. These 

exemptions include food, including restaurant meals and snack 

foods, and of course foods that we buy in a grocery store; drugs 

and medicines; children’s clothing; reading materials; 

residential electricity and natural gas. And in addition the E&H 

(education and health) tax does not apply to most services 

including personal, professional, and repair services, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s the provincial sales tax. 

 

Now one of the features of the provincial sales tax is that 

businesses who purchase certain items that they need for their 

businesses do not pay the E&H tax or the provincial sales tax 

on those items. They have to pay the tax on those items. 

 

The businesses also have to pay any taxes that they collect to  

the provincial government on items that they sell. As to say 

they sell a good to a member of the public and that good is 

subject to the tax. They collect the tax. That is the tax they then 

remit to the provincial government. 

 

Now the GST, or the goods and services tax, is a federal tax. It 

also has a rate of 7 per cent, but it has a much wider application 

than the goods and services tax. Where earlier I mentioned that 

the provincial sales tax or the E&H tax does not apply to a wide 

range of services, including professional services and so on, the 

goods and services tax is imposed on services. 

 

That is to say that if you for example go to see a lawyer, 

whereas the lawyer would not charge if he . . . if he provided a 

hundred dollars worth of services, the lawyer would charge you 

an additional $7 because that would be the 7 per cent GST. The 

lawyer would not charge an additional $7 for the provincial 

sales tax because the provincial sales tax does not apply to those 

services. 

 

Similarly, I find that’s the concept with construction services 

and many other services — the GST. The car mechanic is an 

example. The GST would be applied, but the provincial sales 

tax is not applied. So the goods and services tax has a much 

wider application than does the narrowly based provincial sales 

tax, Mr. Speaker, even though the rate is similar at 7 per cent, at 

least since budget day of this year. Prior to that, the provincial 

sales tax was 9 per cent. 

 

Now the other interesting feature of the goods and services tax 

and that distinguishes it from the provincial sales tax, the goods 

and services tax features something called input tax credit. And 

it works this way. If a business, if a business purchases 

something that it needs, goods that it proposes to . . . let’s say if 

it buys goods from a wholesaler, it will have to pay the goods 

and services tax on those goods that it buys from the 

wholesaler. When it then sells those goods at retail price, it 

collects the goods and services tax, but as opposed to simply 

remitting all of the goods and services tax that it collects to the 

federal government, it can deduct from that the goods and 

services tax it pays on the goods that it first paid for. 

 

So businesses have an input tax credit. So that as opposed to the 

provincial sales tax, businesses are given a very distinct 

advantage when it comes to the goods and services tax. They 

don’t have to pay the GST on items that they purchase, whether 

it be goods or whether it be services that they pay for. They can 

deduct these things, if you like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that is the major difference between the GST and the 

provincial sales tax — GST, much wider range. Nearly 

everything, as Canadians and people in Saskatchewan will 

know, is covered by the GST, whereas the provincial sales tax 

does not have such a wide application. It in fact has a narrow 

application, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For example if anybody is watching this and they’re planning to 

go out for dinner tonight, when they go for their dinner and they 

pay their bill, they’ll notice there’ll be a 7 per cent increase or a 

tax for the GST, but there won’t be any tax for the . . . or no 

provincial sales tax on the meal. 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

 

Now harmonization is a concept that we will also talk about. 

Now that includes combining two taxes so that you have one 

tax. You combine the two taxes. Now there are some 

advantages to this. If you have one tax as opposed to two taxes 

you make it somewhat easier for consumers I suppose to 

understand what the tax might be. At the end of the day it’s also 

easier to anticipate because it’s not a question of thinking of, 

does this item have a tax or doesn’t it have a provincial sales 

tax? There’s no confusion; the same tax is on all items, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s also easier for businesses of course, because they only have 

to deal with one tax administration. And there are some 

advantages in terms of public administration because you only 

have to administer one tax as opposed to two different 

jurisdictions administering two taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are some very real disadvantages, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is why most Canadians on balance, and this government in 

particular, has remained avidly opposed to any harmonization, 

any harmonization whatsoever. The disadvantages are, one, 

more importantly, is increased cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan, increased cost to the consumers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where there was no tax, there is now a tax. Where there might 

not have been a provincial sales tax on say a restaurant meal 

that I spoke of earlier, with harmonization there would now be a 

provincial sales tax. And that is why consumers don’t like 

harmonization, because it means more money out of their 

pockets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now again I could go through all the items that are exempted 

here. Many of them that are included under the goods and 

services tax such as children’s clothing, restaurant meals, 

reading materials I think is a noticeable one; residential 

electricity and natural gas. Again, most services — personal, 

professional, and repair services, Mr. Speaker, all those items 

would be covered by a harmonized tax where the GST and the 

provincial sales tax are combined into one tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s also a shift that takes place in taxes from business to 

consumers. What happens with the GST as I explained earlier, 

is that businesses can deduct the GST that they pay, or that they 

are required to submit to the federal government, they can 

deduct any GST that they have actually paid on any goods and 

services that they have paid for. So there is a real advantage to 

business, but this tax is then extended to consumers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now there’s also, of course, an impact on provincial 

government revenues. When you eliminate the tax on business 

input, it means then there’s less revenue that flows through to 

the provincial government. So that even though the base is 

expanded, at the end of the day, there’s less money that is 

realized for the provincial government and so it will have a 

bearing in terms of how the province, how the province deals 

with its fiscal agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are not inconsequential items as the Liberal 

opposition might believe. Harmonization has had, in the 

Maritime provinces where it’s been implemented, has had a  

major impact. The concept has been especially controversial 

here in Saskatchewan. And that’s why I think it’s important to 

indicate where it is that we stand because it is an important 

matter of fiscal policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where we stand as I indicated earlier, also may 

have some influence on where the federal Liberals stand if this 

continues to be a matter of, how shall I say, electoral interest. If 

it continues to be an election issue, the federal Liberals may 

back off attempts subsequent to the federal election to, as I say, 

pressure those provinces that are not now harmonized to in fact 

sign up under harmonization. 

 

I take it’s important that whatever pressure we can bring to 

bear, we should do that. The Liberals have shown that they are 

susceptible to pressure. They certainly responded to the 

pressure of Canadians who didn’t like the GST as initiated by 

Brian Mulroney and the GST. They made it clear in their red 

book in the last . . . which was their campaign policy and 

platform in the last federal election. They made it clear that they 

were going to get rid of the GST. 

 

There were also many campaign commitments in addition to 

what was articulated in the red book, made by the Prime 

Minister, made noticeably also by the current Deputy Prime 

Minister, Sheila Copps that the Liberals, if elected, would get 

rid of the GST. There’s no doubt in any Canadian’s mind that’s 

what the Liberals were elected to do. So they showed they were 

susceptible to pressure by Canadians on that point. 

 

Of course after the election, we know it was something else. 

They buckled under, as they always do, to pressure from major 

business corporations who were satisfied with the GST 

administration, the way it worked. So the Liberals buckled 

under, and essentially no change at all to the GST. 

 

Paul Martin, if I believe, did indicate that he was sorry that 

Canadians had been misled; that the Liberals had been elected 

on a promise to get rid of the GST and that he now realized that 

it couldn’t be done. The Prime Minister — where he stands is 

anyone’s guess; although it seems to be that his comments as a 

Prime Minister were at great variance, if you like, with those as 

an opposition leader in the House of Commons. 

 

And of course Sheila Copps, the person whose mouth is 

exceeded only by her ego, of course we know the story of 

Sheila Copps. She made it very clear, prior to the last election, 

that she was going to resign if the GST didn’t go, and of course 

she did resign and was re-elected after a by-election, which was 

the honourable thing to do. And I guess, as most Canadians, we 

rest assured knowing that Sheila Copps is the Deputy Prime 

Minister, and is only a heartbeat away from the Prime Minister 

himself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are concerned in Saskatchewan that the federal 

government, if re-elected and in the absence of this becoming 

an issue, may want to exert pressure on some provinces to 

extend the harmonization that has taken place in Maritime 

provinces with their individual sales taxes with the goods and 

services tax, to provide for one what is now called in those 

provinces an HST, or harmonized sales tax. And to prevent any  

  



1222  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

further confusion, I say that we should make it clear where it is 

that we stand. 

 

And let me just say very briefly, Mr. Speaker, that when it 

comes to the NDP there is absolutely no question where it is 

that the NDP in Saskatchewan stands when it comes to the 

concept of harmonization. My colleague — when it was first 

introduced by the Devine government — my colleague, the 

member for Regina Northeast, made it very clear. He used 

words in . . . his first words in response to the Bill put before 

this legislature, put before this legislature to harmonize, to 

harmonize the provincial sales tax with the GST, his first words 

were shock, disbelief, and then anger — real anger. 

 

I think that summarized the NDP position fairly well. It’s not a 

matter of just simply opposition. I would say that our position 

was more one of unrestrained hostility, Mr. Speaker — 

unrestrained hostility when it comes to harmonization. 

 

And I might point out that our very first act as a government, 

our very first act as a government was to get rid of 

harmonization to the extent that it had taken place in 

Saskatchewan; to do away, where it had been implemented, 

where — I believe it was the case of restaurant meals — where 

we said, it’s gone and it was gone. 

 

I don’t think that this is something that many people remember, 

but the first act of an NDP government in 1991 was to stop 

harmonization, to get rid of it, and to provide for a very large 

tax cut in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1600) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Now let me just summarize our 

position. We didn’t like it when we were in opposition and we 

don’t like it now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I call upon the provincial Liberals to 

indicate where they stand. Apparently their leader is on record 

as saying that he favours, personally, the harmonization of the 

provincial sales tax with the goods and services tax. Would they 

now please get up and explain where it is that they stand. Why 

it is that they feel that they need to impose such a large charge 

on consumers? 

 

And make no mistake about this — this is a very large charge 

on consumers, Mr. Speaker. As an example, I received here my 

renewal notice for Canadian Geographic magazine. They said 

one year — one year — $24.95, GST included. And then it 

says, residents of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, 

pay 26.82, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So make no mistake — make no mistake — harmonization 

means increased costs for Saskatchewan people, major 

increased costs for the Saskatchewan people. And the people 

who get the benefit are big business — make no mistake about 

it. 

 

I think your time has come — your time has come — to make it  

crystal clear for Saskatchewan people where it is that you stand, 

Mr. Speaker. And I invite them to do that at the next 

opportunity we debate this matter. 

 

And at this point I would move that we adjourn debate from this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I’m afraid I’m going to have to rule the 

member’s motion out of order. He’s not moved the motion and 

we can’t adjourn debate when we don’t have one. 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, I am delighted . . . 

 

The Speaker:  No, the hon. member for Regina Victoria is 

correct. Having spoken to it, only he is eligible to move it. And 

he may want to move it before he adjourns it. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I get the 

distinct pressure of time here. I don’t know where it’s coming 

from but I would move, seconded by my colleague, the member 

for Regina Coronation Park: 

 

That this Assembly affirm its continuing opposition to 

harmonization of the provincial education and health tax 

with the federal goods and service tax, as first proposed by 

the federal Conservatives and later implemented by the 

federal Liberal government in some parts of Canada. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, there is much 

more to be said on this topic than there is time in which to say 

it. But what our intention of the House is, is after consultation 

with the members of the third party and the opposition party, is 

to at this time move to Bill No. 220. And at 4:30 we will, as our 

intention to, move to Bill No. 225. And just before 5 o’clock I 

will also be asking leave of the Assembly to move to 

government business. 

 

Therefore to expedite that, Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on 

this motion now be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, and I will request leave of the 

Assembly to move directly to item 14, Bill No. 220, The 

Shortline Railway Successor Rights Suspension Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 220 — The Shortline Railway 

Successor Rights Suspension Act 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the government members for allowing the Bill to go forward  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

into second reading; but one has to wonder why they’ve 

allowed this to go forward. And I think it’s becoming evident to 

themselves that with the amount of public pressure — the 

public pressure that is being put on that government and by the 

pressure put on by the official opposition — that they know full 

well that they have got to deal with some of these transportation 

issues. It is no good to sit on your hands any longer and say 

some of the problems out there don’t exist. They do exist and 

it’s time to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this Bill was brought forward, like other 

Bills, I mean they . . . there’s usually a very good reason for 

doing so. The reasons for this Bill, dealing with the suspension 

of successor rights on collective bargaining agreements, is 

really I guess . . . well there’s a number of reasons. And the first 

is that the existing agreements, collective bargaining 

agreements, that would follow from CNCP (Canadian National 

and Canadian Pacific) to the new short-line operators are just 

too restrictive. 

 

Some of the . . . I guess the problem that would arise for the 

new operators is just the environment that they’re going to be 

faced with, the environment out there to remain competitive in 

the province, competitive against trucking. And as we know, 

the trucking rates are low but they’ll be low only for a certain 

amount of time. 

 

So there has to be some flexibility given, some flexibility given 

to create this competitive environment for new short-line 

operators. And some of the examples that I’ve used before in 

the House, Mr. Speaker, are flexibility to allow for engineers to 

do work or repair work on perhaps some of the cars. You know, 

flexibility to allow perhaps the flagman to do track repairs. 

That’s the environment that you’re faced with in Saskatchewan 

today. The fact of the matter is they’re not going to be able to 

afford to have a short-line operation if the restrictions on the 

short-line operator aren’t going to allow and give this kind of 

latitude. 

 

And what we’re trying to achieve with this Bill — Bill No. 220 

— is to, I guess, put a common-sense approach to it all, to have 

a win-win-win-win situation come about. 

 

Now the first win of course, would be for, I guess the 

employees. And that would be very evident. Because if we 

don’t make some changes, and if we don’t move and give some 

latitude in this area of transportation, we’re not going to have 

short-lines in the future. And you’ve all received, I guess as 

MLAs, a package not so many days ago — proposed 

branch-line abandonment. And that’s going to be ongoing from 

here on in. And we might as well accept that and deal with it, 

deal with it up front, and ensure that whatever we come out of 

this with is to retain railroad, rail bed. 

 

And so the employees that now work on these lines also accept 

that if in fact we allow this to go the way it’s going without 

becoming involved as a government, there won’t be jobs for 

anyone on any rail because there just won’t be rail lines. There 

won’t be rail bed. It will be ripped up like so many of the rail 

lines have been across the border in Montana. And I ask 

anybody that isn’t sure what it’s going to look like in 10, 15  

years, to take a trip down to perhaps Great Falls and see the 

abandoned lines and where lines used to be, and they’re just 

completely gone. 

 

So of course the employees are going to be winners in this, 

because in all honesty whoever is going to be operating a 

short-line rail is going to need qualified, experienced people to 

operate this rolling stock on the new short-lines. And they’re 

going to . . . I guess to retain them its going to take something 

more than to be paying them minimum wage and absolutely no 

benefits, no employee benefits and no pensions. I mean that 

wouldn’t be an acceptable environment for themselves. 

 

So I heard some of the heckling from across the way that this 

Bill is really union busting, and that’s not the case. And 

obviously he hasn’t read that at all. What we’re dealing with is 

not trying to tear down the unions; what we’re trying to do is 

put some common sense to the collective agreements with 

which they now operate under. And it just brings them back to 

the table, Mr. Speaker. It brings them back to the table to work 

with the new short-line operators to come up with what has got 

to be a common sense approach. 

 

We’re not saying . . . you know, we’re not taking the 

Progressive Conservative approach that they always do, as just, 

you know, rip out the contracts and forget about the employees. 

Because those employees often are our friends and neighbours. 

Let’s be serious about that. But the environment that they have, 

that they work in today, cannot be brought forward and put 

forward to a new short-line operator. It just would not be a 

viable operation. 

 

Another, of course, winner in bringing forward such a Bill is the 

short-line owner/operator, whoever has got to come in and be 

competitive and make a go of it. And there’s a few things that 

have to happen to make this all come about. And the first thing 

is for governments to apply their influence or pressure to the 

CNCP to not have abandonment plans which are in a piecemeal 

fashion. And I’ll probably get into that later if I have enough 

time. 

 

But to go and start tearing down lines in 30-, 40-, 50-mile 

chunks at this time is not going to work. Because those lines 

that are being abandoned today are not profitable. But if you 

took a little bit bigger picture, a little bit bigger area, especially 

if — and I’ll use south-west Saskatchewan as an example, 

where they have abandoned . . . or propose to abandon from Val 

Marie to Consul — well that line is not going to be viable for a 

short-line operator, but if you included back all the way up to 

Assiniboia, then it would be a viable operation for a short-line 

operator. But it’s got to be in that full, regional chunk, and 

that’s the only way we’re going to be able to have a shot at 

getting some of these operators to come in and take a look at it. 

 

So I think the short-line owner/operator is going to be in a much 

better position to remain viable and be able to respond to 

whatever change . . . And who knows what’s going to come 

about in the next 10 years, or even perhaps three or four years. 

 

And another winner, the third winner, a very important one, is  

  



1224  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

the farmer, the producer. And they’re going to be winners 

because they’re going to be able to continue to have access to 

branch lines, the branch lines that they now have access to, and, 

you know, that’s going to carry their product. 

 

And it shows itself, I think, very clearly at this point, this year, 

this spring, with all the flooding that’s going on. And we know 

full well, with road bans and the bridges washed out and the 

roads washed out, that it’s . . . well they’re unable to move the 

grain. And one thing about the rail beds is that given their 

present condition, they need little to no repair, and they’ll last 

some 50 to 60 years in this state. And we know full well that the 

highways won’t last two to three weeks if you were to start to 

put the amount of truck traffic onto these highways that these 

abandonment plans would do. 

 

So of course the farmers, the producers, are winners and also 

the public are winners. Because let’s take a look at where we’re 

at today with our highway and road situation. We’ve got rural 

municipal governments that are being cut back. I think that it 

was another $12 million of cut-back this year alone. But the 

state of our highways — and we’ve raised this many, many 

times in this legislature — the state of our highways are in a 

deplorable condition. 

 

There is no way, there is no way that our highways could be 

brought up to the condition needed for that bed to be in a 

condition to handle the kind of truck traffic — heavy hauling 

traffic — that would be required. It can’t keep up with the 

branch line abandonment plans. So something has got to come 

about. There is no way in the next 10 or 15 years that they 

would be able to bring it up to speed. 

 

So of course the public, they’re the ones that would be footing 

that bill, redoing the highways or grid roads or wherever this is 

going to go. And I think probably the government has a good 

idea that they’re hoping it will go back to gravel, many of the 

highways go back to gravel. 

 

And it’s showing itself in some of these highways such as 

Highway 18 where they just refuse to fix it and have the people 

themselves in those areas finally throw their hands up and say, 

you know really, I guess it’s better to have gravel than to have a 

highway that you just can’t travel on. 

 

So there we really have four winners in all of this, Mr. Speaker. 

And really, where are the losers? I mean the government knows 

full well that at some point they are going to have to deal with 

it. You might as well allow this to go beyond second reading. 

Bring it back again; let’s deal with it. You should get out there 

and find out if you can find people that are opposed to it. 

 

Now I know the member that was heckling awhile ago is 

probably thinking that some of the unions are going to be 

opposed to it. But have you asked them? Have you sat with 

them and asked if in fact they’re going to view this in a 

common sense fashion the same way that the farmers want to? 

Really they all want to be out there working, using a system, 

and doing it in a common sense way. We’re all taxpayers of this 

province. And hopefully that’s where it’ll end up, Mr. Speaker. 

(1615) 

 

If we don’t do it that way, if we don’t do it that way, I guess the 

question is can the Government of Saskatchewan afford the 

alternative? Absolutely not. They just can’t . . . they can’t go 

down that road. They’re not keeping up with the highways 

today. They say the highways today . . . they’re not repairing 

them fast enough even with light loads with cars and half-tons. 

So there’s no way that you can start to put heavier traffic on any 

of these roads. 

 

If we take a look at an area of the province that is really affected 

with this latest round of cuts, that being south-west 

Saskatchewan, and take a look, as I had said earlier — and I’ve 

brought a map, Mr. Speaker, just to highlight this fact — if we 

take a look at what’s going to happen in this entire south-west 

part of the province where there is no transportation alternative 

really — or competition — in railroading and we also take a 

look at the state of the highways in that part of the province, we 

can’t just say we’re not going to do anything. It can’t be one 

large, extremely large grasslands park because people aren’t 

going to tolerate it. And I hear that is perhaps where this 

government would like to go with it. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will only ask and encourage the 

government members to please consider having this go one step 

further. I know by you allowing it to go this far today is an 

admission that you know it’s got to be dealt with and that it’s an 

admission that you have sat on your hands and done nothing. So 

let’s see if we can’t take it to that next step. 

 

I move second reading, Mr. Speaker, of an Act respecting the 

Suspension of Successor Rights in relation to the Acquisition of 

Shortline Railroads and to amend The Trade Union Act in 

consequence thereof, Bill No. 220. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

in support of this Bill. I think it is an important one that touches 

on the future of this province. We all know the challenges that 

will face us as a result of changes to our rail line transportation. 

 

We know that branch lines in this province are facing new 

challenges, and we are concerned that as the major rail 

companies no longer operate the branch lines that many of our 

communities and our farmers will be left with no service at all 

unless short-line rail companies, either cooperative or private, 

can be encouraged to operate these short-lines and to keep open 

the grain delivery points in these communities. 

 

This is an issue, Mr. Speaker, which primarily affects our 

farmers of course, but it really affects everyone. In the case of 

our small towns, we have villages in this province which 60 per 

cent of their property tax base is provided by the railroads and 

the grain delivery points. If those are taken out, I fear that 

many, many of our villages will become non-viable in terms of 

their tax base. 

 

So it’s certainly of grave concern to our small villages and, I 

think, to all of us that quite frankly those of us who are 

non-farmers the last thing in the world we want are large semis 

on our highways and roads delivering the wheat. We would  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

prefer that as much traffic as possible remain on the rails and 

off of our roads. 

 

So in that sense, Mr. Speaker, I think this is an issue which 

affects each and every one of us whether we are farmers or not, 

whether we are rural or not. It is to our advantage to keep as 

many of the branch lines open as possible, and it is likewise to 

the advantage of all of us to keep as much traffic on the rail 

beds as possible and off of our crumbling road system. 

 

I would like to just briefly though talk about successor rights, 

Mr. Speaker. And like the member for Wood River, I would 

like to emphasize that the Liberal opposition in general supports 

successor rights. Indeed I would go so far as to say that were 

successor rights to be abolished, it would lead to chaos in 

industrial relations. 

 

We cannot have a system in which any party to a collective 

agreement can simply set up another corporation, transfer the 

assets to that corporation, and the collective agreement isn’t 

there. That would be absolute chaos in the collective agreement 

process if that happened. 

 

So all we are saying is that in the case of short line railways we 

are very, very afraid that if the existing railway collective 

agreements concerning, say, transfer of responsibilities are in 

place, it would in effect make short-line railroads impossible to 

operate. So we wish it to be known that our comments on 

successor rights are restricted to the issue of our short-line 

railroads. 

 

And I say our fear is that short-line railroads will simply not be 

viable, not be able to operate if the existing collective 

agreements with CN (Canadian National) and CP (Canadian 

Pacific) have to be enforced forbidding an employee in one area 

from performing a task in another area and all of the other 

related parts of existing collective agreements. We know that 

the short-line railroads will have staff who tend to be, pardon 

the phrase, jacks of all trade as opposed to the highly 

specialized workforces that the large railway companies have. 

 

So we think that successor rights are a major issue in terms of 

whether or not short-line railways will be viable for the small 

branch lines in rural Saskatchewan, and therefore we are raising 

this issue — it’s an issue for short line-railroads. We are 

certainly not attacking the principle of successor rights 

generally, and I wish to have that placed on the record. 

 

Now in my own constituency, we have the Turtleford branch 

line and it goes through the community of Meota, and at 

present, that is a protected line to the year 2000. But I know 

there is great concern as to what the long-term future of that line 

will be as we see major grain terminals now being developed in 

the North Battleford area. 

 

We’re grateful that the major grain companies are establishing 

at North Battleford and we are pleased with the commitment of 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and other groups. But we are, all 

of us, concerned about the possible loss of service to rural 

Saskatchewan. We want as much as possible to preserve the 

infrastructure which will hold together our small towns, which  

will keep traffic on the railroads and off of our roads. And it 

need hardly to be said, Mr. Speaker, that our roads are in bad 

enough shape as it is without pushing more traffic on to them. 

 

I congratulate the member for Wood River. I think that his 

suggestion is a sensible one. It is a limited one simply intended 

to facilitate the development of short-line rail companies to 

operate any branch lines that may be abandoned to try and 

preserve something. And I would say to any union member who 

may be concerned about this, who may be concerned about this 

and our stand, that maybe successor rights will not apply to the 

short-line rail companies. I would say to them that it will 

preserve jobs for railway workers; jobs that may otherwise 

simply disappear completely. 

 

And so far from being an attack on working people, this is an 

attempt also to save jobs for working people in rural 

Saskatchewan rather than to simply throw up our hands and 

watch the railway disappear, the jobs disappear, the traffic go 

on to our roads, and ultimately many of our little villages also 

disappear. 

 

So this is a way of strengthening rural Saskatchewan. It is a way 

of strengthening the economy. It is a way of preserving our 

roads. 

 

I would encourage all members of this House, both on this side 

and friends opposite, to join in this positive move to try and 

preserve the infrastructure of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I would 

like to point out to the House that this particular problem that 

we are facing with short-line abandonment is a change of 

federal policy. And the odd thing that I find about it is that the 

solution that is being presented is a solution that is similar to the 

solution that was presented in regards to the voting time in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Caused by a problem with the federal government not 

recognizing where the province of Saskatchewan is, and 

thereafter, the suggestion that comes out is that you change 

some policy in the province. In the case of time, change to a fast 

time rather than what’s been working for some 20 years in this 

province or more. Change that. Change that and solve the 

problem that the federal government generated because they 

don’t understand what they’re doing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are doing the same 

thing in regards to rail line abandonment. This is simply a 

policy of the federal Liberal government’s offloading, onto the 

province and the people of Saskatchewan, the responsibility that 

the federal government has maintained for a number of years — 

in fact for almost a hundred years, I would think — which is the 

rail transportation. And they’ve offloaded that onto the backs of 

the provinces and therefore, onto the backs of the farm 

community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to take very much time because 

I think I’ve covered the items that I want to. But I’m going to  

  



1226  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

recommend to the members of this Assembly that they defeat 

this Bill and not accept the concept of picking up behind the 

federal Liberal government every time they make an error. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I’m going to ask leave, Mr. Speaker, that we 

now proceed directly to item 19, Bill 225, The Municipalities 

VLT Commitment Act, which falls under second . . . which is 

also a second reading under private members’ public Bills. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Bill No. 225 — The Municipalities VLT Commitment Act 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 

pleasure to stand up and give a second reading speech on my 

private members’ Bill. This doesn’t happen in this House very 

often, Mr. Speaker, so I appreciate that particular opportunity. 

 

The Bill, for those people that have looked at it, will realize it’s 

not a very lengthy Bill. It doesn’t need a lawyer to interpret it 

and that’s because the problem is simple, and the solution is 

simple as well. 

 

It’s a simple, succinct Bill that will do wonders for each and 

every municipality in Saskatchewan. And I don’t think there’s a 

single municipality in Saskatchewan that wouldn’t support this, 

with the probable exception of a municipality that might have 

an MP (Member of Parliament) or an MLA sitting in the House 

here today, and that would be on the government side. 

Everyone else would support this particular Bill. 

 

All it does is simply hold the government across the way to 

their promise. And they made the promise and everybody in 

Saskatchewan knows exactly what it was and what it said. It 

wasn’t very long ago that the Leader-Post, January 28, 1995 

read: “Towns to get some VLT cash.” The first line of the 

article states, and I quote: “The NDP government is going to 

give 10 per cent of VLT revenues to the municipalities.” 

 

(1630) 

 

I notice it’s important to say they’ll give it to the municipalities, 

not sprinkle it through their other funds, as they’re trying to do. 

This was back when the present SaskPower minister was the 

minister responsible for Gaming, and that in itself was a 

gamble. 

 

Former Municipal Government minister, Carol Carson, said 

much the same. She was excited to announce, as the January 27 

Star-Phoenix of ’95 states: 

 

The final step . . . (there’s something awesome about that) 

The final step of a three-part plan to compensate lotteries, 

charities and communities for revenue lost to  

government-run video lottery terminals. 

 

Of course the final step of the three-part plan, Mr. Speaker, as 

all of us knows, was the government’s commitment to give 10 

per cent of VLT revenues to the municipalities. Unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite somehow forgot that 

promise. It actually sounds like they’re ignoring it. I’m sure 

when they go back home to their constituencies there’s a few 

reeves and people who are on RM councils, town councils, and 

mayors who nudge their memories a little bit. So I doubt it’s 

forgotten. I think it’s being ignored. 

 

Instead of giving municipalities a 10 per cent revenue, which 

this year would mean 16.5 million — that’s $16.5 million — 

the NDP are saying, well we’ll put some money into 

municipalities through expanding the 911 service. Well they 

should be doing that without stealing it from the municipalities 

and other programs. They dribble it in there and think that’s the 

answer to a promise. 

 

What are they saying? That they didn’t make the promise in the 

first place? That when the Premier spoke to the delegates at the 

SUMA convention, that they misunderstood his promise, and 

all the rest of the people in Saskatchewan misunderstood it? I 

doubt it. That other promise that would provide 10 per cent of 

VLT revenues to municipalities — don’t fund other programs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, whether the NDP chose to acknowledge 

their promise or claim to have never made it, each and every 

one of the people across the way know the exact truth on this 

issue. 

 

SUMA and SARM were led to believe that a small portion of 

VLT revenues that are sucked out of the cities, towns, and 

villages across the province would be handed back to local 

governments. Everyone in SUMA knows that, everyone in 

SARM knows that, and everyone across the House knows it but 

they’re not doing anything about it. They’re ignoring it. They 

haven’t forgotten it. It’s awful quiet over there for people 

who’ve forgotten this promise, or so they say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a lot of money to 

municipalities who’ve had their funding cut by 20 million this 

fiscal year, in addition to the over 17 million taken out of 

revenue-sharing grants through the changing of health and 

social services levy. Yes, the NDP did away with the levy, but 

they did so by reducing revenue sharing. That’s not what the 

municipalities were asking for, and everyone knows it. They 

never saw the levy. They just had that removed from them in 

the end, both ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to give you a few examples of just how 

much money is being taken from local communities and placed 

in the pockets of the government where it seems to be gone for 

ever. 

 

We did a little comparison of the amount of money taken out of 

communities on an average, per capita basis compared to the 

amount of money these communities received through revenue 

sharing. 

 

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

We’ll take my home town of Rosthern for an example — 

$249,600 taken out through VLTs, just about exactly a quarter 

of a million; $106,433 is the amount Rosthern receives in 

revenue sharing. Where’s the difference? Gone. The difference 

is gone. Estevan — Estevan, almost three-quarter of a million 

dollars, $731,520, taken out versus $277,753 in revenue 

sharing. And where’s the difference, Mr. Speaker? It’s gone. 

It’s gone. Estevan lost the money. Surely someone here is to 

support Estevan as they lost that money. Almost half a million 

dollars —Estevan, you lost it. Where is it? Ask someone. 

 

Prince Albert, $29.77 million taken out. And what did they get 

back? Did they get back 29 million? They got back 11 million. 

And where’s the difference again? Gone. And the keyword here 

is “gone.” It never comes back. We’re talking about a lot of 

money, Mr. Speaker, to small towns and villages that have had 

to maintain their services in spite of the cuts that kept coming, 

one after another — offloading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a promise that the government 

side of this House made — a promise they’re ignoring. Because 

they’re not forgetting it. They’re thinking about it right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know about the federal Liberals and their 

cut-backs to Saskatchewan and that’s been hard, to back-fill the 

millions and millions of dollars. But, Mr. Speaker, we also 

know the NDP government gave their word that they would be 

providing 10 per cent of VLT monies back to the 

municipalities. And remember it’s gone and it’s not coming 

through. 

 

There is no secret formula, Mr. Speaker. This is not a difficult 

promise to keep. All the NDP across the way have to do is 

follow Manitoba’s example. Manitoba government is providing 

10 per cent of all VLT monies to municipalities on a per capita 

basis. That’s simple, that’s easy; there’s no problems. It’s a 

pretty easy system to put in place. All it takes is that the 

government keeps its word. Don’t ignore it; don’t try to forget 

it; just do it. 

 

It should be noted that the Manitoba government funds many 

other rural promises and programs on top of the 10 per cent 

they give back. They support their local communities and still 

provide the extra 10 per cent VLT revenues on top of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely no different than Mr. Chrétien 

promising to do away with the GST if he were elected prime 

minister. And everybody in Canada knows what happened to 

that promise — ignored or forgotten, we’re not sure — but it 

didn’t happen. We’re paying the GST. 

 

It’s no different than the member from Riversdale promising in 

the leader’s debate, when he was leader of the opposition, that 

he was going to do away with the PST. And it’s alive and well 

and we know it. We know it every time we go in there, 7 per 

cent. He said at midnight — midnight — the night of the 

election the PST would be gone. The only thing that’s gone is 

the money taken out of our communities through the VLTs. 

That’s the only thing that’s gone. 

 

The GST and the PST are still with us and they are alive and  

well. Mr. Speaker, these promises were clear to everyone 

listening. The only difference is our Premier hasn’t had the 

nerve to have one of those town hall meetings and have some of 

the public tell him what they think of his PST being around and 

what they think of the VLT money being taken out and it just 

ends up being gone. 

 

These promises were clear to the general public in 

Saskatchewan, to the media, to everyone except the people who 

made them. This is no different. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be 

giving the second reading speech to legislation that would force 

this government to honour its promises, that would force this 

government to do the right thing. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker:  I think the hon. member may want to move 

the second reading. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move second reading 

of Bill No. 225, An Act to provide for Video Lottery Terminal 

revenue-sharing with Saskatchewan Municipal Governments. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

take a moment to just raise a few further questions regarding 

this motion . . . or this Bill that’s before the Assembly. And I 

trust that all members, at the end of the day, will see that this is 

certainly an important Bill and is worth voting in favour of. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague, the member from 

Rosthern, has indicated, this Bill just addresses an 

announcement that was made by the Premier and by the NDP 

when they went into the last election. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that when they made that 

announcement they were feeling somewhat guilty because they 

knew how much money they had taken out of revenue sharing 

with rural governments or with municipal governments over the 

term 1991 to 1995, and to offset the concern that municipal 

governments had, the Premier and his party and his government 

decided that they had to bring something forward that would 

certainly cause municipal governments or give them a reason to 

believe that the government was listening to the concerns that 

were being raised. 

 

And at that time it was taking the VLT revenues which they 

perceived and could see as being a major influx of income to 

the government and sharing that with local governments. And 

the reason they saw that, Mr. Speaker, was because they felt . . . 

I think there was a little bit of guilt was building up. They were 

seeing that there was a lot of money being siphoned out of 

small communities through the VLTs, and this money as it left 

the communities certainly wasn’t available to those 

communities to provide the services that they would like to 

provide. 

 

And therefore it seemed to be appropriate that they would at 

least give 10 per cent of those VLT revenues back to local 

communities. Now my colleague was talking about the fact — 

and we’ve pointed out a number of communities — where the 

VLT revenues have gone and what they have in revenue sharing 

and the difference. And you have to ask yourself where that 

money is, and the term we’ve used is that money just  

  



1228  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1997 

disappeared, just disappeared in smoke up the chimney; it was 

gone. 

 

And then I believe it was the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain suggested that money is going into health 

and education. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to 

you that while the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain 

suggests it’s going into health and education, come out to my 

riding and tell the people in my riding that that money from the 

VLT revenues is going into health and education when they’re 

closing hospitals, when they’re closing schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the municipal governments, 

even today I believe the Premier stood up and was blaming the 

federal government for the offload and the reduction in revenue 

sharing so that would put the province at a disadvantage in its 

revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years this province and 

this government has put local governments at a disadvantage in 

revenues because of their reduction in revenue sharing. And so 

even as the auditor pointed out in Public Accounts this morning, 

when you take just . . . rather than as the auditor suggested you 

put the gross revenue fund right beside the SFS, what was that 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Summary financial statement. 

 

Mr. Toth:  The summary financial statement. I thank the 

member from Regina South. The summary financial statement. 

If you put them in the same book, Mr. Speaker, then people get 

a better idea of how government is spending its monies. But 

when it isn’t there, when you have to go to one document, then 

to the other, it’s very difficult to determine how monies are 

being expended. And the end result is, Mr. Speaker, we as 

taxpayers continue to pay more and more and are being asked to 

dig into our pockets deeper to provide for the offload that senior 

levels of government are passing onto us. 

 

So while VLTs may be of a concern to a lot of people it would 

seem to me, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the revenues that 

have been generated in this province through the VLT machines 

that are right throughout the province and in small 

communities, it would only be appropriate that local 

governments at least have some benefit . . . be able to provide 

some of the services that are being offloaded, and that they have 

to go back to the tax base. Why not pull it out of some of those 

VLT revenues rather than having to go to the property owner all 

the time. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important Bill. And what this 

Bill does, this Bill indeed addresses a promise made by the 

government for three . . . two and a half years or two years ago 

where they said they would share that revenue. This 

government . . . this Bill certainly does put back into the hands 

of local government some revenues that they are losing that 

they have no control over. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Melville has just  

suggested, it is desperately needed by many small communities, 

many communities who are at this very moment actually 

struggling to exist. 

 

So I want to join with my colleague, the member from 

Rosthern, and offer my support to this Bill. And I invite all 

members of the Assembly to support the member from 

Rosthern in the introduction of this Bill in reaching out and 

showing support for municipal governments across the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 

able to speak on this Bill this afternoon introduced by the 

member for Rosthern. I took a great deal of pleasure listening to 

his speech and talking about where the revenues had gone. And 

all I would note is that in the last election the things that were 

gone were the Tory MLA from Estevan was gone, replaced by a 

New Democrat. The Tory MLA from the Battlefords was gone, 

replaced by a New Democrat. 

 

I would say to the member for Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, he 

should be worried or he might be gone after this next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, on the substantive pieces of 

this Bill, I want to make a couple of very brief comments. 

There’s a couple of technical pieces that are of some concern to 

me within this Bill. 

 

First of all, as the Tory members opposite may or may not 

know, the Gaming Corporation actually doesn’t run the VLT 

system in the province. It’s actually the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, but not to let the facts interfere with a good 

argument. 

 

Secondly, I’m sure that the members would have pointed out, if 

they had had more of a chance to read their Bill, that section 2 

actually provides no mechanism for the payment to be made to 

anybody. So it simply sets aside the money, but there’s no 

mechanism to pay it out to anybody. But those are . . . I can 

only imagine where the money would go, and I won’t ask. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. I’m sure all hon. 

members will want to allow . . . Order. I’m sure all hon. 

members will want to allow the hon. member for Regina South 

to be heard, and all hon. members will be given the appropriate 

opportunity to become involved in the debate. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the member 

from Moosomin will appreciate this comment. I think on this 

particular issue, even the Provincial Auditor and I would agree 

that there is a real problem if you’re paying out $16 million and 

it’s not going to anything in particular. So I just say that this is a 

difficult Act simply in the way it’s worded. 

 

But even, even though I think it’s beyond repair in terms of 

amendments, there’s a couple of other reasons I think members 

should not be supporting this Act. 

 

First of all, it is a bit of a leap of logic to say that the money  

  



April 29, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

that comes from video lottery terminals or from other sources of 

gaming doesn't get returned to the communities. One of the 

reasons the government is involved in it is to ensure both that 

there’s strict regulation, but also to ensure that the money goes 

to public works. The money doesn’t simply sit in an account. 

The money doesn’t certainly accrue to the benefit of any of the 

members in this Assembly. 

 

That money goes back into the communities in the form of 

payments to the health care centres, in terms of payments to the 

schools, to social services, to any number of different things. 

 

And I would also argue from strictly a rural municipality 

standpoint also into the benefit of road grants. It is I think a 

fallacy for the members opposite to be saying that these funds 

do not benefit municipalities, do not benefit our communities, 

because it does exactly that. Not simply a proportion of it, but a 

hundred per cent of this money goes back to supporting the 

communities and the good works of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that these funds do is that they help 

to provide some stability to the government’s finances. And I 

think that this is a fairly important piece to recognize. 

 

I don’t want to belabour this point this afternoon. Obviously 

this Bill is not enactable if only because clause 2 is incoherent 

at best; but even beyond that, I would simply encourage 

members to vote it down on principle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member for Rosthern wishes to 

exercise his right to close debate, and it’s my obligation to 

advise all hon. members that if you wish to enter into the 

debate, you must do so now or you will not have opportunity to 

do so. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think there’s a few 

more things that we need to address, and it seems to me that the 

members opposite haven’t dealt at all with one particular issue, 

and that is the very difficult time that communities, especially 

small town communities in rural Saskatchewan are finding 

themselves in. 

 

They have rinks to run, swimming pools to keep open, and 

roads to pave. They have antiquated water systems, sewer 

systems, these sorts of things. All of that infrastructure is falling 

apart in rural Saskatchewan. They need all the money they can 

possibly get. And here we have a government that’s taking the 

money right out of their pockets and then is dribbling it back in 

strange ways, but keeping most of it, as I said earlier, it’s 

keeping it gone. 

 

I need to make one last comment. One last comment to the fact 

that item no. 2 apparently was somewhat hard for people to 

read. I know the sentence is a little long. It may have references 

to something like O. Henry but maybe they never read O. 

Henry. I could believe that. 

 

But if we take the first four words and start off “There shall be 

paid” and then take about the last six, seven words, it says the  

“municipal governments of Saskatchewan.” Blatantly simple 

for anyone to understand. And I’m . . . unfortunate that the 

members opposite can’t follow that. That may be an indication 

of why they have such a difficult time with taking this money 

and giving it back to the people who actually earned it, and 

whose money it actually is, and that is rural people of rural 

Saskatchewan and the communities and the cities from where 

this money came. 

 

And I would ask that all people on both sides of the House 

support this legislation, and especially the individuals that have 

a history of being councillors and mayors and reeves, because 

they know this is important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 

Assembly to now proceed to government orders, Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 

 

The Chair:  It now being near 5 o’clock, this committee 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. later this same day. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1199 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1199 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1199 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1200 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1200 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1200 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1200 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Students Against Drinking and Driving Awards Banquet 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1200 

 Workforce 2000 Conference 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 

 Pense Theatre Company 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 

 New RCMP North-west Region Headquarters to be in Regina 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1201 

 Beardy’s First Nation Acquires a Hockey Team 

  Johnson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 

 Early Childhood Intervention Week 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 

 Respected Midwife Celebrates 100th Birthday 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 

 Optimists Oratory Contest 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1202 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Health Care Funding 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1203 

 Endangered Spaces Protection 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 

 Northern Highways 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 

 Future of Moose Jaw Airbase 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1205 

 Government Investment in Crown Life 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

 SaskPower’s Proposed Investment in Guyana 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1206 

 Funding for Municipal Governments 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Low Income Family Housing Project 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1208 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1208 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1209 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 222 — The Crown Corporations Accountability Act 



 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1209 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1209 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 4 — Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1209 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1210 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1213 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1216 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1218 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1219 

 Motion No. 5 — Opposition to Tax Harmonization 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1219 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1222 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 220 — The Shortline Railway Successor Rights Suspension Act 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1222 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1224 

  Johnson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1225 

 Bill No. 225 — The Municipalities VLT Commitment Act 

  Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1226, 1229 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1227 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1228 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Women’s Secretariat  Vote 41 

  The Chair................................................................................................................................................................................. 1229 

 


