






















































Hansard: March 07, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 
 March 7, 1997 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions on behalf of parents and employees affected 
by the changes to the regulations of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to recognize the hardship which 
this failure to inform affected parents and employees has 
caused and immediately develop a program to compensate 
all affected by this mistake. 

 
The petition has been signed by citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition as well. The petition of the undersigned 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 

That Saskatchewan taxpayers face an unreasonable high 
overall tax burden; 
 
That Saskatchewan’s 9 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) 
continues to hurt consumers and impose a major barrier to 
business growth and job creation in our province; 
 
And that the 9 per cent PST was a major reason for only 
1,000 new jobs being created in Saskatchewan last year 
compared to 40,000 jobs being created in PST-free 
Alberta. 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 
to 7 per cent in the 1997 budget and table a long-term plan 
for further reductions in the PST in years ahead. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions have been coming in from all over 
the province. This one in particular is from the Preeceville, 
Endeavour areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Hon. 
Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature assembled: the 
petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 

That the provincial government is imposing an $11 tax on 
Saskatchewan hunters to cover all costs of big game crop 
damage; 
 
That the government and all Saskatchewan residents  

benefit from the millions of dollars brought into our 
province through hunting-related activities, approximately 
38 million annually from American tourists visiting 
Saskatchewan alone; therefore it is extremely unfair to 
impose this tax grab solely on hunters. 
 
And further, that adding the big game damage fund licence 
tax on hunters on top of other increased costs to hunting in 
Saskatchewan will encourage hunters to hunt in other 
provinces, such as Manitoba, at roughly half the cost. 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to force 
hunters to pay the entire cost of a big game damage in the 
province of Saskatchewan and instead once again offer big 
game damage coverage through Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come also from across the province — Regina, 
Fort Qu’Appelle, Indian Head, Wadena, Esterhazy, Dubuc, 
Yorkton, Duff, Caron, Spalding, Edenwold, Dysart, Southey, 
Lumsden. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition and I read the following prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 
revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 
levels for municipalities in order to protect the interests of 
property taxpayers. 

 
And these are signed basically by the good people from 
Gainsborough. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled I present the following petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to recognize changes to The 
Labour Standards Act to have classified families who bring 
care-givers into their homes to look after loved ones as 
employers; 
 
That as employers, families are forced to pay minimum 
wage, overtime, vacation pay, statutory holiday pay, 
parental bereavement, and other statutory leave, and pay in 
lieu of notice if wrongfully terminated; 
 
That because of these changes to the Act, agreements 
between Saskatchewan families and their care-givers are 
considered illegal and are superseded by the Act; 
 
That the result of this decision is causing a severe financial 
and emotional hardship on Saskatchewan families, seniors, 
and care-givers all across the province of Saskatchewan; 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

That the exorbitant costs required under the Act are forcing 
single parents to quit their jobs and instead rely on social 
assistance, forcing one parent in two-income households to 
quit their job to make ends meet, parents and seniors to 
cease to employ care-givers and the like; 
 
And that instead of helping Saskatchewan families, this 
law is harming families, increasing unemployment, and 
will in the long run mean additional cost to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers; 
 
Also to recognize the financial reality faced by 
Saskatchewan people and immediately follow the lead of 
other provinces and make an exemption under The Labour 
Standards Act for Saskatchewan parents and seniors . . . 

 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. I 
remind the . . . order — I remind the hon. member that the only 
information to be presented with the petitions is the prayer 
itself, and as I listen, it is sounding to me as though this may be 
debate and not the prayer, although I’m not certain and — 
order, order, order — and I understand that the hon. member of 
Cypress Hills knows the rules and that he will continue if it’s 
part of the prayer but if not, then he will recognize that debate is 
not allowed. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The prayer will 
wind up in one short sentence and that is: 
 

. . . that best for the individual families and not have 
additional costs imposed on that agreement by the 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I present this petition very happily this morning on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, 
the measures to combat child prostitution Act. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, the gambling 
addiction accountability Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 
Bill, the regional telephone district Act. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, the education 
and health tax amendment Act, 1997. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members in the House some 
guests that are located in the opposition gallery as well as the 

Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I’d like to introduce the Leader of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, the president of the Liberal 
Party, Anita Bergman, and a former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who probably needs no introduction to 
most MLAs here. 
 
And also in the gallery are some very special people to me. I’d 
like to introduce my daughter, Lindsay. And thank you very 
much for being with me for these last couple days, and I know 
you enjoyed missing the school. 
 
I’d also like to introduce my wife’s parents, my in-laws from 
Theodore, John and Eleanor Maleschuk. Would you please rise. 
There they are. And a very hard-working CA (constituency 
assistant), Jeff Hryhoriw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to rise and join with the Leader of the Official Opposition 
in welcoming to the Assembly the new Leader of the Liberal 
Party, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, and wish him as much success as I 
can, which he’ll understand and I’m sure all members will 
understand is somewhat limited. But I do want to wish him all 
the best in a very demanding and difficult and important role, 
being a leader of a political party, as he is, in Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to introduce, Mr. Minister, to you and to the 
members of the House, three individuals. First I’d like to 
introduce to the House and ask all members to extend a very 
warm welcome, an individual who’s contributed a great deal to 
the Canadian political life in this nation as leader of the Nova 
Scotia New Democratic Party and currently as the leader of the 
federal New Democratic Party, who is in Saskatchewan and 
visiting this weekend from Nova Scotia, Ms. Alexa 
McDonough over there in the west gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet 
also, begging your indulgence and that of the members of the 
House, I want to introduce two people who are a source of great 
pride for all Saskatchewan people — artistic and cultural 
contributors; one might even use the word leaders, nationally 
and internationally — who are seated in your gallery. 
 
First of all, for his second Governor General’s award-winning 
book, The Englishman’s Boy — I want to underline that I’m not 
his agent — but The Englishman’s Boy, a fantastic novel, Guy 
Vanderhaeghe, and his partner, who is an exceptional painter 
and artist in her own right, Margaret Vanderhaeghe, who are 
sitting in your gallery. These are people who tell things about 
Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan and describe Canada to 
Canadians and describe Canada to the world and seek eternal 
truths in their artistry. And I can tell you that they are really, in 
my judgement, world-class, as acknowledged by the awards 
they’ve taken here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would all members please welcome these two  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

very distinguished Canadians. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to join with the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Premier of Saskatchewan in welcoming Mr. Jim Melenchuk to 
the legislature, the current Leader of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan. We look forward to the exchanges that I’m sure 
we’ll be having over the next number of months leading into 
the next provincial election. 
 
And we would also, Mr. Speaker, want to welcome the federal 
New Democratic leader, Alexa McDonough, here to 
Saskatchewan. I’m sure she’s doing what she can to bolster the 
NDP’s (New Democratic Party) fortunes here in the province, 
sagging fortunes as they are. But truly we’d want to welcome 
both those people to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
you to the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 
three gentlemen in your gallery this morning. One being a very 
hard worker from the south-east part of the province, both in 
the farming community, crop insurance, and now certainly on 
the right side of the issues in Saskatchewan’s Liberal Party, Mr. 
Jeff Bartlam. As well too, a gentleman from my constituency 
and the community of Central Butte, the president of the Arm 
River Liberal Association, Mr. D’Arcy Berger; and a member 
of the executive, his cousin, Mr. Grant Berger. I’d ask the 
Assembly to please give him a warm welcome this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly nine . . . or seven grade 9 students from the 
Saskatoon Christian School and their chaperons, Debbie Black 
and Lynne Bawolin, and we will be meeting for some 
discussion and juice in a few minutes and I would invite all 
members to warmly welcome the students and their chaperons 
from the Saskatoon Christian School here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add the 
voice of my colleagues on behalf of the official opposition to 
also welcome the Leader of the federal New Democratic Party 
to this great province of ours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to the Assembly two very close friends of mine 
who happen to live next door, Celeste and Steve Tully from 
Maidstone. Not only that, Steve had just received an award — 
20 years serving the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) — and both people are community 
people committed to Saskatchewan and I’d like them to stand. 
And please welcome Steve and Celeste to the legislature. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of this Assembly, two people who 
found it very difficult to leave this great south-west and the 
constituency of Swift Current, but they did come. And they are 
farmers out in the Success area and very active in the NDP 
Party in Swift Current. 
 
I’d like to introduce Glen and Sharon Reimer. They’re in your 
gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  I have two more guests I would like to introduce, 
and I don’t know whether . . . I will be very quick with this. I 
would like to introduce a person who works in my office who is 
a very, very hard worker and does most of my work. Cyrstal, I’d 
like you to stand to be introduced. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  And the other person who has meant so much to 
me in my life and has given me all this encouragement — and 
she won’t speak to me for the next month — I’d like to 
introduce my wife, Gay. Gay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — If all members have completed 
introductions, I would like to introduce visiting guests from my 
home constituency of Moose Jaw who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. We have 19 students with the Multicultural 
Council in Moose Jaw who are accompanied today by 
instructors Dean Kush and Monique England. 
 
They’ll be engaged in a tour of the building at 10:30 and will be 
looking forward to an MLA visit at about 11 o’clock. In the 
occasion of the members from Moose Jaw both being unable to 
join with them at 11 o’clock, the hon. member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley has kindly consented to meet with them. 
 
And I would ask all hon. members to welcome these visitors 
from the Multicultural Council in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 8 is 
International Women’s Day, the day when we recognize 
women’s achievements. A just and humane society requires the 
full participation of both men and women in public and private 
life, in business, politics, and all types of organizations. 
 
The United Nations chose tomorrow as the day when we 
recognize that women are, and should be, full and equal 
citizens. Saskatchewan women have a long history of activism. 
They come together out of concerns for social causes, farms, 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

families, and children. They have formed business and 
professional organizations to meet the challenges women face 
in business and in the world. 
 
Farm women like the Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural 
Network work together to address rural concerns like the 
farming economy and services for rural women. Women have 
made strides over the years but there is still many gains to be 
made on the road to full equality. 
 
Women earn about 70 cents for every dollar that a man makes. 
Women are more likely than men to be found in low-paying 
jobs with little opportunity for advancement. Women have 
fought for what should be rightfully theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 8, the day to officially recognize 
women’s accomplishments, our province should be leading the 
way in recognizing women’s achievements every day by 
working steadily to achieve equality without question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
also today to bring to the attention of my colleagues a special 
day that celebrates the achievements and recognizes the 
challenges of women everywhere — International Women’s 
Day. 
 
Women’s economic and social contributions to society are 
tremendous and deserve to be acknowledged and celebrated. In 
Saskatchewan women from a wide variety of backgrounds — 
rural and urban, first nations and Metis, immigrant, and 
disabled women — have worked together to make progress in 
many areas of their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as women we can be proud of how far we’ve 
come. In Saskatchewan, 60 per cent of women are in the paid 
labour force and almost one-third of self-employed persons are 
women. Women hold executive positions and are elected 
members of government, as is evident in this Assembly. 
 
Yet along with the many advances women have made in 
Saskatchewan and around the world, many challenges remain. 
Women are still the primary care-givers of the family and this 
unpaid and often unrecognized work adds to the plight of 
women trying to attain economic and social equality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day, which is tomorrow, 
March 8, provides an opportunity for everyone to reflect on 
where women are today but also to recognize that we must 
continue to travel together along the often difficult but 
challenging road to equality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Women’s Curling Champions 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
take this moment to heap praise on the Canadian women’s 
curling champions, a foursome who have, again, won our hearts 
and the Tournament of Hearts. The Saskatchewan team of skip 

Sandra Schmirler, third Jan Betker, second Joan McCusker, and 
lead Marcia Gudereit continue to make us proud of their curling 
accomplishments. 
 
Three Canadian titles in four years and the only team to hold 
the title three times. And now the possibility of becoming an 
unprecedented three-time world champion is just a few weeks 
away for Sandra and her team in Bern, Switzerland; and they 
have earned a berth in the play-downs to represent Canada at 
the 1998 Winter Olympics in Japan. 
 
Congratulations, ladies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This has 
become something of an annual tradition for me. I am happy 
also once again to congratulate the curling rink of Sandra 
Schmirler — my constituent, Sandra Schmirler, Mr. Speaker — 
and I have to say this just once: Schmirler the Curler. 
 
Sandra and her rink of Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, and Marcia 
Gudereit are simply the best women’s curling rink in Canada 
and soon the world. For any of us living under a rock last week 
and may have missed it, I am congratulating the Schmirler rink 
for winning the Scott Tournament of Hearts in Vancouver on 
Sunday. They won it for the third time. 
 
For we in Saskatchewan the victory was even sweeter because 
they beat a rink from Ontario in the final — a common sense 
victory if there ever was one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, three Canadian women’s 
rinks have won three Canadian championships. None have won 
three world’s championships — not yet. I am confident though 
that I will be standing here again on April 21 to say this has 
occurred. 
 
Until then I know all members will join me in wishing Sandra, 
Jan, Joan, and Marcia all the best as they carry our colours and 
hopes to Bern, Switzerland. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pay Equity for Women 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we celebrate 
International Women’s Day by reviewing the economic and 
social progress we have made and are yet to make, there are two 
points I would like to make. One is cautionary, and one is 
laudatory. 
 
First, the price of freedom, as we are told, is eternal vigilance. 
What is gained can be taken away. So as we celebrate the 
incremental liberation of women, we should remember how 
recent it was, for instance, that we were not legally considered 
persons. 



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

But much more positively, Mr. Speaker, is the progress we’re 
making in Saskatchewan towards pay equity. Equality will be 
even closer to reality when in the workplace there is equal pay 
for work of equal value. 
 
And in 1994 our cabinet decided that executive government and 
the Crowns would lead the way by implementing pay equity 
through the collective bargaining process and that wage 
adjustments would begin after April 1 of 1997. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  We are proud to say that we have followed 
up on those commitments. As responsible employers the 
government has set standards to achieve the goal of equal pay 
for work of equal value. Wage adjustments are to be completed 
within a five-year time frame. 
 
The first organization to implement this change will be the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, to be followed by executive 
government, SaskEnergy, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  It is by such small, incremental steps as 
these that equality will one day be achieved; and by the virtue 
of the structural change — bargained collectively — the results 
maintained. 
 
I am proud to announce these steps today. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to compliment the 
people who continue to make Kinsmen Telemiracle a success: 
the volunteers who work tirelessly, the citizens and businesses 
of this great province for their financial contributions. 
Twenty-one years and more than $40 million raised is an 
accomplishment worth great praise. Congratulations for your 
years of caring and giving. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Success in Maidstone 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to share with the other members of this 
Assembly an illustration of economic success that is occurring 
in the community of Maidstone. This community of less than a 
thousand people is proving that the economic agenda 
established for this province is working. 
 
Stability and growth are key words when describing 
Maidstone’s economy for 1996 and 1997; words that can be 
used to depict Saskatchewan’s economy as well. The 
community experienced broad-based growth throughout its 
many industries and services — from the gas and oil and 

agricultural industries to services and retail industries. 
 
In many ways, Mr. Speaker, Maidstone’s economy is an 
example of our provincial economy and the broad-based growth 
it has been experiencing. The stats today show that 7,000 more 
people are working in February ’97 than were working in 
February ’96 in Saskatchewan. 
 
The maintenance and expansion of existing businesses, as well 
as the establishment of new ones, is not only an 
accomplishment for the community but also a reflection of the 
government’s economic agenda. 
 
Building permits illustrate that growth is occurring. Almost 
$600,000 worth of permits were issued in 1996 and more are 
expected in 1997. 
 
Maidstone is preparing for the future, Mr. Speaker. The 
community is determined to prosper. If 1996 and the beginning 
of 1997 are any example, they are definitely on the right track. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Price Hike 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 
back in session and I wanted to bring to the attention of 
members a fairly important item that has happened here in 
Regina. 
 
For those of us who watch the X-Files regularly on Sunday 
night, we’re all well aware of the wide-ranging impact 
governments can have on our lives. And true to form, the 
federal Finance minister came to Regina on March 4, made a 
big speech, and sure enough, March 5 gas prices went up no 
more than nine cents a litre here in Regina. A coincidence, Mr. 
Speaker? I think not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Reform 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it has 
been a little over one year since the last spring session began in 
this legislature. And this one-year period has underlined one 
fact: that Saskatchewan’s health care system is indeed in crisis. 
 
Just as we did in the last session, Mr. Speaker, the official 
opposition once again bring forth the many and varied concerns 
that people across this province have with our health care 
system. 
 
Today we are also establishing a health care hot-line, Mr. 
Speaker, through which people can share their experiences and 
ideas about the state of health care in this province. And rest 
assured, we will be bringing those issues and thoughts forward 
to this House. 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

Will the Minister of Health explain, Mr. Speaker, what comfort 
can he provide for those people who continue to fall victim, 
who continue to fall through the cracks in our health system, 
and re-ensure them that he will do something to fix the health 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, since the House last sat of 
course there’s been an addition to the Liberal Party, the election 
of the leader, the new Leader of the Liberal Party. And I want to 
tell the House that after he was selected as leader he went on 
record as saying that he’s going to do away with the elected 
health boards in this province, Mr. Speaker, and he’s going to 
go back to 450 health boards, Mr. Speaker, like we had before, 
made up of hand-picked people picked by the Leader of the 
Liberal Party. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party 
has gone on record as saying that he’s going to shut down most 
of the rural hospitals in this province because he’s going to 
adopt the Australian model, Mr. Speaker, which says that there 
will be hospitals in communities of more than a hundred . . . or 
10,000 people. 
 
But most alarming, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what that member 
and that party said in the last session, which is that we should 
spend more on health care, the Leader of the Liberal Party says 
he’s going to cut hundreds of millions of dollars out of our 
health care. And I’d like to know where that member stands on 
that issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really do 
appreciate the minister answering the question. 
 
Let there be no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that health care is the most 
important issue among the people of this province. The latest 
polling provides that public support for this government’s 
directions and changes to health care is falling dramatically. 
Three years ago 49 per cent of Saskatchewan people were 
satisfied with the reform. Two years ago, it slipped to 38 per 
cent. And the latest results show a mere 26 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker — one in four — one in four, Mr. Member. 
 
Can the . . . Mr. Speaker, given the fact, given the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s been five years since this government’s faulty 
health care reform process began, the time has come for an 
independent evaluation, not a government study, not a 
government-run evaluation. The Saskatchewan residents 
deserve that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the Minister of Health today stand up in this House and 
give his commitment to the people of this province, the people 
that are suffering from lack of health care services, that he will 
introduce a group to study the effects of health care reform and 
where we haven’t come from since 1991? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to remind anybody 
watching today what that member and the Leader of the Liberal 
Party have to say about health care in this province. We had that 
member in this House last year saying this: “If there are people 
that are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them pay.” 
 
And what he’s talking about, Mr. Speaker, is replacing the 
single-tiered, public medicare system we have with a private 
medicare system. And this goes hand in hand, Mr. Speaker, 
with what the new Leader of the Liberal Party — who, by the 
way, is on the payroll of the Liberal caucus — has to say about 
the issue, Mr. Speaker, because what he says, November 27, 
1996 in the Leader-Post is — private clinics — “I don’t have a 
problem with that.” 
 
That’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. So at least there’s some 
consistency between the member from Arm River and the 
Leader of the Liberal Party. They stand for private, for-profit 
medicine, Mr. Speaker. We stand for medicare. That’s the 
difference between those members and these members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Crime 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 
been extremely disturbed this week. For the second consecutive 
day, Regina police were forced to fire shots to apprehend a 
vehicle taken by teenagers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are doing now is not working. The 
people of Saskatchewan are demanding action. We have young 
offender laws to rehabilitate and to punish, but at present they 
appear to be doing neither. The administration of those laws is 
of course a provincial responsibility. Saskatchewan already has 
the highest percentage of youth incarceration of any jurisdiction 
in North America and yet youth programs are sorely lacking, 
and child poverty is the second highest in Canada. 
 
Will the Minister of Justice explain what he is going to do to 
finally acknowledge the problem of youth crime, and to live up 
to his obligation to ensure safety in this province and redirect 
the lives of our problem youth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
new member from North Battleford for his question and I’d like 
to also welcome him here to the legislature. I look forward to 
many fruitful discussions. 
 
The question that we have today is of great concern to our 
government and to me personally. We know that there’s been a 
rash of reports of the various issues involving young offenders 
and young adults. We’re concerned about that; we’re concerned 
about the public. What we are doing is, we’re taking this very 
seriously. 
 
We are working to support the police forces, who are doing a 
good job in a tough situation. We’re also working together with  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

the Hot Cars program that is brought into the province with the 
assistance of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
We’re also working on a integrated approach to deal with those 
offenders who have been identified as the people who are very 
much a problem. 
 
What I would say today is that we have to remember very 
clearly that the Young Offenders Act is a federal Liberal 
responsibility and we would ask that you do everything you can 
to work with Mr. Rock and Mr. Chrétien. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the Minister of 
Justice acknowledges that we do have a problem, even if he 
seems to be reluctant to acknowledge that the administration of 
our youth centres, the hiring of our youth workers, and youth 
programing, and the administration of the Young Offenders Act 
is a provincial responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Now that he has acknowledged that our youth 
programs are failing, I would like to ask the hon. minister if he 
will endorse my call at the conclusion of question period for an 
emergency debate into how we will handle the problems of 
disadvantaged youth in this province and the problems of youth 
crime. 
 
Will the minister indicate if he considers the situation 
sufficiently grave to support my call for an emergency debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you again for the question. This 
situation in Regina and in Saskatchewan is something that we 
have been working very carefully with, with the police and with 
other people within the justice system. And it is something 
where we need to work together. 
 
One of the clear messages, and one of the clear difficulties, is 
that when we went to Fredericton last week to the ministers of 
Justice meeting to talk about young offenders legislation and all 
of the ancillary services related to young offenders, it was clear 
that this was federal legislation that pushed a lot of costs onto 
the province. And the sharing from the federal government has 
not been the way that it should have been. 
 
And we would very much appreciate assistance from our 
colleagues across the floor as they work with their federal 
counterparts to address a number of these issues. We in 
Saskatchewan will be working and continue to work with all of 
the people throughout Saskatchewan to solve these problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
latest employment figures which were released today are the 
first positive sign on the Saskatchewan job front for some time. 

And these are in spite of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And these are in spite of, not because of, 
the so-called job strategy of this government. Mr. Speaker, 
these numbers pale in comparison to what is happening in the 
other prairie provinces. 
 
In the last month 18,000 new jobs were created in Manitoba 
and 31,000 new jobs were created in Alberta. When will the 
Minister of Economic Development realize that his 
government’s failure to provide jobs and hope for our young 
people is a contributing factor to the youth crime epidemic 
we’re now experiencing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
respond to the member opposite and thank him for the question, 
seeing that the stats that came out from the federal . . . 
(inaudible) . . . show that there are 7,000 more people working 
in February of ’97 than in ’96. And I want to say to the member 
opposite that that is a good record for the business community 
in Saskatchewan given the kind of winter that we’re enduring. 
 
I’m also curious . . . and I expected this question from the 
member from Kindersley because the comparison with 
Conservative provinces stands in contrast to the Liberal 
provinces; that I would have expected this member to compare 
himself to, i.e., Newfoundland with an unemployment rate of 
20.9 per cent; P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) at 20 per cent; 
Nova Scotia, 14 per cent; and New Brunswick, an increase of 2 
per cent over last year in Liberal New Brunswick. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, the lowest unemployment in 
Canada isn’t good enough. We’re going to work even harder 
and we have said we’re going to work harder. But for that 
member to say that their job numbers in Liberal provinces are 
anything to crow about needs to check the record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Crime 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, it’s time 
to take off the blinders. How can you possibly say that car theft 
is not a common occurrence and that it’s being blown out of 
proportion by the media? 
 
For the past year now, Regina has averaged over 10 car thefts a 
day. In the past couple of days over 70 vehicles were stolen. 
Shots were fired in two separate incidents. The public doesn’t 
feel safe. The police do not feel safe. In fact the only people 
who don’t seem to be afraid are the criminals who are out there 
stealing cars and taunting the police. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week you met with Canada’s Justice ministers 
from across the country and discussed the Young Offenders 
Act, and indeed it is an area of federal jurisdiction. 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

But what specific recommendations did you bring to the table to 
deal with this growing epidemic of car thefts in Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the Leader of the Third 
Party for the question. The specific issues that relate to car theft 
are part of many offences that come under the Young Offenders 
Act. And one of the things that was discussed very clearly at the 
federal ministers’ meeting related to the fact that the Young 
Offenders Act does not have the same kind of flexibility in 
dealing with offenders as some of the other Criminal Code 
provisions and some of the other sentencing provisions. 
 
But I think the most important thing is to remember that in 
Regina we have a chief of police, we have a mayor, we have a 
justice system that are very concerned about this issue, and we 
are working together with them to identify those people who are 
the source of many of the problems. 
 
And I think you quite correctly identified that a big issue is fear 
in the communities. And clearly, one of the ways that we can 
deal with that is to all work together to resolve this problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, some of 
the minister’s comments on this issue have been absolutely 
incredible. Yes we have a chief of police here in Regina and yes 
we have a mayor; what we don’t have is a Minister of Justice 
prepared to do anything on the issue. 
 
The minister says we should all park our cars in a safe place. 
Where’s that, Mr. Minister? Moose Jaw? 
 
The minister says we need more jobs for our young people. 
First of all, many of the people involved in these car thefts are 
14 and 15 years old. They should be in school, Mr. Minister. 
 
And secondly, there are a lot of people who don’t have jobs but 
they don’t go around stealing cars, necessarily. The minister 
says we should work with the police in the community. The 
police in the community are calling for tougher sentences, Mr. 
Minister, but he says — you say — that’s not the answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you standing up for the criminals instead 
of standing up for the police and for the public here in 
Saskatchewan? There’s only one group of people who would 
agree with your comments yesterday, and that’s the car thieves. 
 
Mr. Minister, everyone knows we need . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order, order, order. The hon. member 
is being rather lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go 
immediately to his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, what we need to do is deal with 
this Young Offenders Act and make some recommendations to 
the federal minister, one that includes stricter . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ll ask the hon. member to go 

directly to his question now or I’ll recognize another member; 
to go directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when are 
you going to start working toward the goal of reducing crimes 
in this province; reducing car theft in this province; putting 
forward recommendations like stricter sentences, restitution, 
and public identification of dangerous, repeat offenders? When 
are you going to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the member for what I 
think was a question. But practically, what we are doing in 
Saskatchewan is we are taking this matter very seriously. We 
are taking all matters related to youth crime very seriously. 
 
And I think it’s very telling that the federal committee that was 
working in the House of Commons did not come to 
Saskatchewan, even though we had been assured by the federal 
Liberals that they would come here to hear about our specific 
concerns as it related to youth crime in Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the difficulties for us then is that some of the ideas 
and concerns that we have, we’ve been able to insert them in 
other ways, but it didn’t raise some of the public discussion that 
I’m sure that the Leader of the Third Party would have liked to 
have. 
 
We take this matter very seriously. We are working on this 
problem and we appreciate any ideas and suggestions from that 
side of the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Investment in Guyana 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, you don’t have enough money to cut the PST or 
to fix highways but you managed to find $31 million of 
taxpayers’ money to invest in the poorest country in South 
America. Mr. Minister, Guyana isn’t the most stable country to 
start off with, and yesterday the president of Guyana died. And 
it’s not a laughing matter, as the Liberals seem to indicate. 
 
Mr. Minister, how will the president’s death affect the political 
and economic stability of Guyana and the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ $31 million investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I want to say, beginning and prefacing my remarks, that we all 
sympathize with the family of the president of Guyana and will, 
with the rest of the people of the world, mourn his death. 
 
I want to say with respect to the Guyana project, it would 
require I guess, some understanding of the members of the 
opposition and others, who don’t have a handle on the process 
that has taken place. 



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

SaskPower was involved, as other companies around the world 
were, in a process whereby the Guyanese government asked for 
corporations to come in and put a proposal together with 
respect to the development of an electrical infrastructure. 
SaskPower Commercial — one of the companies that was 
involved in that process — after due diligence, SaskPower 
Commercial was chosen as the corporation to put forth a 
proposal in more detail to the government to determine whether 
or not a contract could be negotiated and an agreement signed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that process is taking place. Subsequent to that, it 
will come before the SaskPower board who will do due 
diligence with respect to the economic return, with respect to 
the possibility and the risk involved. Then a decision will be 
made and passed on . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think 
the minister has a clue about Guyana’s stability. The country is 
facing elections later this year and the leader of the governing 
party has just died. And the main opposition party was 
responsible for nationalizing a number of foreign companies in 
the 1970s, including a Canadian bauxite company. And who’s 
to say it may not happen again. 
 
The U.S. (United States) State Department and groups like 
Amnesty International continue to identify human rights 
violations in Guyana. There continues to be racial tensions. 
Guyana has the lowest per capita GDP (gross domestic product) 
in South America and has ongoing border disputes with 
Surinam and Venezuela. And on top of these problems, Mr. 
Speaker, they now have to deal with Jack Messer. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s probably not a taxpayer in Saskatchewan 
who would invest their own money in Guyana. Why would you 
risk $31 million of taxpayers’ money in such an unstable 
country when it doesn’t even create one job in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Minister, first of all let me 
again state to the member that the 31 million has not been 
committed. There is a proposal that will come before the board 
of SaskPower who will do due diligence. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Minister. The Crown corporations of 
this province have been managed in a more responsible fashion 
since 1991 than was ever the case when the Conservative 
government in this province had the reins and the control of 
those corporations. 
 
I can say to the members that the debt/equity ratio in the 
Crowns have been substantially better since we took power. I 
can say that they have been better managed and I can say that 
the people of this province have been served very well since 
1991 by these corporations. 
 
I would say to the members opposite that, goodness’ sakes, we 
have a government in this province who does due diligence 
with respect to economic development initiatives, unlike that  

administration who squandered billions of dollars on behalf of 
the people of this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s a situation that will never happen 
again in this province because we’ll never see a Tory 
government, and for that matter a Liberal government, for a 
long, long time in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
caucus recently established a pothole patrol hot line. And 
dozens of callers to this line have confirmed one thing. They 
don’t find the sad state of our highway system to be merely an 
inconvenience. They believe that our highways are hazardous 
and pose a very real threat to motorists. 
 
A perfect example is a 20-kilometre section of Highway 19 
between Loreburn and Hawarden which has been virtually a 
sheet of ice this winter and the site of 10 separate roll-overs 
since December. There are so many potholes, so many heaves, 
road crews cannot scrape the ice off the highway. 
 
Will the Minister of Highways explain how his government can 
stand by as Saskatchewan residents become victims of this and 
other hazardous routes which make up the highway system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  First of all I want to take the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank our Highways crews, 
because with the tough winter we’ve had, they’ve done just an 
exceptional job and deserve a lot of credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  About the 1 800 Bump Line, Mr. 
Speaker, I do have some concerns. I guess some of the people 
might take the Liberals seriously, and you know that’s a grave 
mistake, I believe. Some of their concerns might be very 
legitimate concerns, Mr. Speaker, and the department should 
look at those concerns. But if they’re sitting on that member’s 
desk for weeks and weeks, and we don’t get that information, 
some of these people should at least know that the Liberal 
government, the only reason they have this line is to play 
politics with those concerns. So I would think that the member 
should at least have the courtesy to give either the Minister of 
Highways the locations of the concerns and/or to the 
department directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, with no reference to the 
minister’s health problems, I don’t think his heart is in the job. 
 
The level of spending on Highway 19 has seriously dropped 
since the NDP have taken government. In fiscal year ’91-92, the 
maintenance spending on Highway 19 was close to $800,000 
each and every year. By ’93-94 it had fallen to  



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

500,000, and in ’94-95 it was 625,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is clearly underfunding the 
maintenance of Highway 19, and with the amount of accidents 
on this highway, and given the amount of calls that we have 
received on our pothole patrol hot line, it is clear that this road 
has become a serious public safety hazard. 
 
Mr. Minister, what actions will you take today — today — to 
ensure no lives are threatened or lost on Highway 19? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you. To Mr. Speaker, is the 
member from Wood River . . . he’s still here; he’s way over at 
the end of the line; he’s almost bumped — speaking of bumped 
— right off the floor of the House. 
 
But I want to tell the member, I happened to be on a talk show 
with a member last week, Christina Cherneskey, on CJWW. 
And the people that called in were very understandable about 
the financial situations of the province and that we in fact are 
doing a good deal of repair work on the roads with our limited 
resources and considering the number of roads that we have. 
 
But what they couldn’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is the federal 
Liberals downloading on the province, the federal Liberals 
preferring the railways to producers, allowing them to abandon 
rail lines. 
 
Really what the line should be, Mr. Speaker, I think, is 1 800 
Dump, and that would be to dump the federal Liberals from all 
these decisions that are actually affecting the roads and 
affecting the producers of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to obtain a ruling from 
the Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll ask the Leader of the Opposition to put 
your point of order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Yesterday morning, the Lieutenant Governor 
delivered the prorogation speech ending the first session of the 
twenty-third legislature. As I listened to the summary of the 
issues and Bills that were debated and passed in this Assembly, 
I was shocked to hear about the passing of the district services 
Act. After reviewing Hansard this morning, I have confirmed 
that my ears did not deceive me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read one paragraph: 
 

You chose to implement The Service Districts Act which 
provides a new framework for intermunicipal co-operation 
in the delivery of local services. It gives municipalities the 
ability to form a service district to achieve efficiencies  

without restricting or reducing the autonomy or powers of 
individual municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that the district services Act 
died on the order paper, and I would ask for your ruling as to 
whether the information presented is accurate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not entirely sure what the correct approach to this is. The 
member is accurate that the portion of the comments which 
related to the health services district Act were not accurate. It 
may be useful, I think, for Mr. Speaker to simply correct the 
record, ask that the record be corrected. It will be done so. And 
then we’ll get on with this session. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has raised a point of order 
regarding the accuracy of the content of the prorogation speech 
presented by His Honour yesterday, and the Government House 
Leader has acknowledged that there was an error in the content 
of it. 
 
I think the wisest course of action is for the Chair to take notice, 
to take under advisement the comments of the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Government House Leader on this point of 
order. And I will commit to the House that I will bring a ruling 
from the Speaker at the next sitting of the legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 46 on a matter of pressing urgency and 
necessity and ask leave of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker:  The Leader of the Third Party has requested 
leave of the Assembly to present a motion under rule 46. I’ll ask 
the Leader of the Third Party to very, very briefly advise the 
House as to why he feels this matter is a matter of urgent and 
pressing necessity and then to advise the House as to what is the 
nature of the motion he wishes to introduce, and then the House 
shall decide. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan farmers face challenges on what seems like a 
yearly basis, and most recently this one is tragic and very costly. 
Steps must be taken immediately to address the severe backlog 
in the grain handling system here in western Canada. 
 
According to the Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker, the delay will cost 
prairie farmers $65 million; 15 million in demurrage costs 
alone. That number is increasing into the millions each day as 
more than 40 ships await grain shipments at our ports. As Paul 
Baxter, shipping agent in Vancouver, said recently, this is the 
worst we’ve seen. It’s given this port a bad name and hence 
Canada a bad name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that grain shipments are at least one 
month behind gives us a bad name, but more importantly, it 
hurts struggling Saskatchewan farmers with millions of dollars 
in costs they can’t afford. Our farmers need help, Mr. Speaker,  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

and they need it now. 
 
(1100) 
 
I ask leave of the Assembly to discuss immediate and 
appropriate steps that may be taken to address the crisis in the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government’s 
mishandling the grain transportation system and demand 
that the federal government take steps to address the 
current backlog by immediately passing legislation to hold 
the railways and others responsible for the delay; 
monetarily responsible, including the demurrage charges, 
so that all costs incurred by prairie farmers will be 
reimbursed in full; and further, that this Assembly forward 
the transcripts of this debate to Prime Minister Chrétien 
and federal Minister of Agriculture Mr. Goodale. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Grain Transportation Delays 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 
make my remarks relatively brief so that my colleagues on both 
sides of the House can add their input into this issue. I realize 
that we are supposed to be hearing responses to the 
government’s throne speech; however, it is imperative that we 
take the time today to make the federal government know how 
their mishandling of the grain transportation system in Canada 
is hurting Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently there are dozens of ships waiting to be 
loaded with Saskatchewan grain in western Canada while our 
precious grain is sitting in hopper cars on rail sidings and in 
grain elevators and in farmers’ bins across this province. 
What’s worse, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal Liberals have 
done absolutely nothing to deal with this problem. They’ve 
talked about transportation reform for two years, yet there has 
been no meaningful reforms put in place to deal with this 
situation. 
 
It’s one thing for a government to drag its feet, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s an entirely different matter that the foot-dragging is 
literally costing farmers — farmers, Mr. Speaker — millions 
and millions of dollars. Exactly how much are we talking 
about? The Canadian Wheat Board said that there will be about 
a $65 million loss to farmers in the next crop year — $65 
million there. Apparently about $15 million has been lost in 
demurrage costs alone. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, should farmers who work hard to 
produce crops be stuck with the bill because problems have 
resulted with the transportation system? They simply should not 
be the ones paying the cost. 
 
Farmers work hard, Mr. Speaker, they work hard to keep their  

farming operations afloat. They have to deal with floods, with 
drought, with grasshoppers, cutworms, early winters, cool 
summers, hail, and many others, things that are out of their 
control. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s fair and I don’t think the 
farmers of this province feel its fair that they have to pay the 
bill for the backlog in the grain transportation system when 
their part is done, Mr. Speaker, and their crops are ready to go 
to market. Farmers should not have to, once again, suck up the 
costs of millions of dollars while the federal government 
refuses to adequately address this situation. 
 
It’s not like the federal Liberals haven’t received any input or 
any good ideas on the subject, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s just the 
opposite. Ralph Goodale has dragged his feet for the past two 
years while several proposals have been brought to him that 
would provide for a more efficient grain handling system. The 
latest, Mr. Speaker, was just a couple of weeks ago when the 
prairie farm coalition, commodity coalition, brought forward a 
comprehensive and informative plan that would address this 
very situation. 
 
The coalition, Mr. Speaker, is made up of a group of 12 western 
Canadian commodity organizations representing almost every 
grain and oilseed and speciality crop grown in this prairie 
region. 
 
Members of that group include the Saskatchewan Canola 
Growers Association, Western Barley Growers Association, 
Western Producer Car Group, Manitoba Canola Growers 
Association, Alberta Barley Commission, Alberta Canola 
Producers Association, Canadian Canola Growers Association, 
Alberta Winter Wheat Producers Commission, Flax Growers Of 
Western Canada, Western Canadian Wheat Growers 
Association, Alberta Marketing Choices Implementation Group, 
and the Oat Producers of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the objective of the coalition is to promote 
commercial business-like solutions to problems of grain 
handling and transportation and marketing. We’re talking about 
a group of organizations, Mr. Speaker, that obviously know 
how to market commodities world-wide, a group that has a lot 
of buyable, innovative answers for grain transportation 
problems that are plaguing the farmers of this province right 
now. These people have handed, Mr. Speaker, they have handed 
Mr. Goodale some very good ideas that would help alleviate 
this problem on a long-term basis. And we’ve got a copy of this 
submission if anyone would care to look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prairie Farm Commodity Coalition presented 
their report to the federal Minister of Agriculture, Minister 
Goodale, who has done absolutely nothing with it. In fact, 
despite two years of talking about transportation reform, Mr. 
Goodale and the federal Liberal government have made no 
fundamental changes to the grain transportation system for the 
1996-97 crop year. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, new initiatives are needed and they are 
needed now. So it’s not for the federal Liberals . . . it’s not that 
the federal Liberals haven’t received any solutions to this 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

problem, Mr. Speaker. They’ve just decided not to implement 
any solutions and it is at the expense of our farmers here in this 
province and our economy suffers as a result. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, farmers should be paid in full for 
their losses. The federal government should put a mechanism in 
place immediately to ensure prairie producers receive fair 
compensation for the federal government’s mishandling of our 
grain transportation system. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, Minister Goodale, realize that he was elected in 
Saskatchewan and he was elected to do what’s best for the 
farmers of our province and for the farmers of the other 
provinces here in Canada. 
 
Mr. Goodale needs to be reminded of his roots and why he ran 
for politics in the first place. It’s time he took viable, long-term 
steps to ensure that this situation does not happen again in 
Saskatchewan. Our country’s reputation can’t afford it, the 
federal government can’t afford it, our economy can’t afford it; 
but most of all, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province can’t 
afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that all members of the Legislative 
Assembly will do their best for Saskatchewan farmers and 
support this motion. It is important that we deal with this 
matter, Mr. Speaker. The economy of this province . . . the 
farmers are suffering. You talk to any farmer in Saskatchewan 
these days and I don’t think they feel that it is their 
responsibility any longer, once they load cars in this province, 
to have to pay for the backlog in the system that’s going out to 
the west coast. 
 
It is simply wrong Mr. Speaker. It is an area unquestionably a 
federal jurisdiction. Grain car movement, federal rail line 
regulation, is an area that the federal government has to take 
responsibility for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I move, seconded by my colleague from 
Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government’s 
mishandling the grain transportation system and demand 
that the federal government take steps to address the 
current backlog by immediately passing legislation to hold 
the railways and others responsible for the delay; 
monetarily responsible, including for demurrage charges, 
so that all costs incurred by prairie producers will be 
reimbursed in full; and further, that this Assembly forward 
the transcripts of this debate to Prime Minister Chrétien 
and federal Agriculture Minister Goodale. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when I was first elected six years ago, I felt that I had been 
given a mandate to represent the views and the concerns and the 
needs of the rural people of Saskatchewan. And it’s somehow 
appropriate, sadly appropriate, that my first speech in this 
session should be about rural needs. 

Many of you will be familiar with the little line of alliteration of 
mine that has become a favourite of certain members of the 
media. And while I can’t use the Premier’s first name, it goes 
something like, the member from Riversdale’s rural revenge. 
Indeed I can hardly think of another government that has done 
more harm to rural Saskatchewan and the agriculture sector 
than the current provincial NDP. 
 
Nevertheless today we are faced with another piece of 
alliteration, Ralph’s rural revenge. It’s no secret that the rural 
areas of western Canada are not the strongest centres of support 
for the federal Liberals. We should hardly be surprised then that 
what we are now seeing, just how low a priority and well-being 
that agriculture is being given by this federal government. This 
low priority was set when Jean Chrétien appointed a lawyer as 
Agriculture minister instead of a farmer. Can you imagine the 
hue and cry that would have ensued from the lawyers had a 
farmer been appointed Justice minister? 
 
My colleague, the member from Kindersley, has already gone 
over many of the startling facts regarding the current crisis in 
grain transportation — $15 million in demurrage charges 
straight out of farmers’ pockets, $65 million in total losses to 
farmers according to Wheat Board estimates. And I’m sure 
everyone here has a connection to agriculture, who feels that 
these numbers are like a punch in the gut from Mike Tyson. 
 
But it isn’t just the farmers who should be mad about this 
situation. With our provincial economy still largely dependent 
on agriculture, the multiplier effect from these losses is going to 
have grave financial implications on every man, woman, and 
child in this province. 
 
As an example, Mr. Speaker, at the reception after the Speech 
from the Throne yesterday, a farmer told me that FCC (Farm 
Credit Corporation) is hounding them for their land payment. 
And she said they haven’t got the money but their grain bins are 
full. They have the assets but the federal minister in charge of 
FCC, Farm Credit Corporation, also happens to be the federal 
minister in charge of Agriculture Canada, and grain movement. 
So on one hand he’s demanding that farmers make their 
payments to FCC and on the other hand he’s not allowing them 
to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This situation needs to be addressed immediately. Unfortunately 
immediately is not what we are getting from the federal 
government. In spite of having a workable plan in his hands to 
resolve the situation, Agriculture Minister Ralph Goodale has 
done nothing but drag his feet. Which is the usual speed Mr. 
Goodale reacts to things, except in delivering speeches, and 
even there, Mr. Speaker, he seems to be filibustering himself. 
 
But all of this is just so much paper-shuffling and bureaucratic 
bafflegab. All the talk in the world is not going to resolve the 
problem. What we need is action. 
 
What makes the delay in resolving the shipping delays all the 
more noxious is the fact that this is a problem which has been 
plaguing farmers for years, if not decades. The entire concept of 
demurrage, as it is now structured, makes no sense. In a trade  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

transaction, why should the party that has the least impact on 
how quickly the product gets to its destination be the one that is 
held financially responsible for the delays. Any reasonable 
assessment of market forces would lead one to the conclusion 
that you have to penalize the people who caused those delays. 
That is the only way that demurrage can have the intended 
economic effect of ensuring products get to port. 
 
Today it appears to be the railroads themselves that are behind 
the delays. We have all heard more than enough anecdotes 
about train loads of automobiles that are making it swiftly to the 
lots in Ontario while our crops rot in the elevator. 
 
(1115) 
 
But we went through the same basic situation in years past with 
labour difficulties. In 1995, it was the west coast longshoremen. 
In September of 1994, it was the Grain Services Union. In 
January of 1994, it was the longshoremen again, and in 1991 it 
was the double-header from the public services alliance and the 
grain workers’ union. As Leader-Post agricultural economist 
Darcee McMillan said back in 1995: 
 

It seems to some that it’s just one union after another doing 
what they can to undermine farmers. 

 
And here again, I’m sure that we all remember the horror 
stories: farmers forced into bankruptcy, while a $60,000-a-year 
longshoreman squabbled over a few more dollars a month. 
 
Also, I think we all remember in 1995 when the federal NDP 
sided with the Bloc Québécois in supporting those unions. 
Actually, now that I think of it, the provincial NDP were quite 
happy to let farmers pay the demurrage during the grain services 
strike. However, Mr. Speaker, that is all in the past. 
 
What we as an Assembly must now do is put up a united front 
against any and all groups, either business or labour, that would 
try to cripple our provincial economy. In bringing forward this 
motion, our caucus wants to send a strong message that the 
province of Saskatchewan is drawing a line in the sand against 
all those who would put the knife to the throat of our farmers. 
 
By taking the sensible course of placing demurrage and other 
costs on the back of those responsible, a federal government 
would not only be ensuring corporate good citizens on the part 
of the railways, they would also be encouraging labour peace by 
making the grain handling unions take responsibility for the 
damage they cause to people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been greatly encouraged by the level of 
all-party support and cooperation that we seen on this issue, and 
I trust that on this occasion at least, the NDP government will 
see past its ideological blinders and support farmers instead of 
the union bosses for a change. Likewise I hope that our 
colleagues in the Liberal caucus will not let partisanship loyalty 
stop them from making a statement that is in the best interest of 
their rural constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers should not have to pay for the errors or 
actions of others. Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to vote in 

favour of this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
rise and support this motion. I believe that the third party is a 
little behind in their complaints. I want to read to the Assembly 
a news release that I had given a while back: 
 

Highways and Transportation Minister Andy Renaud today 
said Canada’s grain handling and transportation system is 
failing Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
“Saskatchewan grain is sitting in bins on the farm, in 
hopper cars parked on rail sidings, and in grain elevators. It 
is not moving to the port where empty ships wait, . . . “This 
is costing Saskatchewan farmers millions of dollars.” 
 
The federal government introduced new legislation in 1996 
to cover grain handling and transportation. All the prairie 
provinces argued (Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta) at 
that time, that the new Canada Transportation Act favoured 
railways over shippers, (and) didn’t promote competition 
in Canada’s railways, (and) it wasn’t responsive to the 
needs of shippers and that producers would suffer as a 
result of the legislation. 
 
“Saskatchewan fears have come true. Our farmers are 
being financially hurt due to the inability of the federal 
government to deal with the railways,” Renaud said. 
“Under the CTA there is little room for the federal 
government to penalize the railways for their poor 
performance.” 
 
“Saskatchewan is calling on the federal government to 
compensate producers for added costs resulting from the 
delays,” Renaud said. “The federal government and the 
railroads should be held accountable.” 
 
“The railways and the federal government are failing 
Saskatchewan farmers, while the railways are making 
record profits and downsizing their operations. 
 
“The federal government is demonstrating its inability to 
manage the crisis in grain transportation that is facing 
Saskatchewan farmers,” Renaud said. 
 
The federal government is holding a grain industry meeting 
in Calgary on February 13 and the province is calling upon 
the federal minister of Agriculture to immediately address 
the needs of all grain producers, concluded Renaud. 

 
This was dated February 12, Mr. Speaker. And so I want to let 
the third party know that we are on top of this and pushing very 
hard for improvements. We get little reaction, however, from 
the Liberals across the House, and for sure from the federal 
Liberals in Ottawa. 
 
Saskatchewan producers are very important to our province — 
one of our major industries. The economy relies on agriculture.  



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

We have the most productive farmers in the country, in the 
world. They have a reputation with their global customers, 
people that we ship to, because of the high quality of the grain 
that we produce, the high quality of speciality crops that we 
produce, and the reliability of that supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that reputation is being jeopardized by grain 
handling and the transportation system that is failing our 
producers, as I mentioned earlier. The failure of the railways to 
provide adequate service is preventing grain from reaching 
export position, and hurting Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Over 1.5 million tonnes of grain sat on the Prairies, unable to be 
delivered. That would cost farmers. I believe it’s the Canadian 
Wheat Board that estimates about $65 million — over $15 
million, Mr. Speaker, in demurrage charges. That’s the charges 
that the ships will charge. And guess who pays? The farmer, for 
waiting for the grain, their grain, in a situation that they have no 
control over. And that’s not fair. 
 
The other $50 million in costs, of course, is because of the 
permanent loss to prairie producers from grain that will have to 
be sold next year. The problem here, Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned earlier, is the record of Canada with our trading 
partners — the reliability issue. They rely on Canada for that 
good quality grain that we produce and they rely on a speedy 
delivery when they need the product. 
 
But we’re not giving it to our trading partners, Mr. Speaker. 
And will they be there next year? I don’t know. Will they be 
there the year after? I don’t know. Will we lose sales to the 
United States, to Australia, to other producing countries? I 
don’t know. 
 
How many millions of dollars have the producers on branch 
lines had to incur to truck their grain from the branch lines to 
the main lines? Another cost. And what about the additional 
cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers for the added road damage as 
the grain starts to move in the spring when the road bans are 
on? 
 
The federal government, the Liberals, are not concerned about 
that. The railways certainly aren’t concerned about that. But it’s 
going to be the farmers again, it’s going to be taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, who are going to have to fix those 
roads as we move that grain to the main line. 
 
It is time that the federal government and the railroads were 
held accountable. They’re not held accountable. I was reading a 
little article this morning in The Western Producer, March 6: 
“Grain cars wander the countryside.” This is by Joe Pender. 
And he says: “Our Canadian railway system is very inefficient 
and irresponsible, with a don’t-care attitude.” 
 
I’m afraid the federal government is the same thing. It’s a 
don’t-care attitude. They have a meeting in Calgary on February 
13 and they are going to get the grain moving, is what they say. 
Well is it moving? Not very fast. What’s happened? The money 
that the farmer is losing, is there anybody concerned about that? 
I don’t think so. I haven’t heard one word from the Liberals on 
this issue. 

I know they talk about potholes in the highways, which is a 
serious problem. But how about the farmers’ income? How 
about the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan? I know 
you’re not concerned about that and you want to play politics 
with the pothole situation. Why? Because you want to defend 
the federal Liberals, because you’re Liberals as well. And I can 
understand that. 
 
The federal government reduced farm income by over $300 
million a few years ago by eliminating the Crow benefit, and we 
haven’t heard much about that from the members opposite. 
They like to talk about the potholes in the highways — I know 
that — but they have to defend the federal Liberals, you know, 
and they have to protect them because they’re one and the same. 
And I can understand that. 
 
We introduced the Canada Transportation Act. The federal 
Liberals did that last year. Now there’s a Conservative 
government in Alberta and there’s a Conservative government 
in Manitoba and there’s an NDP government in Saskatchewan 
— the best, of course — but what happened? We went to 
Ottawa twice. Once to see the Transportation Committee and 
explain the concerns we had. We went to the Senate committee, 
the Standing Committee on Transportation, and told them about 
our concerns. And where were the Liberals? Nowhere to be 
seen, no help at all. 
 
We made our presentations, we thought we had got a 
reasonable hearing, but it fell on deaf ears again. No concern 
about Saskatchewan, no concern about Alberta, no concern 
about Manitoba, no concern about the farm community. It fell 
on deaf ears and here we are today, grain sitting on the branch 
lines since mid-December and not moving to market. 
 
Today we continue, with our counterparts in Alberta and 
Manitoba, to push the federal government into some action and 
to show them the problems with their new legislation, but we’re 
not being heard. 
 
We argued vigorously that the Canada Transportation Act, Bill 
C-14, is too biased towards the interests of the railroads. It did 
not promote competition in Canada’s railway industry, and it 
wasn’t responsive to the needs of shippers and that producers 
would suffer as a result of this legislation. 
 
But no, didn’t hear anything from the federal Liberals except 
that no, the Bill would go through. Didn’t hear anything from 
the provincial Liberals because, you see, they have to support 
the federal Liberals and they’re one and the same. And so, you 
know, they would rather support the federal Liberals down East 
than the producers from Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba, 
which I find ironic. 
 
In nearly every instance the federal government ignored our 
requests and concerns, and instead of standing up for producers 
and shippers they sided with — guess who — the railways. 
These are the same railways that are now making record profits 
while reducing service in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The federal government told farmers they would benefit from 
these changes through the improved transportation system at a  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

reasonable price. That’s what the Liberals said. In a 1995 
speech to the Institute of Public Administration in Regina, the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, Ralph Goodale, said the 
reforms would, and I quote: 
 

. . . help generate faster, cheaper, and a more efficient 
system, one that delivers on time for farmers at the least 
possible cost, and one in which the cost savings are fully 
and fairly shared among all stakeholders including, most 
especially, farmers themselves. 

 
Well isn’t that interesting. We tried to tell Mr. Goodale that Bill 
C-14 was not going to react in this way, that farmers were going 
to suffer. But no, he convinced the people that it was going to 
be a very good thing. The Liberals, the Saskatchewan Liberals, 
agreed with that. And what do we have? Grain sitting on the 
branch lines, waiting to be delivered to port, farmers with no 
income. Hard time to pay the bills with no income, Mr. 
Speaker. Very difficult time. 
 
I want to remind the Liberals across about what has happened 
since this new federal legislation has come into force. Number 
one, poor performance of grain handling and the transportation 
system. Two, continued deregulation in spite of shippers raising 
concerns with the federal government. 
 
I mean we were not the only people that went to Ottawa to tell 
them of the errors in their ways, about our concerns about Bill 
C-14. Shippers from across the Prairies went in droves. The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was there, other grain companies, to 
tell the federal government, look, we have some concerns with 
this Bill; it’s going to have some effect on us. 
 
But what happened? The Bill was passed. The Senate even 
passed it. And the Conservatives didn’t help much there neither, 
but needless to say it seemed to slip by the Senate as well. And 
we’re . . . one of the reasons we’re not sure if the Senate should 
still be there. We have our concerns about that. 
 
(1130) 
 
I want to speak a little bit about the demurrage costs. You 
know, that’s what the ships are expecting that our farmers 
should pay them while they wait for our grain. Over $15 
million, Mr. Speaker. Over $15 million. The farmer has 
absolutely no say in the system. His grain is either in the 
elevator or in his bin or sitting on a car on some siding 
somewhere in rural Saskatchewan, not moving. And yet he has 
to pay the ships for waiting for his grain. 
 
And what does Mr. Goodale say? We are going to fix the 
system, he says. Well where is he? Where is the compensation 
from the federal government that we’re asking . . . that’s being 
asked for in this motion? Why should the farmers pay that $15 
million? 
 
If Mr. Goodale does not want to straighten out the system, he 
certainly should look after paying that to the farmers and then 
make sure that the system is fixed so that this never happens 
again, so that our trading partners can in fact rely on what they 
expect from Canada — speedy delivery and good quality  

product. 
 
Our reputation, Mr. Speaker, I talked about it earlier. What is it 
going to do to our reputation? Will the other . . . those trading 
partners of ours come back to buy our good quality grain if they 
are scared that it will not be delivered by the railways? I don’t 
know. I’m very concerned, very concerned. 
 
But we have the Liberal Party here, Mr. Speaker, not concerned 
about that. They are concerned about some potholes in the 
roads. I am concerned about those potholes too. But there are 
other issues that we have to deal with, a lot more important 
issues even — the income of farmers, allow them to get ready 
for spring so they’ve got some money in their pockets for seed 
and fertilizer and chemicals. 
 
Our fears of that new legislation have come true, and I can say 
it over and over and over again that I told you so. But did we 
get one letter of support from the provincial Liberals? No, we 
did not. Not one, not one word of support. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, why? That’s because, that’s because they 
are Liberals, you see, and the federal government is Liberal. So 
how can they say that the federal Liberals are doing a bad job? 
They may believe it, but they are never going to say that. 
 
So I guess we will continue to fight on. Saskatchewan farmers 
are paying the price due to the inability of the federal 
government to deal with the railways and that seems okay with 
the Liberals in Saskatchewan. Under the CTA (Canada 
Transportation Act) there is little room for the federal 
government to penalize the railways for any poor performance. 
Why wouldn’t there be a system of reward and penalty? I don’t 
know. I have no idea. 
 
Who will say that this will not happen next year? Will it happen 
next year? I would urge that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 
join with us, join with this motion, and let’s tell Ralph that we 
have a real problem here. We’ve got to fix it so that in fact it 
will never happen again and send a clear message to Mr. 
Goodale. 
 
And I know that you’re Liberal and he’s Liberal, but you have 
to overlook that. You have to put that aside and you have say 
look, yes, do what’s right. You know, even though we’re both 
Liberals, please do what’s right for a change, you know. 
 
The current situation is not working. We need a rail system that 
meets everyone’s needs, including the producers. The system 
must not be just the sole benefit of the railways, just cost 
savings to the railways, without some service there for the 
people that need to use it. We have a bulk commodity. Grain is 
a bulk commodity. We are captive to rail in many cases. And 
the railways know that. 
 
But this Bill certainly, Bill C-14, always did favour the 
railways. It’s set up to favour the railways and not concerned 
about producers and shippers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has not only been the province’s lobbying for 
change, as I mentioned earlier, but the prairie Pools also were  



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

there. The Canadian Wheat Board were there. We asked the 
federal government to intervene but it wasn’t done. Everyone 
was disappointed. Now reality is here. Now we see what’s 
happening, what the Bill really meant. 
 
Railways and grain companies introduced Direct Hit. They’re 
going to get the grain moving, clean up the backlog, they say. 
We’re going to do this till the end of March. The Direct Hit 
program is industry driven and maximizes the grain shipments 
from high through-put elevators located on the main lines. But 
what about the branch lines? What about the lines that are away 
from the main lines? I know the railways would like to abandon 
them as quick as they can. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What are you doing to stop that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The member opposite says, what are you 
doing to stop that? He should know that it’s federal jurisdiction. 
Railways are governed by the federal government. You know, 
and he sits there and he says, what are you going to do, Mr. 
Province? I mean I know he doesn’t want to tell the Liberals in 
Ottawa anything because he’s a Liberal too, and I can 
understand that. I know how he feels. But if they’re making an 
error, he should still tell them. I mean that’s his responsibility. 
Don’t worry about the election. Don’t play politics. Do what’s 
right. 
 
Shippers and producers adjacent to branch lines are the hardest 
hit, of course. They’re going to be . . . (inaudible) . . . in spring 
they’re going to have to try and get their product from their 
branch line, from the elevator out in the country, to the main 
line elevator over Saskatchewan highways and municipal roads. 
And is there any concern there? I don’t think so. 
 
My government is very concerned that when service does return 
to the branch lines — and hopefully that’s soon — that our 
producers will be faced with the road bans, as I mentioned 
earlier, and will be busy trying to get their crops into the 
ground. 
 
Are the federal government, are they even a little bit concerned 
that the province’s road authority will have to pick up that cost, 
and ultimately the citizens of the province? No. Are the federal 
Liberals concerned about rural municipalities having to pick up 
that cost, and ultimately the consumer or the farmer out in the 
country? No. Are the railways concerned? Well, no. 
 
And maybe the federal Liberals are not concerned because they 
want to be friends with the railways. I don’t know why that is, 
but I think as a Liberal, a provincial Liberal caucus, certainly 
you should take this a lot more seriously and demand from Mr. 
Goodale some action very quickly. 
 
I want to speak about what the effect might have on 
unemployment in the provinces. Many of you know we have the 
lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada right now. And in 
comparison to Liberal provinces, Liberal provinces of course, 
have the highest, highest unemployment rate. They have a sad, 
sad record, Mr. Speaker, sad record indeed. 
 
And I don’t know, if this grain doesn’t move and if it sits, what 

affect that will have on our unemployment rate. We don’t want 
it to go up. And I know that the Liberals opposite are not really 
concerned because Liberals in other provinces aren’t very 
concerned with unemployment. 
 
But I’m just concerned that, you know, if the grain sits on those 
lines for a long period of time, that in fact it will have an effect 
on our low unemployment rate. 
 
It’s interesting to note that while the Liberal provinces have 
very high unemployment rates, that the province that has the 
best job growth in all of Canada is — guess where — British 
Columbia. And you know what kind of government they have, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s an NDP government. 
 
And do you know where the lowest unemployment rate is in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker? If you don’t, I’m going to tell you. It’s 
actually Saskatchewan. And you know what government 
governs Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? NDP again. 
 
So I just wanted to let you know that, because we are certainly 
concerned as well that the unemployment rate doesn’t move up 
as the grain is not being delivered. 
 
So I would ask that everyone join with me in urging the federal 
government to fix this backlog situation immediately, to 
compensate producers, road authorities, for costs like the 
demurrage costs and road damage costs. 
 
We need to have the federal government revisit the Canada 
Transportation Act to ensure that this never happens again and 
ensure our trading partners that indeed we are taking 
preventative action that this will never happen again, and that 
you can trust Canada and our delivery of our products to them. 
 
And I know we will not get a lot of support from the Liberal 
opposition. I know that. They don’t understand the situation 
very well. This was very obvious when the member from 
Saltcoats made a statement last week calling on the government 
to establish a two-year moratorium on branch line abandonment 
in Saskatchewan. That was a very interesting comment. The 
system from elevator to port is under federal jurisdiction, Mr. 
Speaker, and I just wanted maybe to let him know that. 
 
But I know he doesn’t want to talk to the federal government 
and tell them what a bad job they’re doing because they’re 
Liberals as well. And I can understand that. But really they’re 
leaders in their community and should take that responsibility 
very seriously — to tell Mr. Goodale and the other Liberals in 
Ottawa even when they’re doing a bad job that, you know, I 
know we’re Liberals and they’re Liberals but you’ve got to do a 
better job. And it’s not that hard to do — you should try it 
sometime. 
 
And I noticed the member from Wood River, he made a 
statement yesterday in the Star-Phoenix or in the Regina 
Leader-Post, I guess. He says perhaps the Premier has the 
ability to influence both the railways and the grain companies to 
stop abandoning rail beds. Well isn’t that interesting, you 
know? 



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

Instead of saying I’m going to convince Mr. Goodale we’ve got 
to stop this abandonment because it’s the federal government 
that has the jurisdiction, what did he say? No, we’re going to 
ask the Premier to intervene. 
 
It’s very hard for me to understand the logic. I think it’s a bit of 
playing politics, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s what it is. I think 
they, you know, they want us to fix the potholes, and I can 
understand that. They want us to stop the abandonment of rail 
lines even though it’s a federal jurisdiction. 
 
You never hear about the offloads from the federal government 
to the province, like the $110 million last year at health and 
education. Haven’t heard a word from them on that at all. Why? 
Because the government in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, is Liberal and 
the opposition across is Liberal, and so they don’t want, you 
know, they don’t want to say that the Liberals in Ottawa are 
doing a bad job. And they support it totally. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale said, oh the federal budget 
was so wonderful that we as a province should follow the 
federal lead on budgets because theirs was so good. It was a 
little . . . we’ll give the provinces a little but we’ll take away a 
whole bunch kind of budget. And the Liberals in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, say, oh what a wonderful federal budget there 
was. It’s very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that I would hope that 
the Liberal government are done with their old ways and will 
stand up and support this motion so we could get this off to Mr. 
Goodale as soon as possible, so something can be done to our 
rail service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t have the 
opportunity to be here to listen to all the comments made as I 
was doing some interviews outside the door here. But what I 
did catch was more than interesting coming from the 
Transportation minister in a province that is so reliant on 
agriculture, the export of agriculture products, the movement of 
grain. 
 
And they’re more than prepared . . . I can accept why the third 
party or Conservative leader would want to just be in here just 
playing politics, but the Minister of Transportation has a job to 
do and part of that job is not just transportation but, as part of 
Executive Council, to ensure that the workings of this province 
are done in a manner that’s beneficial to all. And he shouldn’t 
be playing the kind of politics he is today. I don’t think that’s 
responsible. The people have asked him to do, actually much 
more than that. 
 
So at the end of my brief comments, I will be moving an 
amendment to the motion and I will read it at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But let’s just talk about the government for a moment, the 
provincial government. We’re not, our caucus is not, for a  

moment saying that there isn’t a great deal of responsibility to 
be shared with the federal government and the railways in what 
has happened. It’s disastrous, we accept that, and we want it 
fixed just as much as the third party and the government. Let’s 
get that clear. Let’s get that clear right now. 
 
But the problem is, is that it just didn’t begin today. We just 
didn’t have snow fall last week. We didn’t have some of the 
problems that they’re basing their arguments on in the last days. 
We’ve had it for some months now. The grain is . . . the 
backlog of grain has been building, building, building, and the 
only response I’ve seen from Executive Council, from the 
Premier, from the Highways minister, is to ask, by way of news 
release, that there be some compensation. I think that was about 
four or five weeks ago and he knew he was going to be in 
trouble. I think that news release came out in a somewhat timely 
fashion. Perhaps they had a view that things would happen 
shorter, the session would come in sooner, and they didn’t want 
this to be coming around to bite them in the neck. 
 
So if we take a look at what action they should have done 
though, keeping in mind that Saskatchewan is so reliant — so 
reliant — on the movement of grain, should they have not have 
perhaps had a special meeting with the federal Agriculture 
minister and the railroads? I mean in any part of the speech that 
we heard from that minister today have we heard that they were 
taking an initiative that was beyond simple politics? 
 
An Hon. Member:  No we did not. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  No, I don’t think we did, did we. It was 
just, just get out there, try and beat up on the provincial Liberal 
caucus. That’s what the goal was here today. And we can accept 
politics. 
 
But you know when we’re done in this building and all the 
politics aside, what hurts me, Mr. Speaker, is when I get the 
phone calls from my constituents, the people that I represent — 
and my colleagues, they get those same calls — and they are 
hoping that there is no politics to be played out on this very, 
very serious issue. 
 
And I hear all the members chirping across the way. They 
happen to be members that aren’t representing rural 
constituencies; so if they would sit back and listen, they’ll learn. 
But I think it’s incumbent, I think it’s incumbent that they get 
up and get moving on some of these issues; they do it right 
away. Quit playing your simple politics. 
 
If you were going to be serious about the issue, if you agree that 
$65 million is too big a hit for Saskatchewan farmers, 
Saskatchewan farm families, to take on the chin this year, then 
you should have been proactive and progressive and got a trip 
lined up to Ottawa. If you felt there was a problem with one 
person or railroads, you should have done something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to this motion 
and it will be seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That all words after the word “that” be deleted from the 
motion and replaced by the following: 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

That this Assembly, in light of the multiple circumstances 
that have affected grain transportation in western Canada, 
including lack of initiative on the part of the railways and a 
lack of direction from the federal government, all of which 
have affected Saskatchewan producers by placing a 
financial burden on them, calls upon the railways, the 
federal government, and our provincial government to take 
immediate action on behalf of our farmers to improve grain 
transportation and to provide compensation to our 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Wood River and speak on the 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a worse time this grain handling backlog could not 
have happened. I mean farmers have payments to make, spring 
seeding — operating money is needed now. We notice out there 
that municipal tax arrears are on the rise once again, as they 
were a couple of years ago. At the same time grain prices are 
dropping, input costs went up and are not dropping. 
 
We’re just coming into the time of year when bans are coming 
on the road and the delay in the grain movement will be crucial 
to our road system as the minister across alluded to. Although 
he didn’t get quite into just how bad our road system is. He 
should spend more time out of the city and he might understand 
what is happening out there. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, instead of sitting across there as the 
members opposite do and pointing the finger time after time 
after time at the federal government, wouldn’t it be nice just 
once if they would get off their behinds and join with the 
federal government and do something for the farmers of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the Highway minister in his 
glowing speech from across gave the impression that that 
government really cares about our farmers in this province. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer in this province and in the last 
five years I haven’t seen much caring. 
 
I’d like to bring to your attention a few of the points that I’m 
talking about — $188 million in GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) money that disappeared out of my back pocket. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Forty per cent funding cuts to conditional 
and unconditional grants to municipalities already before the 
$20 million that your government cut this year on top of that, 
and that amounted to 25 per cent of what is left — the funding 
cuts of the $20 million. 
 
On top of that, the members opposite supported another $17.6 

million cut to the revenue-sharing pool for municipal 
governments when they replaced the 2 mill health levy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  To sit across there . . . And the Minister of 
Highways says, we care about farmers. I doubt it. Last year the 
farm compensation for the deer damage out there . . . And the 
Minister of Environment is sitting there — what did you people 
do? Again, nothing, absolutely no compensation. 
 
So maybe it’s time. Instead of pointing the finger and just 
giving lip service to our farmers out there, why don’t you join 
for once with the federal government and resolve the problem 
and come up with a compensation package that will help out 
farmers who so dearly need it at this time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I second the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well you know 
what this reminds me of, Mr. Speaker? This reminds me of an 
old saying, this reminds me of an old saying, and I’ve used it 
before in this House because you can tell every time, and that 
saying is: when you throw a stone in the dark and the dog yelps, 
you know you hit the dog. You can just tell. You can just tell. 
This is the case in this House. I rest my case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for Wood River, sitting beside 
. . . yes, Wood River and Arm River. The two river boats . . . 
river rats are sitting over there. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. The 
hon. member recognizes that the comment he just made is 
clearly out of order and I’ll simply ask him to withdraw that 
remark and proceed with his debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that remark and 
I apologize. It just kind of slipped out. But at least they took it 
in good . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. member knows 
when requested to withdraw a remark that no explanation is in 
fact neither necessary or welcome, and I’ll just simply ask him 
to withdraw the remark and proceed with his debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I withdraw the remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member for Wood River is right for once. This is about 
politics, this is about politics because we do have a federal 
election coming up in the near future. And we on this side 
accept this motion, we accept this motion for a number of 
reasons. 
 
The first being it’s important that the farmers move their grain 
because of the way the system has to work in order to get 
compensation back to the farmers. But secondly, is to flush out 
of the woods the provincial Liberal government and the federal 
Liberal government in terms . . . the provincial Liberals and the 
federal Liberals, who will always be in opposition, to tell us  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

where they really stand on this issue because I’ll tell you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We just did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Oh yes, you did — after being whacked 
in the dark you stand up and say . . . you mouth the words, yes, 
we support. 
 
But let me tell you something. Where were you, Mr. Liberal 
Opposition people, and Ms., where were you when the federal 
the safety net funding was reduced from $850 million to $600 
million? Did we hear a puff? Where were you when the Crow 
benefit of $320 million was cut? Did we hear a sigh, any words 
coming out of the Liberals? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, where were they? Nowhere. Where 
were they when the federal Liberal government was increasing 
the cost for inspection and grading of grain? See, until you 
flush them out, they say nothing. 
 
So then the next question is: do you believe them? Do you 
believe them? Do you believe the federal leader? Do we believe 
the federal Leader of the Liberal Party, the Prime Minister? He 
had to apologize on one occasion that I remember. So do we 
believe what they say? 
 
Where were they, Mr. Speaker, when they cut the support to 
dairy programs? Where were they when the federal government 
quit funding PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on Water 
Based Economic Development) and PARD (Partnership 
Agreement on Rural Development) and the green plan? Where 
were they? 
 
They weren’t in this House to be trapped. They were out so they 
didn’t have to say anything. But now they’re in the House, 
they’re trapped, they’re caught. And being caught in a trap, you 
holler and squeal just like the members were doing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is about politics and who runs this country 
and how it’s run. Because we’ve got a federal Liberal 
government who’s pushing forward deregulation. In a 
deregulated system, supported by the railroads — and I’m not 
going to point fingers at just the railroads; I think they have a 
great responsibility — but the fact of the matter is the Liberal 
federal government has the opportunity, it has the cause, and it 
has the power to make legislation or make points and make the 
railways and everyone else’s system accountable so that the $65 
million that the farmers are losing because of this grain hold-up 
is paid for . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well they’re cheering at the $65 million 
a farmer is losing. I’m not sure if that was appropriate, I’m not 
sure that was appropriate. But to ensure that that $65 million 
the farmer is losing is not coming out of the farmer’s pocket — 
it’s not coming out of the farmer’s pocket — I would like to see 
them table their correspondence with the federal Agricultural 
minister or the federal Transportation minister saying this is 
wrong. 

I’ll bet you a dollar to a doughnut there hasn’t been one letter 
written — not one — to the federal government complaining 
about this. I’d like to see it. I invite you to table it when the next 
speaker gets up, because I’m sure you’ll all want to have 
something to say. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, this is about politics; this is about how the 
government’s run. This is about the interests of Saskatchewan 
and western Canadian farmers. The president of CN (Canadian 
National Railway) says this on March 6th in The Western 
Producer. I’ll quote: 
 

The president and chief executive officer of Canadian 
National said in an interview last week that the failure to 
meet rail car unload targets this winter shows a regulated 
system can’t work. 

 
So then again you’ve got to ask yourself, who’s running the 
government? I mean, the railroads say a regulated system can’t 
work. And here’s what else he says, and I quote: 
 

Give us full control and we’re willing to be held fully 
accountable. 

 
Full control. Well when the WGTA (Western Grain 
Transportation Act) was replaced with the CTA, the railway 
was given more control. They were given the power and less 
and less responsibility. That’s a deregulated system. And what 
have we got this winter? 
 
(1200) 
 
An Hon. Member:  Snow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  A backlog of grain. Well snow is the 
excuse that the railways are using why the grain isn’t moving. 
So I understand when you say snow that you’re sort of siding 
on that side. But look, there are snow slides every winter in the 
mountains. This winter was worse, yes, I agree. Okay. 
 
Unloads are almost back to normal, but there’s 17 per cent 
storage space in the elevator system. That means it’s plugged. 
That means it’s plugged. 
 
The railways say give us full control and we’ll be fully 
accountable, and a regulatory system is impeding the shipment 
of grain. Well I don’t believe that. I don’t believe that simply 
because we have had deregulation and it’s worse this year. So 
you have the opportunity. 
 
And who’s running the government? 
 
You know what — 1994 tax year — you know what CP 
(Canadian Pacific) Rail gave to the Liberal Party? — $63,000. 
Well, you know, I understand, I understand why you may not be 
so eager to jump up and smack them then, because you don’t 
bite the hand that feeds you. You don’t bite the hand that feeds 
you. 
 
I just want to put that on record. But I put it aside because I’ll 
tell you this is about how this country is run. And this is about 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

how the grain movement system should be regulated. And this 
is about the federal Liberal government and this is about the 
provincial Liberal opposition not sticking up for the farmers of 
this province, not going to their federal brothers and sisters and 
saying this is wrong. That’s what it’s about and that’s what this 
debate is about. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker, a little irony — I remember when 
at times when the grain movement was stopped because of 
labour disputes. That happens from time to time. And I can 
recall the Liberals sort of jumping up and down and saying 
those darn unions, they’re rooking the farmers, you know, 
hurting the farmers. And it does, and it does affect. There’s no 
doubt — it does affect. 
 
But they’re very quiet when it comes to the railroads slowing 
down grain delivery. The farmers don’t count then because of 
the old pocketbook of the Liberal government. The Liberal 
Party might get hurt. 
 
And in this upcoming federal election, Mr. Speaker, the people 
of this country have to decide who they want to run it. They 
have to decide who they want to put in as MPs (Members of 
Parliament) to fight and stand up for things like the movement 
of western Canadian grain to port. Do they want people who are 
being lined in the pocketbook by some of those who would 
want a fully deregulated system give us full control? Well, it 
looks like it. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, that the vote on this motion, the vote on 
this motion is critical. We have to show support for 
Saskatchewan, but we have to remember when you look at the 
long list of things that this federal Liberal government has 
pulled out, that pulled the rug out from underneath western 
Canadian farmers from Crow benefit to safety-net reductions, 
all the inspections fees, PAWBED, PARD. I only read part of 
that list. I only read part of that list because it goes on and on, 
and maybe I should finish it if I can find it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, 25 per cent at one time of the grain was on the 
tracks in cars, is what I’m told, in the system. We’re getting our 
unloads back to par but there’s a great backlog out there, and 
the federal government . . . it’s incumbent upon the federal 
government to make sure that they do something. 
 
This is the most . . . this is the lowest movement we’ve seen for 
10 years to the west coast, Mr. Speaker. As of March 4, there 
were 39 ships waiting to be loaded. Six ships have been waiting 
for over 30 days and one ship for 61 days. Does that identify a 
problem? Does that identify a problem? I think so. 
 
The problem is the grain isn’t getting there. Now here’s the 
problem: demurrage is being paid for by the farmer. Every day 
the ship waits over a certain number of days they charge the 
Wheat Board for that grain. That comes directly out of the 
farmer’s pocket. 
 
If there’s no responsibility, if there’s no responsibility from the 
farm gate by those people who touched the grain all through the 
line . . . 

An Hon. Member:  Unions included? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The unions included. Responsibility, and 
I say the west coast movements . . . (inaudible) . . . You tell me 
when the last time there was a strike at the west coast. A long, 
long, long, time ago. 
 
The grain companies are putting on extra shifts to try to get rid 
of the backlog. That’s being responsible. The union folks are 
working hard to get those ships loaded. That’s being 
responsible. The farmers are sitting back paying the bill though 
whenever anybody stops this system, whenever anybody stops 
the system, the farmer pays. 
 
So here’s Mr. Goodale’s opportunity. Sixty-five million — who 
do you think, Mr. Speaker, should pay for that? Who do you 
think should pay that $65 million loss when every dollar of 
export grain outside this country from the farmers contributes to 
this economy, contributes to everyone working in this country. 
Is it their responsibility when somebody else clogs the system to 
pay? I think not. 
 
This is why it’s up to Mr. Goodale and the federal government, 
Mr. Chrétien, to move and move quickly. We will see. The best 
thing we got going for us, the best thing we got going for us is 
the fact that there is an election around the corner, because 
that’s when Liberals move. They try to buy it. And hopefully, 
although I disagree with this, hopefully they’re going to try to 
buy some votes and buy their way out of this one, at least to 
help support the farmers. We’ll see. We’ll see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the locomotive power has to be increased. The 
railroads know that. They’ve ordered more cars, but they leased 
cars this winter. I understand one in four didn’t work because of 
the cold. They’re not geared to cold weather conditions. 
 
And then we also have, Mr. Speaker, one other issue, one other 
issue. I’ve got many other issues, but I’ve got one I want to talk 
about right now, and that is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
members that don’t want to listen, when I sit down I will listen 
to you as long as you want on this issue. 
 
I want to talk about the short line railroad offload, the short line 
railroad. The federal Liberal government is allowing the railway 
companies to just abandon the rail lines, simply abandon them. 
 
Successor rights? Absolutely. Successor rights will not be a 
problem in short line. But here’s the problem. You see this is 
the difference in the attitude. The Tories are worried about 
successor rights because they think unions are the curse, the 
scourge of the world. But the Liberals . . . But successor rights 
isn’t the big problem here. The big problem is when you 
abandon a short line the legislation changes from federal 
responsibility to a provincial responsibility. 
 
So I’ll tell you we have to be very, very, very cautious about 
what short lines — and the people out there know that — what 
short lines can be developed and what short lines shouldn’t be 
developed. Because if there’s a financial problem in a short 
line, the company doesn’t go to Ottawa and say, we need some 
help. You know where they go? They come to Regina because  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

the legislation changes. And that’s the problem. Nothing to do 
with successor rights. The labour folks out there will make the 
short lines work to the best of their ability. I know that — they 
told us so. 
 
But the problem is it’s a direct offload. So then when the 
offload goes from the federal Liberal government to the 
provincial government, what’s the response by the federal 
Liberal government? Do they say, well we’ll come out with a 
national . . . a long-term infrastructure program like the U.S. has 
where they put about 40 per cent of the federal infrastructure 
. . . or the road system is federally funded as opposed to 6 per 
cent of the road system federally funded in Canada? 
 
No, they come up with another short-term infrastructure 
program. I’m happy to get it. But this is another thing with the 
offload of the short line on the provincial government. With 
more grains moving on by truck, let’s see that Mr. Chrétien and 
Mr. Goodale come forward with a long-term, federally-funded 
infrastructure program not just for Saskatchewan and western 
Canada, but for all of Canada, like they do in Australia, like 
they do in the England, like they do in the U.S., and like they do 
in Germany and most countries around the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  So, Mr. Speaker, there is a major 
problem. There is a major problem, Mr. Speaker. Yes. 
 
And here . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, this is shameful. This is 
shameful. We have $320 million of Crow benefit cut out of this 
province. Our net farm income has gone down. It’s projected to 
be lower than last year, okay. Our farmers are responding 
miraculously, by diversifying, by doing all they can, from game 
farming, which is a growing industry, to spices, to all kinds of 
things. They’re responding. 
 
But here’s what Mr. Martin says. Here’s what Mr. Martin says. 
August 1, 1995. It says, “Martin enlightens locals.” Yes, a 
bright light. In Nokomis, Saskatchewan, in the Last Mountain 
Times of Tuesday, May 14, 1996, I quote Mr. Martin: 
 

August 1, 1995, the day the Crow died, was the best day 
the province ever had, Paul Martin said. 

 
The best day the province had, cutting three hundred and . . . 
The federal Finance minister is coming to Saskatchewan. You 
talk about arrogance. You talk about arrogance and talking 
down to the little farmers of Saskatchewan, saying, you guys 
don’t know what’s good for you. And the result was a $320 
million, Mr. Speaker . . . is a drop in net farm income. 
 
And then what have they done? What have they done about 
rising input costs, which again hits from the federal level? We 
have brought forward in this province — I have through the 
federal-provincial meetings — brought up the fact that input 
costs is probably one of the number one overall arching . . . 
overarching concerns to the farmer. Because when the price of 
grain started to bolt up last year, inputs bolted up. Now grains 
come down; inputs are still up. That’s why . . . another reason 
we’re having a net farm income problem. 

Farmers are still optimistic because they know that the grain 
supply, the world grain supply to consumption, is the lowest it’s 
ever been. There’s some relief in that; some relief in that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, until the issue of input costs is addressed . . . 
And I know that you don’t have any direct control about input 
costs. You can’t say, okay, we’re going to charge X dollars for 
this and X dollars for that. But the federal government has a 
responsibility to look over the shoulders. 
 
And the Liberal government responded in 1995 by having a 
little task force. Do you know what the result of that 
recommendation was? Input costs are high. The solution by the 
federal Liberal government, Mr. Speaker, is farmers should — 
get this — shop around. Shop around. Arrogance? Arrogance? 
Shop around? Out on my farm I can shop around all I want and 
is still . . . the prices, even though with competition, are fairly 
static. Fairly static. 
 
I think the federal Liberal government has a responsibility again 
and that’s why I put it on the federal table and will be again 
talking about it in July — federal input costs. I’ve talked to Mr. 
Goodale about it. It took a year to get them convinced that this 
is a priority and hopefully . . . I’ve asked them to put it up on 
the agenda, higher on the agenda than it has been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, shop around? Shop around. What kind of a 
mentality do they have? What kind of mentality do they have? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I end by saying this: I asked the federal 
Liberal government, the federal Liberal government, I asked the 
provincial opposition, to follow the lead of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Follow the lead of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We decreased one input cost by nearly 25 per cent — crop 
insurance. Which one? Hello, where were you? Quit crop 
insurance. On average, across the board, a decrease of 23 per 
cent, the first time an input cost has been significantly reduced 
since . . . In the 25 years that I’ve been farming, the first time 
that input costs have been significantly reduced. I asked Mr. 
Goodale and Mr. Chrétien and I ask you to talk to them as well. 
 
Please get on the board and please help Saskatchewan farmers 
by getting the grain moving, and make sure it keeps moving, by 
reducing input costs, by stop being so arrogant and talking 
down about people and saying that $320 million out of 
Saskatchewan farmers’ pockets is the best day Saskatchewan 
ever had. Please, follow the lead of the provincial government 
in Saskatchewan and help reduce input costs for the farmers of 
this province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member for Saskatoon Eastview 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

(1215) 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I could 
talk about grain handling but I’m going to, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. No you can’t talk about grain 
handling. You only have leave to introduce guests. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you. I’ll stick to what I do best, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a grain handler 
actually, a former distinguished colleague, to all members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Tom Keeping, who was the member for 
Nipawin, who served in this Chamber with dignity and honour, 
and I know that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  And humour. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  And humour, and humour. And that was 
shared, that view was shared by all hon. members. And he’s just 
a great friend. Some things haven’t changed. I was out for 
dinner with him last night, and I paid the bill at Greko’s and . . . 
so perhaps he has come around to reimburse me, I don’t know. 
But I would invite all members, as I know they will, to give 
Tom a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I’d like to ask 
leave to introduce a guest as well, and then I’d like to speak to 
the question. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I 
didn’t take the opportunity to welcome Tom back to the 
Assembly. As you all know, he once sat on our side of the 
House, even though he was a member of the other party. And I 
really think that after listening to a lot of his poetry and those 
kinds of things that he used to do so well, that most likely he 
should have been a member of our party too. But maybe he’ll 
do that later in life. 
 
We’re happy to hear that he’s doing well in his private life once 
again and we’re happy that he took the time to come back and 
visit with us. Sometimes when people leave here they find that 
the circumstances under which they’ve left have left a bad taste 
in their mouth and they may not come back. But with Tom, he 
of course has seen the benefit of our institution and we’re 
happy to see him back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Grain Transportation Delays 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
afternoon — or this morning, I guess it is yet, almost afternoon 
— but anyway, I’m happy to enter the debate on the issue that 

our colleagues have brought up this day. 
 
And I’m a little disturbed, Mr. Speaker, at the way this debate 
has carried on. And naturally, naturally we see the old, the old 
ideas of politics come forth. And it’s a little sad, when you have 
such an important issue as this, that people have to position 
themselves along political lines. 
 
Here we have the Liberals trying to throw a pail full of red 
herrings into the mix of a great debate on an important issue, 
trying to defuse it, water it down and muddy it up so that 
nobody can recognize what the issue really was to start with. 
And so they bring in an amendment that in itself, and I’ll give 
them credit, is not a bad solution to problems. It’s got some 
merit. 
 
Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, what it really does is 
simply defuse the gist and the importance of the push that we 
are trying to put into this great and important issue. And there’s 
no sense doing that. It’s not reasonable to do that today. Let us 
carry on with the motion that our leader brought forth, which 
directly identifies the problem, directly identifies the people that 
caused the problem, and suggest a direct solution for the 
problem. No messing around, no muddying it up. Go after the 
people that are responsible. 
 
On the other hand, we have the government side, Mr. Speaker, 
that decides, well because the Liberals are bringing in an 
amendment we’ll have to get into some political rhetoric and do 
a lot of those kinds of things too. And back and forth goes and 
back and forth goes the debate from their chairs. And instead of 
addressing the issue as an important issue — as it is — they 
simply position themselves for political grandstanding on this 
very first day when we should be talking about this very critical, 
important issue and that is, why farmers in Saskatchewan are 
paying for other people’s mistakes. 
 
And that is really what the question is all about: who should pay 
for the mistakes in the grain handling system? Should it be the 
farmers? Well, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is that I’m a 
half a century old and about the first word that I learned that I 
thought was a swear word, but I found out, Mr. Speaker, just to 
assure you, that it really wasn’t a swear word, but I thought it 
was, because more than 50 years ago I thought the word 
“demurrage” was a swear word. My father echoed it in disgust, 
and my grandfather echoed it with more disgust and more 
disdain. And all of my neighbours echoed the word 
“demurrage” as though it were the worst thing in the world. 
And so I thought it must be a swear word. 
 
But I’ve come to discover that it is an identification of a 
problem that not only existed then but continues to exist to this 
day, and not one government has had the intestinal fortitude or 
the backbone to cure the problem — and that is, to attach the 
cost of these mistakes to the people that make the mistakes. 
 
Who causes the mistakes of demurrage? Who causes ships to be 
ordered into port in Vancouver so that they can be paid to have 
a paid holiday? The minister in charge of the Canadian Wheat 
Board is ultimately responsible because it’s the Wheat Board 
that orders those ships. They don’t come in there and collect  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

demurrage simply because they have the right to do it. It is not 
their God-given right — they are ordered. They are brought in 
because somebody said, come. And it’s high time we put an end 
to that, Mr. Speaker, because it is not fair to the farmers. They 
pay for those mistakes. 
 
And Mr. Ralph Goodale is, ultimately, as the minister, 
responsible for those mistakes and I demand his resignation 
here today even though he’s not here. But the words of this 
speech are going to his Prime Minister, and I tell him today: 
have the gumption to stand up and do what has to be done or 
else resign. 
 
And I’m going to say to the members across the Assembly here: 
you as the government have the majority of the power of the 
vote in this Assembly. I ask you to throw out the pail of red 
herrings, throw out the rhetoric in the political debate, and 
throw out the amendment. Put that amendment down and get 
back to the main motion and support us to solve the problem. 
Let’s get back to causing people who caused the problem to pay 
for their worst mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a long history of mistakes in grain 
handling. And this is not a simple solution and nor will it be 
easy. It will take a lot of political determination because even 
though the solutions can be easily found, it won’t be easy to 
have the political will to put them through. 
 
Saying to the people in the Canadian Wheat Board, that you as 
directors of that Canadian Wheat Board should pay part of the 
demurrage costs out of your pay cheque as a penalty for your 
mistakes, is not easy. But we demand today that that is exactly 
the direction that the federal government should go, cause those 
people to lose out of their pocketbooks. Tell Ralph Goodale 
either to resign or to put up a thousand dollars a day out of his 
wages for every day that there’s a ship collecting demurrage. 
That’ll hit the pocketbook, that’ll hit home, and there will be a 
change when we hit these people where it counts — in the 
pocketbook. 
 
And we say the same to the CPR and the CNR (Canadian 
National Railway Company). There is no competition in rail 
traffic in this country. It is a monopoly and these people do 
whatever they please, whenever they please, for 50 years and I 
expect for 50 years before that. Mr. Speaker, the solution is very 
simple in terms of what needs to be done. And that is to charge 
the demurrage to the railway companies, to the Wheat Board 
directors, and to the minister in charge, and not to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is absolutely, Mr. Speaker, no reason why farmers should 
be caught paying these penalties or losing the income. Just last 
week, the Japanese were buying wheat from the Americans. 
Has anybody really got in their heads the idea that those folks 
aren’t our competitors? And they come in here and tell us that 
no, we haven’t lost any markets. Well wake up and smell the 
coffee. They just bought their wheat from the Americans — 
that’s not us. And that means we lost a sale and we’ll lose some 
more — 39 ships sitting in the port. 
 
Believe me, you couldn’t make money any faster than to go out 

and buy a grain ship right now and get an order and tow it into 
Vancouver. And I say tow, because you don’t want to buy too 
good a one — it would cost too much money. Tie enough inner 
tubes on it so you can make it float and collect demurrage and 
when you’re done, you’re rich and you sink the thing. That may 
be a little bit of a stretch, Mr. Speaker, but the truth of the 
matter is that that’s exactly the kind of foolishness that’s going 
on out there. People are ordered to come in to load grain when 
everybody that’s in charge of getting the grain into position 
knows very well there is none to load. What kind of a scam is 
going on? 
 
I ask you simply to question yourselves, who is profiting? And 
why are they allowed for 50 years and more to profit? Because 
something is smelling in Denmark, is also starting to smell in 
Saskatchewan and in Vancouver’s ports. There is something 
wrong with this system and it needs to be corrected by putting 
responsibility on the people that make the mistakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to support my leader and his 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
join in this debate because I think it’s a very important topic or 
issue in my constituency. All the way from White Fox to Birch 
Hills, agriculture is very important. 
 
One of the things that’s really changed this year comparing to 
last year, farmers are not very optimistic today as they were a 
year ago. The prices of grain last year were climbing, there was 
a lot of potential for grain to be moving at a great speed, input 
costs were up, grain prices were going up as well. So things 
looked good last year. 
 
This year the farmers have not been able to move that grain that 
they had a lot of optimism on. So the price climbed on input 
costs. So this year I’ll tell you the farmers have not got a lot of 
optimism out there. They are really uptight with the Liberals 
federally, provincially, for not putting pressure on the rail lines 
to get our grain moving to port. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I ask and I call on the provincial 
Liberals to join in with our minister, our Agriculture minister, 
to put pressure on the federal government to have our grain 
moved to port, to get it rolling at least. 
 
I also ask that we need to commend our transport minister for 
the work he has done to try and get the federal minister to 
listen, to get our grain moving. And I want to say our provincial 
minister has done a lot of work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Langford:  I also want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, I 
will carry on when the throne speech is more into agriculture, at 
that time. So right now I want to say I’ll be supporting the 
motion and not supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

The division bells rang from 12:30 p.m. until 12:31 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 9 
 
Krawetz McPherson McLane 
Gantefoer Draude Osika 
Bjornerud Hillson Julé 
 

Nays — 36 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 
Renaud Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Lorje Scott 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Stanger Hamilton Murray 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Jess Langford 
Murrell Thomson Boyd 
D’Autremont Heppner Goohsen 
 
The division bells rang from 12:35 p.m. until 12:36 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 45 
 
Flavel Van Mulligen Wiens 
MacKinnon Shillington Mitchell 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Lautermilch Upshall Kowalsky 
Renaud Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Lorje Scott 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Stanger Hamilton Murray 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Jess Langford 
Murrell Thompson Krawetz 
McPherson McLane Gantefoer 
Draude Osika Bjornerud 
Hillson Julé Boyd 
D’Autremont Heppner Goohsen 
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, to move a series of 
routine motions before it is a day . . . of which it is traditional to 
move the day after the throne speech. 
 
If I have the leave of the House, I’ll move them. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of By-laws and Amendments to the 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Fairview 
 

That the by-laws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto, the by-laws and amendments are 
tabled in the present session, be referred to the Special 
Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld, by leave of the Assembly having 
been granted: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton: 
 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor as tabled 
in the present session be referred to a Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Report to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Watrous: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 
referred as tabled in the present session to the Standing 
Committee on Communication. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Finally, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Lloydminster: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 
referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with orders of 
the day, I rise pursuant to rule 46 and ask leave of the Assembly 
to engage in a debate of urging and pressing nature. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member for North Battleford has 
requested leave of the Assembly to proceed with a debate 
related to pressing and urging necessity, and I will ask the hon. 
member to advise the House as to why he considers this subject 
to be of pressing and urgent necessity, and then advise the 
members of the motion he wishes to introduce and to do that 
very briefly. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the news 
and the unfortunate incidents, especially in the city of Regina 
this past week, I am requesting an emergency debate on the 
means by which we can mobilize the resources of the 
community and of this province to find solutions to the 
problems of misdirected youth. The Hon. Minister of Justice 
has acknowledged that there is a serious problem; I’ve heard 
nothing yet on solutions. I would like a debate on how we can 
address this pressing issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may read the text of the motion which I would 
like to propose to this Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly urges the government to establish a 
special task force to aid the government in its fight against 
the escalating problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan in 
light of the most recent wave of property crime charges, 
including car thefts as well as crimes of violence. Such 
task force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 
municipal police forces, community leaders, 
representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 
organizations, and other organizations committed to the 
fight against youth crime. 
 

The Speaker:  Hon. members, you have heard the hon. 
member for North Battleford describe why he would like to see 
this matter dealt with as a matter of urging and pressing 
necessity. You have been given notice of the motion, and leave 
is required in order to proceed. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1245) 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Youth Crime 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you for correcting me, Mr. Speaker. I 
think there are still a few things I have to learn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Honourable Minister of Justice has of course 
already informed us that the Young Offenders Act is federal 
legislation and that he has, of course, informed us of the 
problems of federal funding. However, we know that we are in  

the same federal system as nine other provinces, nine other 
provinces which seem to manage much better than we do under 
the same framework. 
 
We have to ask ourselves why do we have the highest rate of 
incarceration of our youth of any jurisdiction in North 
America? We have to ask ourselves why do we have the second 
highest level of child poverty of any jurisdiction in Canada? We 
have to ask ourselves why we have less job opportunities for 
our young people than any other province in western Canada? 
We have to ask ourselves why has SGI surcharged our house 
insurance in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, North 
Battleford, and other communities because of the terrible 
history in home break-ins? 
 
We have to ask ourselves why do we have so few youth 
workers that when a young offender is placed on probation for 
the first offence in the hope that work can be done with him or 
her in order to get him off the track he’s clearly on, that why the 
workloads of our youth workers are so high that probation 
largely exists on paper and there is no-one to work intensively 
with that youth to redirect him into more positive goals? 
 
We have to ask ourselves why the education levels of 
Saskatchewan youth are now below the national average? We 
have to ask ourselves why, as we go around our streets, our 
malls during school hours we see many young people in those 
malls and on those streets who are not in school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many problems, obviously, and there are 
issues which deal with the federal government. But I would 
point out the other provinces have that same federal 
government. And somehow they have dealt better than we have 
dealt with the problem of young offenders, youth custody, 
probation, and finding better channels for our young people 
than what we have. 
 
When I came to this Assembly, I thought that the purpose of 
this Assembly was to find solutions for the problems of this 
province. I now worry that perhaps the main purpose of this 
Assembly is to whine about the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I submit there are things that we can do. And I 
submit that we do have powers that we can use if we choose to 
use them. 
 
Certainly it is easy to simply address the problem of youth 
crime with a rant. And the events of this past week do indeed 
strongly suggest that there are some people on our streets who 
ought to be in custody. 
 
Nonetheless, the fact we already have the highest youth 
incarceration rate in North America does suggest to me that 
simply building more jails and locking people up for longer and 
longer periods of time is unlikely to result in the safe 
communities we all want. We have to be able to provide our 
young people with the hope and the opportunities that can 
redirect them. And when they are in custody, Mr. Speaker, it is 
my sincere hope that custody will not be a period of enforced  



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1997 

idleness. When I say that, I’m not talking about chain-gangs, 
but I am saying that leaving our young people in a big cement 
room watching television is unlikely to be a great rehabilitative 
measure. 
 
I would like to see them involved in programing from early 
morning to late at night. And that includes obviously schooling, 
it includes rehabilitative measures, it includes addiction 
problems, which of course so many of our young people going 
into custody do have, and yes, in appropriate circumstances, it 
would also include work placement as learning the expectations 
of our work world and of employers is indeed also important in 
the development of our young people. 
 
In North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, I have been involved since its 
inception in the street worker program. That is a program which 
was designed to identify and work with young people 
pre-charge, pre-court, and to work with them and their families 
to ensure that they would be in school, in worthwhile 
extracurricular activities, they would be involved in sports, they 
would be involved in other enrichments, and that the parents 
would also have a support network. 
 
Our street workers have had, I think, considerable success in 
working with young people who are not yet in trouble but 
appear to be headed in that direction. 
 
I respectfully submit that these are the areas we have to look at 
and we have to look at seriously. I respectfully submit it is not 
enough of a problem to say we need more money from Ottawa. 
Because the fact is the other provinces are somehow coping and 
they’re coping better than we are. And that suggests that there is 
something wrong here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, although the Young Offenders 
Act is of course federal legislation, the administration of that 
Act is provincial. Family welfare is provincial. The youth 
workers are employees of our provincial government. Programs 
to assist and enrich families are likewise provincial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the time to pass the buck. This is not the 
time to whine about somebody else being responsible for our 
problems. This is a time for us to take ownership of our 
problems and of our youth. This is a time to say that we believe 
our youth can be better directed. 
 
But part of directing them is to convince them that they can 
have an education and a future in this province, that they can 
drive a good car without stealing it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — That they can go into a nice home someday 
that they hold title to, and they don’t have to break in the back 
window. 
 
I respectfully submit that what we need is a sense of hope and a 
sense of empowerment and a sense of belonging to this 
community and being a part of this community. 

I also accept, of course, that part of any system has to be 
correction and discipline. And the message must go out, firmly 
and loudly, that those who refuse to abide by society’s rules, of 
whatever age, must anticipate some penalties. I have no 
problem with that and I endorse that, and I think that we have to 
look at ways though in which that can be speeded up. 
 
The one thing we know, Mr. Speaker, is that, with young people 
especially, it is very important that when discipline is to be 
meted out that it come as close as possible to the offence; that 
unfortunately much of the impact of discipline for youth is lost 
when that punishment comes so long after the fact. 
 
I also know that on a youth’s first brush with the law our 
tendency is to try and avoid incarceration and to try and work 
with that youth through the elders, through the youth workers, 
and through other divertive measures. I am in support of these, 
but my problem with them is that so often because these 
resources have been underfunded and simply are not present. In 
many cases, these resources exist on paper. And there is no 
reality to working with a youth on probation in order to avoid 
him proceeding on to the next dreary step where he is now in 
court and awaiting sentencing and more charges yet again. 
 
I am confident that our judges are responsive to the community 
and that they will do their part to respond to the problems we 
see before us. I am confident that our judges will look at each 
case on an individual basis, as they must, and that they will be 
careful who is being released awaiting sentencing. 
 
I accept that it would be wrong of this Assembly, or the federal 
Parliament for that matter, to lay down blanket rules as to who 
must go into custody and when. There must be latitude to take 
each case and each individual on its own merits. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the people who are 
being victimized by crime will feel that this Assembly is 
responsive to their problems, that this Assembly recognizes that 
security of the person must include, as far as it is humanly 
possible, protection from the negative impact of crime. We have 
the right to our homes and our cars without the molestation of 
the criminal element. 
 
But I would hope that the message would also go out that our 
young people deserve a better future. They deserve more 
resources directed towards them. They deserve a better example 
from adults, from their parents, from youth workers, and that 
we wish to mobilize the resources of the community we know 
are out there. We know people are concerned. They should be 
brought together. 
 
And I have worked extensively with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) and I know that the RCMP are as 
concerned as anyone, not in simply building up charge 
statistics, but in trying to work with young people before they 
are charged, before they are thrown into jail. Because when we 
throw someone into jail, that is an acknowledgement that our 
society has failed. 
 
So let us pull together the resources of our society, the people 
who want to work in community to address these problems, to  



March 7, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

say that we find it unacceptable that our crime rate is higher 
than other provinces. We find it unacceptable that our child 
poverty rate is so much higher than other provinces. We find it 
unacceptable that our young people have a lower education rate 
than the national average. And we find it unacceptable that our 
home-owners are more victimized by crime than those in other 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask for support of this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Melville: 
 

That this Assembly urges the government to establish a 
special task force to aid the government in its fight against 
the escalating problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan in 
light of the most recent wave of property crime charges, 
including car thefts as well as crimes of violence; such task 
force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 
municipal police forces, community leaders, 
representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 
organizations, and other organizations committed to the 
fight against youth crime. 

 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to 
enter this debate very briefly as a seconder of the motion. I’m 
looking forward to the members, the hon. members in this 
House for their support. 
 
I come at it from a different perspective. When I hear that the 
chief of police is saying that things are out of control, when I 
hear that police officers’ lives are in danger, they’re 
endangering their own lives and they’re being endangered by 
young people, misled young people, that angers me. 
 
This is not something that just occurred within the last week. 
This has been building up to a crescendo which is now 
expressing itself in much more serious ways than it has in the 
past. We better start waking up and doing something about it 
and put a stop to it. 
 
Citizens themselves are taking it upon themselves to go out and 
obtain signatures. I very much admire Lil Schroeder for taking 
the initiative. Why? They’re becoming frustrated. They’re 
afraid, and they’re being told by our government that what you 
need to do is spend more money on devices to protect your 
property and your own property, your own vehicles. This is 
unacceptable. 
 
It’s not up to the public to continue paying out more money for 
the protection and services that the Justice department, that this 
government is incumbent upon them to provide all people of 
Saskatchewan, urban and rural. 
 
Therefore, I second the motion as a seconder. I implore 
everybody in the House here to support that motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I recognize the Minister of Justice. And  

having recognized the Minister of Justice, the clock has now 
reached the normal time of adjournment. Order. 
 
Before adjourning, I simply want to welcome back the hon. 
members to the Chambers and to advise the hon. members how 
pleased the Chair is with the enthusiasm of the members for the 
task that is before them. I wish for all members that this will be 
an enjoyable weekend with your families and in your 
constituencies. This House now stands adjourned until Monday 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................................7 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................................7 
  D’Autremont .................................................................................................................................................................................7 
  Heppner .........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
  Goohsen .........................................................................................................................................................................................7 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................................8 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Romanow .......................................................................................................................................................................................8 
  Boyd ...............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  McLane ..........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................9, 28 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Stanger ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Hagel ..............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................28 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Murray .........................................................................................................................................................................................10 
 Canadian Women’s Curling Champions 
  Julé ...............................................................................................................................................................................................10 
  Van Mulligen ...............................................................................................................................................................................10 
 Pay Equity for Women 
  Hamilton ......................................................................................................................................................................................10 
 Kinsmen Telemiracle 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................11 
 Economic Success in Maidstone 
  Stanger .........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
 Gas Price Hike 
  Thomson ......................................................................................................................................................................................11 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health Care Reform 
  McLane ........................................................................................................................................................................................11 
  Cline .............................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Youth Crime 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................12 
 Job Creation 
  Gantefoer .....................................................................................................................................................................................13 
  Lingenfelter .................................................................................................................................................................................13 
 Youth Crime 
  Boyd .............................................................................................................................................................................................13 
  Nilson ...........................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 SaskPower Investment in Guyana 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................14 
  Lautermilch .................................................................................................................................................................................14 
 Highway Maintenance 
  McPherson ...................................................................................................................................................................................15 
  Renaud .........................................................................................................................................................................................15 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Krawetz........................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................16 
  The Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................16 
 



 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 Grain Transportation Delays 
  Boyd .............................................................................................................................................................................................17 
  D’Autremont ...............................................................................................................................................................................18 
  Renaud .........................................................................................................................................................................................19 
  McPherson ...................................................................................................................................................................................23 
  Bjornerud ....................................................................................................................................................................................24 
  Upshall .........................................................................................................................................................................................24 
  Goohsen .......................................................................................................................................................................................28 
  Langford ......................................................................................................................................................................................29 
 Recorded Divisions .........................................................................................................................................................................30 
 Youth Crime 
  Hillson ..........................................................................................................................................................................................31 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................33 
MOTIONS 
 Referral of By-laws and Amendments to the Special Committee on Regulations 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 Referral of Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 Referral of Report to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the Standing Committee on Communication 
  Shillington....................................................................................................................................................................................30 
 


