



















































Hansard: May 05, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1365 

 May 5, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair:  Before we begin I will ask the minister to . . . In 

fact we’ll wait for the officials to get into place, and then I will 

ask the minister to introduce her officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The officials from the Department 

of Finance: sitting next to me is Bill Jones, the deputy minister 

of Finance; behind Bill is Bill Van Sickle, executive director of 

administration; behind me is Jim Marshall, the executive 

director of economic and fiscal policy; seated next to me is Len 

Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue division; 

behind Len is Kirk McGregor, the assistant deputy minister of 

tax and intergovernmental. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

welcome, Minister, and all your officials this evening. It’s a 

pleasure to see new faces on the other side of the House and it 

is really good to have you here. 

 

Minister, your department is responsible for a great deal of 

things, and certainly the way I’d like to approach the issue 

tonight is not to deal with how your department allocates funds 

to other departments or to other projects, but more to focus on 

some of the issues that we would like . . . Start again? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and, Minister, and welcome to 

the officials who are with you this evening. 

 

The way we’d like to approach estimates tonight in the 

Department of Finance is not to be dealing with those issues as 

to how you fund or how you allocate funds to other departments 

but rather how different aspects of your own department are 

operated; so that we can get some clarity not only for ourselves 

but also for the people watching as to how this system of 

government operates. 

 

So there’s a number of different things that we’d like to discuss 

with you this evening. And I recognize that we have only 

limited time and we have some tremendous young Canadians, 

and people from Saskatchewan, who I’m sure are going to hang 

on your every word about all the answers to these fiscal 

numbers and all the financial information that we’re talking 

about tonight . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Stand corrected. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first area that I’d like to deal with is a 

question that we’ve raised in the House last week, particularly 

in the terms of the surcharges and the surtaxes on the income 

tax side of the budget. 

 

Madam Minister, we talked about particularly a number of 

surcharges that are on top of our basic charge. Our basic  

income tax charge, as I understand it, represents something like 

49 per cent of the federal tax collected. And that in addition to 

that then, there are three surcharges that add up in some 

significant measure to the amount of tax that’s actually 

collected in the Saskatchewan income tax. 

 

While I understand that some of these surcharges — in terms of 

high income and things of that nature — are ways of making 

tax policy, the area that I have the greatest concern about is the 

area of what was originally the deficit reduction surcharge. And 

granted in that period of time where you were indeed trying to 

balance the operating budget of the province, that is very 

understandable. But once we went into what was supposedly a 

balanced budget situation, then we changed the name of that 

tax, if you like, from a deficit reduction to a debt reduction 

surcharge. 

 

Before I was elected to this honourable office, I certainly felt 

that it was incumbent on me as a taxpayer in this province, and 

a lot of my friends and neighbours believed, that the fact that it 

was an important thing that we were doing as people to be 

willing to dig just a tad deeper into our pockets in paying tax so 

that this honourable goal would be realized in terms of reducing 

the debt of the province was a very important thing. And what 

I’m very disappointed to see is that that is in a way something 

that’s not quite correct in the way it was operated. 

 

Madam Minister, we were given figures by your department, 

which we’re very appreciative of, that showed for example in 

the last year that there were . . . or this current year there’ll be 

something in the magnitude of $58 million collected through 

this surcharge, and that projected in the same current year 

there’s something like $24 million, which is the surplus out of 

the General Revenue Fund, that’ll be applied to the debt. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I’m wondering how you can reconcile 

the fact that a surcharge that has been understood to be 

something that would be directly applied to the long-term debt 

in each and every year that taxpayers in this province are paying 

that money with the clear understanding it’s applied directly to 

the debt outside of the financial operations of government 

through the General Revenue Fund, how can you reconcile that 

discrepancy to the folks that are watching this evening? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, could I 

have leave to introduce guests, please? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, it’s a great pleasure 

to introduce, seated in your gallery here, a group of Cubs, the 

40th McVeety Cubs from Regina, 15 Cubs, ages 8 to 12 years 

old. And the person with them this evening is Neil Robertson. 

 

So I would ask the members, through the Chair, to please give a 

hearty welcome to our guests this evening. 

 

  



1366  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Now, Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, what I would say is this. The people of Saskatchewan 

have to ask themselves a basic question. Is the debt of the 

province coming down, and is it coming down dramatically? 

And I would say the clear, obvious answer is yes. 

 

If you look at the period from 1994 to 1997, the debt of the 

province has been reduced by about $2 billion. If you look at 

the period from 1997 to the end of this cycle, the debt will be 

reduced by another $2 billion. So over that period, the debt of 

the province has been reduced by a whopping $4 billion. 

 

To put that into perspective, the debt will have gone from being 

70 per cent of the GDP (gross domestic product), 70 per cent of 

the size of the economy of Saskatchewan, down to 36 per cent. 

Mr. Chairman, I would say that this is the most dramatic debt 

reduction to occur anywhere in Canada. 

 

And when we recently got our upgrade from Standard and 

Poor's . . . took the credit rating of the province and said, instead 

of having it here, we’re upgrading the credit of the province to 

here, one of the main reasons that that credit rating agency gave 

for the upgrade was the dramatic reduction in the province’s 

debt. 

 

So quite frankly I think the member has no case. The debt of the 

province has come down dramatically. The numbers show it, 

and external agencies show it. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Madam Minister, I’m not debating that the 

debt has come down in this province, but there’s a number of 

factors that have contributed to that. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you could give the detailed 

breakdown in terms of how it’s come down in terms of the 

portion of the debt that you’re talking about’s come down 

through activities in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), and that further broke down into terms of how 

much has resulted from the sale of assets, for example, Cameco. 

 

Because if you’re selling assets and you’re applying it on debt, 

you also have a diminished asset that you’re holding in your 

equity, if you like. So while I appreciate that the share of the 

Cameco assets, for example, have been applied on two fronts — 

one against the General Revenue Fund through a special 

dividend, and the other held within CIC — it diminishes debt, 

but it also, in essence, has liquidated an asset. 

 

So I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would break down for us, 

please, the detailed breakdown on the $2 million that you say 

that we’ve paid down the debt from ’94 to ’97 and where it’s 

originated from — from the General Revenue Fund, from  

activities within the Crowns, and from surpluses in the budget 

— and then ’97 onwards. Would you break down that $4 billion 

that you’re saying that our debt has been reduced? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I’d make 

two points in response to that. When Standard and Poor’s 

upgraded our credit rating, they were quite specific in terms of 

the debt that was reduced. They talked about dramatic reduction 

of tax-supported debt. It’s not possible to make a clear 

distinction between reduction of Crown debt and reduction of 

GRF (General Revenue Fund) debt because there’s tremendous 

crossover. 

 

And to clarify that, let me give you an example. Recently we 

announced that we were reducing the debt of Crop Insurance 

by, I believe it’s $149 million. In fact that money came out of 

the General Revenue Fund, out of your tax dollars. But because 

the Crop Insurance Corporation is a Crown corporation, the 

debt that went down was Crown corporation debt. But clearly 

it’s taxpayers’ dollars that have to go into it. 

 

So because of accounting crossovers like that, it’s not possible 

to just do a quick breakdown because some of the debt that is in 

fact Crown debt was reduced by government funding being 

increased to that sector. And it works the opposite way. Some 

of the Crown assets that were sold came across and reduced 

government-supported debt. So as I say, there is a crossover. 

 

And I think the key thing is when an outside agency gives this 

province a credit rating upgrade — something almost 

unprecedented in the ’90s — and says one of the main reasons 

for this is a drastic decline in tax-supported debt, it means that 

the record on that side is very impressive. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Well, Madam Minister, you’ve certainly 

opened up other issues that I would like to deal with later. 

Certainly the issue of the fact why there isn’t a consolidated 

financial statement whereby the Provincial Auditor has been 

asking for a relationship between CIC and the General Revenue 

Fund on an ongoing basis, in a projected way. And I’m sure that 

we’ll have an opportunity sometime in the not too distant 

future, maybe even later this evening, to get into the Crop 

Insurance debt and the whole GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) fiasco, and asking you if you’re providing for 

contingent liability under the lawsuit that you’re being served 

with in terms of the way you dealt with that whole issue. 

 

What I wanted to know is a simple question. Since you are very 

willing to share with the viewers and the people of 

Saskatchewan the fact that $4 billion in consolidated debt or 

whatever has been reduced from 1994 to the current time, 

please tell us what it is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I’m saying to 

the member opposite is, you can’t make that fine distinction. 

You can look at charts which will tell you how much the GRF 

debt has come down, how much the CIC debt has come down. 

But there’s obvious crossover. There’s obvious . . . and I just 

gave you an excellent example of $149 million — which is 

money coming out of the taxpayer’s pocket — going to pay 

down debt, but because of the accounting of it it’s Crown debt  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

that’s being reduced. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, that sounds like you’re arguing 

the case that the Provincial Auditor is bringing forward for a 

consolidated statement. You made the statement here before us, 

just several minutes earlier, that the overall debt of the province 

has come down, you said some $4 billion. I’m asking you, if 

you can make that kind of statement to the House, please 

itemize the items and the amounts that have gone into that; 

otherwise how can you say it’s $4 billion? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well what you can say is, you can 

say here is the debt of the whole government across the piece 

— Crown debt, GRF debt, Treasury Board Crown debt — and 

here is how much it has been reduced by. But actually tracing 

the sources back to, this is Crown debt, this is GRF debt, is very 

difficult. Plus I would ask the member opposite, why does a 

gain on an asset belong only to the Crown sector? Doesn’t the 

gain on the asset belong to all of the people of Saskatchewan as 

well? 

 

And so that was the principle behind Cameco money being used 

to reduce GRF debt, government . . . basic government debt. 

But I think the key point is this government has been clear. If 

we sell an asset, a major asset, the money will be used to reduce 

government debt. What I would say to the members opposite is, 

there isn’t the same clarity on that side of the House. You’ve 

said — one of your members have said — well if we sell 

Cameco shares, let’s reduce the debt with that money. Another 

of your members said no, let’s use that money to fund a tax cut. 

 

We are clear. If we sell major assets, we reduce the debt. Our 

goal is to reduce the debt of the province. But not just to do that 

— to cut taxes and also enhance basic programs in the province. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you’re misunderstanding. The 

process of the exercise this evening is for you to be held 

accountable for statements you have made. And not 10 minutes 

ago, you said that the overall debt of this province has been 

reduced by $4 billion. It’s one thing to throw around that kind 

of figure loose and easy; I’m asking you for an itemized, 

detailed list of how you justify that kind of a statement. I’m not 

asking you to debate the fact that Cameco shares should or 

should not have been applied to General Revenue Fund or 

partly to CIC. I’m saying you’ve made the statement of $4 

billion in debt. I’m asking you for a detailed list and accounting 

for the figures that you’ve used to make that kind of a 

statement. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I’ve said to the member 

opposite, Mr. Chairman . . . I keep repeating the answer. It’s not 

possible to separate the two out in that way. You can say, here 

is Crown debt. Here’s how much Crown debt has come down 

by. Here’s government tax-supported debt; this is how much 

this has come down by. But there are obvious crossovers in the 

numbers. 

 

No credit rating agency is able to do what you say, and no 

credit rating agency asks you to do what you are asking for. 

What they say is this. What is the debt of the province? Is it 

coming down, and is it coming down relative to the size of the 

economy of the province? 

 

And I think the clear point here that we are making to the 

people of Saskatchewan is there is a dramatic reduction in all 

forms of debt of the province. We chose to use government 

tax-supported dollars, money from taxes, to reduce Crop 

Insurance debt, even though that’s Crown debt, because we 

believed it brought not only a benefit to the government’s debt, 

but also to the farmers of this province. 

 

The members opposite are always saying, well what have we 

done for rural Saskatchewan? What we’ve done for rural 

Saskatchewan is reduce the Crop Insurance debt to ensure that 

the new crop insurance program could begin as an effective and 

affordable program with reasonable premiums for farmers. 

 

So what you’re asking for is not what is important here and it’s 

not the kind of thing that we have broken down in the way that 

you’re talking about it. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Madam Minister, I wasn’t the person 10 

minutes ago that said . . . and I’m paraphrasing loosely because 

I of course do not have Hansard. You said — and I jotted down 

the note — that between 1994 and 1997 the debt of this 

province was reduced by $2 billion, and that from ’97 to the 

current time it reduced a further $2 billion, for a total of $4 

billion. 

 

I’m simply asking you to defend the statement that you put onto 

Hansard in this House of saying that $4 billion of debt has been 

reduced in this province. It’s not my figures, it’s not my 

statement; it’s your statement, and I’m asking you for a 

breakdown as to how you justify that statement or how can you 

make it. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You know, Mr. Chairman, the way I 

would answer it is this: if you look at the debt of the province in 

1994, it was $14.9 million . . . billion dollars — I wish it was 

14.9 million — $14.9 billion. If you look at the debt of the 

province as of 1997, it’s $12.8 billion. If you look at the debt of 

the province as of 1998, it’s $12.6 billion. If you look at the 

debt of the province at 1999, it’s 12.1 billion. 2000, it’s 11.5; 

2001, it’s $10.9 billion. So it has been reduced by $4 billion 

over that time frame. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Okay, Madam Minister, then if that is true, 

then why is it so difficult to ask what were the constituent 

components of the reduction of that debt of $4 billion over the 

period of time that you outlined? 

 

And I recognize what I’m asking for is a consolidated picture 

from the overall vision of where the province is at. How much 

of that debt — if you can use those figures — are coming from 

CIC, how many are coming from the general revenue side, and 

what were the component ingredients of the figures you’ve just 

quoted? 

 

  



1368  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. What I’m saying to the member is you can’t make that 

clear distinction. Because in cases that I’ve mentioned, 

government tax dollars are used to reduce CIC debt. In other 

cases, assets are sold and the proceeds are divided. In the case 

of Cameco, 50/50 — half going to CIC, half going to General 

Revenue Fund debt. 

 

You cannot make that sort of clear distinction because there is 

crossover in government operations. But the main point that is 

important and indisputable is the debt of the province has gone 

down by about 4 . . . by exactly $4 billion, and this is one of the 

main reasons why the credit rating of the province was 

upgraded, agencies said. 

 

So I say you don’t have to take the government’s word for it; 

look what outsiders have said: dramatic reduction of debt to 

enhance the fiscal foundations of the province. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I don’t know why this is so 

difficult. I mean you have facts and figures, and you quoted 

from the figure that said in 1994 the debt of this province was 

$14.9 billion. Why is it so hard, if you can come up with that 

total figure at the bottom of the column, why is it so difficult in 

order to tell us what were the constituent elements of that 

column? 

 

You’ve got to come up with the justification of these figures 

coming from something, otherwise who can possibly accept the 

figures as you’re outlining them. And secondly, if you can do 

the one column of figures, surely you can do the second column 

of figures for 1997 that justify the $12.8 billion that you just 

talked about. Why is this so difficult? If it’s so difficult, then on 

what basis can you justify the validity of the figures? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I’m saying to 

the member opposite is he is trying to make something simple 

that is in fact complex; because there is crossover. 

 

What I am saying to the member opposite is, the people of the 

province should be very proud of the record of this province in 

terms of debt reduction. And they should take great pride not 

only in what people within the province have said about the 

debt reduction in the province, but what outside agencies have 

said. And as I say, I will get the exact quote and read you what 

Standard and Poor said: 

 

The most important upgrade that has occurred in the last 

five years in Canada, upgrading a province’s, a 

government’s credit rating from one level to another. 

 

Why did they say we deserve that upgrade, the people of 

Saskatchewan? They said, two reasons: you got rid of the 

deficit; and you have made dramatic efforts to reduce debt, 

including tax-supported debt. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Well, Madam Minister, I find it totally 

unacceptable that you’re unwilling to give us the figures that 

come up to this number, because without it, the numbers 

themselves, or the total, the total itself that you’re outlining, 

comes into question. 

Madam Minister, on one side we can use a concrete example, 

and you used that as an example and you said that sometimes 

money that comes from the General Revenue Fund goes to pay 

down debt in the Crowns and so that the situation of the 

province is in essence neutral. Because of used cash position on 

the General Revenue Fund to pay down long-term debt in the 

Crown Investments Corporation, you really have transferred 

profits, if you like, in the business vernacular, to pay down 

long-term debt. And that’s probably a very good idea. 

 

But when you’re starting to sell long-term assets, for example, 

when you sell the $700 million of assets in Cameco, I mean you 

have the $700 million — and I’m not disputing that you decided 

to put $350 million, give or take, into CIC debt, and you 

decided to put 7 . . . or $350 million into the General Revenue 

Fund by the way of a special dividend. Don’t get into . . . don’t 

be mistaken; I’m not debating that decision. But the reality is, is 

when you took the $700 million of cash to pay down these 

items, you also liquidated $700 million of assets. And so that 

while it improves our liquidity position and our reliance on 

foreign borrowings, we also are in essence no better off. 

 

Madam Minister, I’d like to refocus in the time I have left 

allocated to me . . . the time that I would like to say is that . . . 

How do you explain to taxpayers who have assumed since 1992 

that they were firstly paying this special surcharge to reduce the 

deficit and once that came into balance, by your way of 

calculating the figures, that it was then renamed to a debt 

reduction surcharge, how do you explain to the people that are 

accepting that extra surcharge on their income tax with the clear 

understanding that all of this money was clearly and directly 

going, as their contribution, to the paying down of the 

long-term debt, how do you explain to them that you’re not 

doing that at all? And all that’s going to pay down the 

long-term debt, outside of these other figures that you won’t 

give us, is the surpluses under the balanced budget legislation 

from the General Revenue Fund, where something like $22 

million are projected this year while you’re collecting $58 

million from this debt reduction surcharge. 

 

How do you explain to them that you’re not really being 

straight up with them in terms of this money going directly on 

debt? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I would say we’re being absolutely straight up with 

the people of Saskatchewan. We’re being straight up with them 

in two senses. We’re saying we are committed to reducing the 

debt of the province, and obviously the record of the 

government shows that. As I say, I can read you more quotes. 

 

When upgrading the province’s credit rating from one level to 

another, Standard and Poor’s cited, and I quote, “the sharp 

decline in tax-supported debt.” An outside agency, they’re not 

talking about CIC debt or Crown debt, they’re talking about the 

sharp decline in tax-supported debt. Moody’s talked about a 

significant improvement in the fiscal position of the province 

and talked about persistent deficit financing. They talked about 

the past and reduction in debt commitments, including 

tax-supported debt. What I would say . . . so I’m saying to the  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

member opposite, our commitment on debt is clear. We’re 

committed to reducing the debt dramatically and we’ve done it. 

 

And I would say, by the way, to the members opposite, one of 

the things we’ve been keeping track of upstairs is the spending 

that the members opposite have proposed during this session — 

the extra money that they would spend through their comments 

in this legislature. If in fact you folks were on this side of the 

House, you wouldn’t be reducing any debt and you wouldn’t be 

cutting any taxes, unless you wanted to run a deficit, because all 

your fiscal room would be taken up by more and more and 

more spending when you look at that list. 

 

I would say . . . the other thing I would say to the member 

opposite is this. The government made a choice when it sold its 

Cameco shares. It made a choice as to the timing. When the 

members opposite advocated that the Government of 

Saskatchewan should sell Cameco shares, the shares were worth 

$18  $18 — that’s what the members opposite would have 

sold Cameco for. The government decided that that was not an 

appropriate decision. Instead of selling Cameco shares when 

they were $18, we sold Cameco shares when they were $75.50. 

 

Now from our point of view, the benefit of that belongs to all 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, not just to a particular agency 

that happened to make that particular decision. And we’re 

committed to using a significant portion of that to benefit all 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan by reducing the debt of all taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Madam Minister, I wish that you were 

spending as much time keeping track of the numbers that I just 

asked you for  and you seem to be unable or unwilling to give 

us  in terms of what was contributing to these figures that 

you’re talking about, than trying to keep track of some mythical 

figures that we’re talking about. You may also, if you’ve got so 

much surplus staff, in order to keep track of these mythical 

things, you might keep track of the Gilligan’s Island kind of 

promises that your federal counterparts are talking about in this 

election. 

 

I want to focus on the numbers that are in your budget, Madam 

Minister, and the numbers that you’ve been throwing around 

here in terms of saying that the financial wherewithal of this 

province is, by defined amount of money, so much better off 

than it was in 1992. And obviously you’re unwilling to supply 

us with those numbers while you’re willing to play politics on 

the provincial and federal level with mythical numbers. I would 

suggest that your department focus more on what your 

responsibilities are, rather than some calculation of the 

Gilligan’s Island thing that your federal counterparts are 

looking at. 

 

(1930) 

 

Madam Minister, I would like to quickly turn to another issue 

that I would like to raise before we leave my section of this 

evening’s questions. And that is the question of where the 

Provincial Auditor’s recommendations are with respect to 

combined financial statements. 

Certainly in your comments and the way you’ve responded to 

my questions in terms of the global numbers of the overall 

provincial debt, you seem to be agreeing with the Provincial 

Auditor in terms of, projections should be done on a combined 

financial basis. So that the province can’t be held up to be 

confused by the smoke and mirrors game that goes on between 

shuffling assets and debt and money from the General Revenue 

Fund and the Crown Investments Corporation and your slush 

fund on alcohol and gaming; so that you can draw out of that as 

you see fit to exercise your own requirements. 

 

Madam Minister, do you accept the Provincial Auditor’s 

recommendation about combined forward projections for the 

combined Crown Investments Corporation and the General 

Revenue Fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

introduced into the discussion, a topic I wasn’t going to get into, 

and it’s once again the federal government and the Liberal Party 

of Saskatchewan’s persistent goal to defend Ottawa in this 

legislature, rather than the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What I would say is, I’m not sure why I would stand there and 

want to defend a government — the federal Liberals — who 

have not balanced the budget; have increased the debt more 

dramatically than any other government in the history of the 

country; cut health care dramatically, except when an election 

comes; promised to cut taxes — the GST (goods and services 

tax) — and not delivered. So, Mr. Chairman, we might be better 

off to leave that topic and go on to what we’re supposed to be 

dealing with here. 

 

With respect to the auditor, I think the important thing is his job 

is to look at the financial statements of the province and to say 

to the people of Saskatchewan: have they spent the money the 

way they said they were going to and according to the laws of 

the province? And that’s what he does when he looks at the 

summary financial statements of the province. He either has to 

sign off and say, I give it my stamp of approval, or else he has 

to say, I have these qualifications. That’s the job that he is 

assigned by mandate to do. 

 

When he looks at the summary financial statements of the 

province, not only does he sign them off, he puts right on that 

signature, no reservations. That is, I haven’t got one quibble, no 

matter how minor, with how the government is actually doing 

the job that they’ve been asked to do. 

 

Now with respect to the issue of how we budget, he has an 

opinion that he’d like to see the government budget on a 

government-wide basis. Quite frankly I don’t agree with that 

opinion because I think it’s outdated. I don’t think it takes into 

account the fact that our Crown corporations are going to have 

to deal in a competitive environment — are already dealing in a 

competitive environment. 

 

And I would ask the people of Saskatchewan: do you think it’s 

fair, when you are getting phone calls regularly from Sprint and 

other competitors of SaskTel, to force SaskTel to come to the 

legislature to lay before the people of Saskatchewan — before 

the fact — all of their plans, all of their strategies, when we  

  



1370  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

can’t force Sprint and their competitors to come here and do 

exactly that? 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan would say that’s not fair and 

reasonable. And it’s probably a recommendation that comes 

from a party that would probably like to, underneath it all, kill 

the Crown corporations  because that would probably be the 

effect of what the member opposite is saying. 

 

But I want to ask the member opposite, if he is such a strong 

supporter of the Provincial Auditor, then why doesn’t he 

support the Provincial Auditor when he says you can’t do 

dedicated financing in this government? That is, you can’t say 

this tax is directed to this program. That’s what the auditor says 

too. So you can’t have part of what the auditor says and not the 

other part. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Madam Minister, I’m not the one 

perpetuating this illusion that there is dedicated funding. I am 

absolutely in agreement with the Provincial Auditor that if you 

can’t have dedicated funding, don’t pretend that you’ve got it. 

Don’t fool the people that are paying taxes in this province by 

making them think that you’re actually dedicating the debt 

reduction surcharge to the debt. 

 

You’re perpetrating a fraud on the taxpayers, and I think the 

Provincial Auditor is absolutely correct by . . . when you’re 

saying that you can’t do it and it’s improper for you to carry this 

on. So I’m in absolute agreement, Madam Minister, that the 

Provincial Auditor is right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 

the member opposite, he might like to look at some of the 

things that the auditor does say about the province’s financial 

statements. 

 

He says in his 1996 fall report: the government’s summary 

financial statements are first-class. 1995 — his spring report — 

the government does publish complete financial statements. The 

government’s summary financial statements are among the best 

in Canada. They provide a full and reliable accounting of the 

financial results of the government as a whole. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, and 

to your officials. I wanted to enter the discussion here this 

evening with respect to the total debt of the province. 

 

And I think that . . . I would like you to know, and I certainly 

would like all people of Saskatchewan to know, that as a fiscal 

conservative I very much agree with the view that government 

should operate on a balanced budget and that you should work 

towards a positive bottom line, whether you’re in government, 

whether you’re in your household, or within your business. And 

I think that that’s extremely important. I’ve always been on 

record, I think, as suggesting exactly that. And certainly the 

party is today of that view, that balanced budgets are extremely 

important. We’ve put forward legislation, private members’ 

legislation, over the last number of years with respect to that. 

 

So in terms of the discussion about debt and where it’s going in 

Saskatchewan, I think it’s positive, a positive development that 

we see debt in Saskatchewan being reduced. To pick up a little 

bit on the member from Melfort’s questions with respect to this, 

I wonder if you . . . In your projections of total debt — you 

started at 1994, working up to 2001 — in terms of total of debt 

in the province of Saskatchewan, you’ve come up with those 

figures ranging . . . starting at 14.9 and reduced to $10.9 billion. 

That is, I assume, on the general revenue side only. 

 

Can you provide details, similar details, with respect to debt on 

CIC debt and on the unfunded pension liabilities, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I have to correct the member opposite. Those numbers 

are total debt of the whole government. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Unfunded pension liabilities included? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, that’s not included in the debt, 

but the debt, the numbers that I gave you for debt, are both 

government and Crown debt. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  So for a taxpayer of Saskatchewan, if they were 

looking at it and if they were going to go into their bank, like 

many people do in the spring, particularly people who operate 

either farming operations or business operations, and were 

going to present to their bankers a complete picture of their 

financial health or well-being to the bankers, just as you do, 

Madam Minister . . . and we realize that government is perhaps 

more complicated. But reduced to its basic levels, it’s the same 

thing as a business operator walking into the bank and saying 

that I’ve got $100,000 worth of long-term debt and I’ve got, say 

$80,000 operating line of credit and I’ve got $20,000 

outstanding payments to my creditors that is due, but on the 

other hand, I’ve got this amount of revenue projected for 1997. 

 

It’s in essence the same sort of thing. And I do it on an annual 

basis. Many, many people in this legislature, and certainly all 

across Saskatchewan, do it on an annual basis, make those same 

sort of projections, those same sort of arguments, and present it 

all as a package to whomever finances them, if indeed they 

require financing. You do it as well, only yours is on a far more 

larger scale than the average person is and everyone 

understands that. 

 

But, Madam Minister, I think the argument is clear, that in 

order for people to accept the total debt picture, they have to 

have some indication as to the breakdown of those debt. If I 

walk into the Royal Bank and said to them: here’s my total 

debt, they would want to know the components of that debt or 

projections of the components of that debt. And I think that 

that’s all that we’re really asking for here, Madam Minister, is 

the projections of those debts — whether it’s the General 

Revenue Fund, CIC debt, or unfunded pension liabilities. 

 

And I would like to, after you answer that, I want to get back to 

that unfunded pension liabilities concern. Because it’s a large 

concern, I think, to the people of Saskatchewan because it is . . . 

And I know you will get into the debate about whether it is  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

indeed a liability, or whether it’s an unfunded pension liability 

and you’ve made provisions or not. But I think most people in 

Saskatchewan would view it as an obligation that at some point 

is going to have to be met by the people of Saskatchewan. And 

in terms of that, most people, I think, would assume that that 

would be considered a liability and a debt that would have to be 

addressed. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I wonder if you might care to make 

comment on that part of the discussion. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I think the issue on the pension liability is twofold. 

 

First of all, the problem has been “fixed” in the sense that the 

government — the government of the past, the Blakeney 

government in 1978 — took the action required to ensure that 

the pensions from 1978 onward would be totally funded 

pensions, and I would say as well, taxpayer-friendly pensions. 

That is, they’re no different than the pensions that you would 

have if you worked in another organization. You put your 

money in; the government puts its money in. When you retire, 

you get only what’s in the fund. So I think the first thing is that 

the required action was taken, was taken some years ago. 

 

In terms of the pension liability, it is included in the summary 

financial statements of the province. And there are provinces — 

I would mention your Tory counterparts in Manitoba, for 

example  they still don’t record that pension liability on their 

summary financial statements, as do other organizations. So the 

problem, in that there had to be a change in the pensions; the 

pensions have been changed so they are, from 1978 onward, 

sound. And they are included in the summary financial 

statements of the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess my 

response to that is if the province of Manitoba doesn’t, I think 

they should. And I think probably the majority of people in 

Manitoba would likely agree with me on that. That if they feel 

that it’s a debt owed to people within their province and an 

obligation that’s going to have to be met in a number of years 

over a period of time, I think it’s important that that be pointed 

out. 

 

Madam Minister, just for the benefit of whomever is watching 

this evening’s proceedings, I would like you to provide that 

information with respect to the unfunded pension liabilities and 

what they are currently and what your projections of them are, 

say up to that same time frame of year 2001 that you’ve used as 

an example in other discussions with respect to debt. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I can say to the 

member opposite is, that I can tell him what they are today — 

$3.4 billion — but I cannot tell him what they are because we 

don’t project them into the future. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Three point four billion dollars and that is 

considered to be liquidated over a period of how long? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, you can’t calculate that because it depends on many  

individuals’ individual decisions: when they retire, how long 

they work for. It depends on the decisions of people who were 

part of the government in one way or another before 1978. So 

it’s impossible because I don’t know the . . . we cannot add up 

the individual decisions of those individuals. Besides that, I’m 

sure they haven’t taken those decisions yet. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  But you and your department must surely work 

through some “what if” scenarios. Pension plans of every sort, 

insurance companies of every sort, have actuaries that work on 

this type of thing to be able to make projections as to where 

they expect their future liabilities to come in a period of time 

down the road. They make those kinds of judgements so that 

you and your department officials can make accurate 

assumptions as to what kind of obligations the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan will have to make into the future. 

 

So I would hope, Madam Minister, that you and your 

department has that kind of information at its disposal. And 

then if it doesn’t, I think you probably owe the people of 

Saskatchewan an explanation as to why it doesn’t. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 

the member opposite is, that it’s impossible to project those into 

the future for the reasons I’ve already given. But the 

governments of Saskatchewan have done what is required. That 

is, they have dealt with the problem. They have recognized that 

they needed a change in the pension schemes so that the 

pension schemes would be affordable to taxpayers now and into 

the future. 

 

And we’ve also done the other thing that is required, which is 

ensuring that the province is in good fiscal and economic shape 

and is in a position to absorb these pension costs as we are 

absorbing them today. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well I think that’s fine and well, Madam 

Minister, but I’ll still believe that the concern is there that if 

your department doesn’t have that information, do you think it 

not important that you work through the actuarial position of 

these pensions to determine and to be sure that we aren’t going 

to have any surprises in the future that we might not be 

anticipating at the time being? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I would say is 

what we have done is we have included these liabilities in our 

summary financial statements. When we look at the total debt 

picture of the province we include the pension liabilities and the 

estimate — the 3.4 billion — is exactly that. It’s the estimate of 

the cost of those pensions as far out as we can see. 

 

So that’s what it is — on the basis of what you know today, this 

is what these are going to cost. And we include that in the 

summary financial statements and those are the statements 

which the auditor signs off and says, I approve entirely, 

absolutely accurate. So that’s the best you can do, is knowing 

everything you know today, what is your projection as to the 

liability. That liability isn’t due today; it’s due well into the 

future. 

  



1372  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Mr. Boyd:  Is that liability apt to change then, Madam 

Minister? Do you anticipate — given the fact that things in the 

economy change from time to time — do you anticipate there 

being any problem in the future; that this $3.4 billion may turn 

into $4 billion shall we say, or on the fortunate side that the 

$3.4 billion may turn into $2.8 billion? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The answer to that question is this. 

When you look at everything you know today, every piece of 

information you have available today, the liability is $3.4 

billion, not due today in any sense, due at different times in the 

future. 

 

I can tell you with certainty what the future liability is going to 

be at some point in the future and that is zero, because at some 

point everybody who was on the old plan will unfortunately 

have retired and passed on and we will be on the new plan, the 

plan put in place after 1978. Anybody who joined the 

government after 1978 will have their pension fully funded 

from day one. So the future at some point is zero. What I can’t 

tell you is how long the people in the early plan are going to 

live and I can’t tell you when they can retire, except I can say as 

of today that liability is $3.4 billion. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Madam Minister, to move to areas of 

revenue raised by your government, can you provide 

information with respect to the total revenue raised by 

government in taxation, excluding corporations, in the last 

fiscal year; a detailed breakdown by tax of revenue raised, the 

projected revenue by tax for the last fiscal year; the projected 

revenue by tax for the fiscal year of 1996 and 1997; and a list of 

studies conducted analysing the impact these taxes have on the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I would refer the 

member to page 66 of the budget speech where exactly all of 

that information is broken down for the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. To move to another 

subject matter, with respect to the whole area of native taxation 

in the province of Saskatchewan, you have alluded over the last 

months, I guess, to the fact that you are in negotiations with the 

native leadership of Saskatchewan in terms of taxation in a 

number of areas. I wonder if you could indicate to us where 

those discussions are at, at present time? And what kind of . . . 

Is this issue about to be resolved, or what can we expect in 

terms of this? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well what we have said on this 

topic is, we have a long-standing tax understanding with the 

first nations people which differs in some significant respects 

with the tax regime in other provinces but costs the taxpayer 

about exactly the same as it does in other provinces like 

Manitoba or whatever. And there has been pressure, primarily 

from the first nations people, to change that tax regime. We 

have said we’re prepared to discuss changes to the tax regime, 

but they have to be balanced and fair changes. And that’s where 

it rests. We’re still talking. The matter is not resolved. And I’m 

not sure that it is close to being resolved, but the discussions are 

ongoing. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is that something 

that . . . What kind of dollars are we talking about here? Are we 

talking hugely significant amounts of money, or is it something 

that perhaps at some point your government will negotiate with 

the native leadership on this issue? I think for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, we would think it appropriate that we 

know what kinds of figures we’re talking about here. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I’m not sure exactly what the 

member opposite is asking because those things are difficult to 

break down. But I’ll answer the question this way. 

 

In Saskatchewan we do not charge the education & health tax 

off reserve. In Manitoba they do charge the education & health 

tax off reserve. But in Manitoba, the same first nations people 

pay cigarette and tax gas on reserve off . . . they do not pay 

cigarette and gas tax on reserve. In Saskatchewan first nations 

people do pay cigarette and gas tax on reserve. 

 

So we could switch to the Manitoba regime. Our discussions 

with Manitoba, my discussions with the minister in Manitoba, 

suggests that the taxpayer would be in about the same position. 

So whether we have the regime we have in Saskatchewan or the 

one that exists in many other provinces, the net effect, in that 

we can estimate it, is very similar for taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  What is that figure then, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I don’t . . . we don’t have a 

precise breakdown. What we’re saying is, if you look at the 

benefit associated with not paying sales tax off reserve, you 

estimate what the benefit is of not paying cigarette and gas tax 

on reserve, you look at estimates about what consumption 

might be, they are very equivalent to an offset. So you take one 

person, and you say how much does that person buy on . . . off 

reserve, tax free purchases, sales tax free purchases. Take that 

same person, estimate how much cigarettes and gas they would 

buy on reserve if it was tax free, and it’s about equivalent 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Then from there I would think that you could 

work through what that overall picture is in terms of the 

trade-off there. Essentially that’s what you’re saying, is there’s 

a trade-off. If you use the Manitoba model, the trade-off is such 

that there’s no net gain or net loss to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And in order to come up with that assumption 

— I don’t know, what do we do — just times it out by the 

number of native people that live on reserve and off reserve in 

Saskatchewan to come up with an accurate figure or an estimate 

of a figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think you could do the 

calculation probably using you and I. If you and I didn’t have to 

pay sales tax, calculate that, think about what the benefits are. 

But think about, on the other side, if we didn’t have to pay any 

taxes on our cigarettes and gas, there would be an equivalency 

or a very close equivalency is what we’re saying. That’s as far 

as the discussions have gone. 

 

And as I say, I’ve discussed this with my counterparts in 

Manitoba. They agree that there is an equivalency there. 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I wonder if you 

could provide projections of revenue to the province would . . . 

the province would receive if status Indians did pay the PST 

(provincial sales tax) for off reserve purchases? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, no, I wouldn’t have 

that estimate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: Not with you or it isn’t available or you haven’t 

worked through the numbers? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, we haven’t worked 

through the numbers beyond what I’m saying to you in terms of 

the offset. We’ve looked at an average individual living on a 

reserve and said, okay, what sorts of estimates would you make 

about purchases of cigarettes and gas relative to tax free 

purchases off reserve? And they’re in the same ballpark. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is that something 

that your department could come up with a figure of? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think, Mr. Chairman, it would be 

very difficult to do so. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well I’m not quite sure how to respond to that, 

Madam Minister  very difficult to do so. It is an issue in 

Saskatchewan. As you know, it was raised in the last election 

campaign with respect to the whole area of native taxation 

within our province. We made an election commitment that we 

believed that, in terms of the whole issue of tax fairness, that 

that should be something that is addressed in the future. 

 

And given, I guess, even the fact that it is difficult to do, I 

wonder if you would care to undertake to do it so the people of 

Saskatchewan would know what kind of figures we are talking 

about in this whole area. And then they can, I suspect, make 

some kind of a judgement themselves as to whether or not it is 

something that you should be proceeding with. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what you would 

come up with is nothing more than an estimate. And I think it’s 

probably worthwhile putting a ballpark estimate on the table 

because I think what the members opposite do, because I see it 

when I go out and talk to the public, they have these 

exaggerated notions. Boy, you could really reduce the sales tax 

if you forced Indians to pay the sales tax. 

 

But we’re talking an estimate in the neighbourhood of $10 

million, which isn’t going to get you . . . it’s going to get you 

about a 7 per cent . . . it’s going to give you about a 17 per cent 

of one point on the sales tax. So it’s a very, very small part of 

the revenue of the province. 

 

And what I would say to the member opposite, because I know 

he plays a lot of politics with this one, the minute that you try to 

get rid of sales tax off reserve, you look at what happens. Look 

at the Tories in Manitoba. You would find yourself very shortly 

thereafter having to exempt cigarette and gas tax on reserve. 

That would cost you exactly the same ballpark, $10 million or 

so. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well why didn’t you just say that at the 

beginning, Madam Minister? Here we are, we’ve spent 20 

minutes getting you to come up with that estimate of $10 

million. And for some reason you’ve been dragging your feet, 

entirely reluctant to do it. And then just glibly at the end of your 

comments, you pop out the $10 million figure, and you say that 

that’s the estimate, and that other people go around the province 

and make exaggerated claims of whatever it is. 

 

Well if we make . . . if anybody was making exaggerated 

claims, you, Madam Minister, have the resources through your 

department to set the record straight. I don’t know why you 

wouldn’t want to do that. And I wonder, to the people . . . You 

could explain that to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, because — mark my 

words — instead of you going around and quoting, well it’s in 

the neighbourhood of around $10 million, which is a very rough 

and fuzzy number . . . Mark my words. You will have that 

nailed to a cross as a $10 million figure. That’s why, unless you 

have a precise number that you can say, here it is, you’re very 

reluctant to give to the member opposite, a number. 

 

Let’s see. Let’s see if he goes around and says, well it could be 

closer to $10 million than a higher number. Or let’s see if we 

end up with that number as a nailed-on-the-cross number. I 

think it’ll be a good test case. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  I think it will too, Madam Minister, because 

you’re the one that made the statement, not me. I simply asked 

you for the figures; you’ve provided an estimate of it, which is 

all I’ve ever asked for from you, was an estimate of it. 

 

I suspect the comment that you will see from us in the future 

will be: the Finance minister, on May 5 of 1997, made the 

estimate of what the revenue is. She also put in these qualifiers 

that you may be looking at court action with respect to other 

concerns on that. 

 

But at least we’re at the point where we have some discussion 

about the relevance of imposing that tax or not imposing that 

tax, and not just allowing anyone to make any kind of a 

wild-eyed estimate of what it is. Because essentially, Madam 

Minister, that’s all that there was before you made the statement 

here this evening that that’s the kind of ballpark that we’re 

playing within. 

 

And I think that that’s important, that the people of 

Saskatchewan do know that that is what you and your officials 

make as an estimate, based on the fact of a number of concerns 

like what the average family, the average native family, use . . . 

spends in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that that’s . . . I think we’ve made some progress on 

that issue, Madam Minister, and I’m pleased to see that. And I 

think that that lends itself for future discussion as well as 

intelligent discussion about the whole areas of taxation — how 

they’re imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, how they 

aren’t imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, whether they 

should or shouldn’t be. And I think that that’s important, 

Madam Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. I’m  

  



1374  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

just trying, Mr. Chairman, to listen to the member’s comments 

and gain some sort of insight into what he’s saying there, but 

it’s apparently nothing there. 

 

(2000) 

 

Madam Minister, you’ve made, in the last number of months, 

trips abroad to, I understand, Japan and Hong Kong. Could you 

provide us with a report on this trip, including who attended, 

who went along with you, Madam Minister, the meetings that 

you embarked upon and the results of those . . . of the trips or 

. . . of the trip, including what kind of future benefits the people 

of Saskatchewan might enjoy from that, and an estimate of the 

cost of the trip. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the last one we don’t have yet. Who went along? The 

deputy minister of Finance went from the department; Rae 

Haverstock, who’s in charge of debt management, went, and 

Cheryl Loadman from my office went. 

 

In terms of who we met with, there was a press release at that 

time, but we met with the Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi, which is 

the largest bank in the world; we met with Nippon Life, the 

largest . . . one of the largest life insurance companies in the 

world. We met with Meiji Life, which is a major life insurance 

company. We met with the Industrial Bank of Japan. We met 

with Kampo, which is the largest single purchaser of 

government bonds. Kampo is the post office agency in Japan. 

We met with Hutchinson Whampoa, which is Li Ka Shing’s 

operation in Hong Kong. 

 

We had meetings with the ambassador — the Canadian 

ambassador to Japan  and the Canadian ambassador to Japan 

hosted a lunch with investors and also hosted a reception with 

about a-hundred-and-some investors in Tokyo. So that’s a 

rough list of the people who we met with. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair . . . (inaudible) . . . to move to 

Agriculture and Food estimates, so therefore I would move that 

we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair:  Before we begin, I’ll just remind committee 

members this department was last before the committee on 

April 14, and before I proceed further I invite the minister to 

re-introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tonight I have 

with me, deputy minister Dr. Murray McLaughlin to my 

immediate left; on his left, Dale Sigurdson, assistant deputy 

minister; on my right, Terry Scott, assistant deputy minister; 

behind me, Ross Johnson, budget officer, administrative 

services branch; and Jack Zepp, director of administrative 

services branch. Sitting at the back, we’ve brought in people 

from Ag Credit Corporation: Norm Ballagh, general manager; 

Doug Matthies, general manager of Sask Crop Insurance from 

Melville; and Greg Haase, director of lands branch. 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and good 

evening to the minister’s officials and to the minister too. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think you have become quite aware of some of 

the initiatives that we’ve undertaken as official opposition in 

terms of our concern for farmers and costs of farm inputs and 

the high cost of farm inputs, and in fact it seems like an 

ever-increasing problem. And we’ve undertaken to do some 

rather extensive surveying of farmers in the province, 

particularly my constituency. And I note I had several hundred 

responses to farm input surveys that I had sent out earlier in the 

year, actually late year, earlier in this year as well. And they 

covered quite a wide cross-section of my constituency. 

 

I have the communities and districts of Avonlea, Bateman, 

Cardross, Chaplin, Coderre, Crane Valley, Glenbain, 

Gouldtown, Gravelbourg, Herbert, Hodgeville, McMahon, 

Moose Jaw district, Mossbank, Morse, Neville, Pense, Ponteix, 

Rouleau, Shamrock, Spring Valley, Swift Current, Tuxford, 

Vanguard, Waldeck. Just to show you that the concern certainly 

is one that is widespread throughout the farming community, 

certainly across my constituency, and I dare say you’d find the 

same thing in yours. 

 

I found some rather common threads of concern, and they 

pertain to farm input costs that are under the control of this 

provincial government. For example, a gentleman from 

Avonlea cites tax assessment as one of the problems. From 

Chaplin, Roy and Hazel Coates saying SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy rates are a problem. Gordon and Patsy Anderson 

from Coderre, the same. Lawrence Gibson from Crane Valley 

citing electrical costs. 

 

A couple from Dorintosh here talking about rising farm input 

costs. Actually they were some residents of my riding 

previously and they moved on, and they expressed their 

gratitude to me for taking up the cause of trying to defend 

farmers and the costs of farm production. And as a matter of 

fact, they did let me know their son’s taken over the farm and 

thanks for the concerns, is what they expressed to me. 

 

Mr. Jahnke from Gouldtown is talking about, again prices of 

gas, diesel, and sales taxes significantly higher than those in 

Alberta. The Bouviers from Gravelbourg — SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy rates. Piches from Gravelbourg — tax assessment, 

SaskEnergy hook-up rates. The Heinrichs from McMahon — 

tax reassessment. The Carters from Moose Jaw as well — tax 

reassessment. 

 

Some other individuals from the Moose Jaw district concerned 

about the control and management of wildlife as it relates to 

costs to farmers. And also citing their appreciation for the 

official opposition’s concern for future farming generations. 

Another from the Moose Jaw district — SaskPower rates. 

Mossbank the same thing — common concerns, SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy rates. Ponteix the same; Swift Current and 

Waldeck. 

 

So as I say, some rather common threads here and I do  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

acknowledge I wrote a letter to you, Mr. Minister, in March of 

this year expressing some of these concerns to you, and I have 

your response in front of me. And what we are talking about 

here is some problems related to things that are under the 

control of the provincial government in terms of costs that 

could be kept in line. And I note in your letter on page 2, your 

suggesting here that your government also tries to control those 

charges and fees that you levy directly on farmers such as 

utilities, crop insurance, and grazing fees. 

 

That being the case, I wonder if you would like to comment on 

what seems to be a considerable amount of concern out of the 

farming community relating to costs that are in fact under the 

control of your government and are you taking seriously the 

rising farm input costs and its affect on agriculture in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chair, I would like to join with the 

member opposite. And I know he’s sincere about his concerns 

about input cost because as a rural person he knows . . . I 

believe he would know that that is one of the most serious 

issues facing farmers in Saskatchewan today. 

 

And I think I’ll just lay out some of the processes that we’ve 

gone through to try to address some of the concerns that you 

have about input costs. 

 

As opposed to the process that the federal government went 

through when they had a joint House of Commons-Senate 

committee study the input cost issue about 1995 or early ’96 — 

a couple of years ago, a year and a half ago — where they did a 

review of input costs . . . To make a long story short, they came 

up with a three-page decision that says farmers should “shop 

around.” I was very, very disappointed in that, and so dismissed 

it accordingly. 

 

At that point in time we took it upon ourselves in Saskatchewan 

to sit down and talk about what we could do as a lone provincial 

government, and decided that there are some things we could do 

as a provincial government by ourselves, but in order to ensure 

that nationwide, the companies who are in the business of 

supplying crop supplies, supplying supplies for crops, have a 

watchdog, it would have to be a national joint project between 

all the provincial governments and the federal government. 

 

But just let me tell you a couple of things that we did before . . . 

you know, in the process. We started in February 1996 — my 

first federal-provincial agriculture ministers’ meeting — and 

brought the issue of inputs costs to the table. There was some 

interest from other provinces, but it wasn’t very well taken up, 

let’s put it that way. 

 

So again in . . . that was the interim meeting in February ’96. At 

the annual meeting in July 1996 in Victoria we again brought 

the issue to the table, and managed to get together a working 

group where we co-chair with the federal government a group 

that is trying to put in place a process that we should go through 

as a nation, with federal-provincial support, to try to monitor 

the input costs. 

 

Now I can say one thing. There wasn’t much interest from the 

federal government in the beginning, or many of the provincial 

governments. But we stuck to it for a year and a half and we 

now have it again on the agenda for the July 1997 meeting in 

Victoria where we are going to be putting forward a list of 

things that we can do in order to try to make sure that input 

costs are monitored on behalf of the farmers, because it’s a 

very, very important issue. 

 

In the meantime what we did, I tell the member — and he will 

know this — we said, well we can’t just stand up here and say, 

you, Mr. Federal Government, should do this because it’s your 

jurisdiction even though the provinces are getting together and 

we got to monitor this. 

 

We chose to be leaders in the field. We put all our resources 

together — not all of them — many of our resources together 

from the crop sector program and reduced input costs more than 

they’ve ever been reduced in Saskatchewan in my memory. 

That was crop insurance — a 23 per cent decrease in that input 

cost right across the board in this province. 

 

(20l5) 

 

So we just didn’t want to say, you know, you guys should do 

something in the federal government. We thought we’d provide 

some leadership — we did. Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is a 

joint federal-provincial program. We did the meetings around 

the provinces, made the recommendations, and the federal 

government said, okay, we’ll join in with that. 

 

Unfortunately, the 23 per cent probably could have been 26, 27 

per cent had the federal government reduced their share of the 

reinsurance debt to zero, as we did. Now I know they’re 

strapped for resources, but they brought theirs down to $90 

million left. If they had’ve brought it to zero it would have been 

another 3 or 4 per cent; so we could have been up to 20, 

probably 27 per cent reduction in that input cost — in one input 

cost. 

 

The other thing we did to try to prove that we wanted to lead by 

example is that we reduced the E&H (education and health) tax 

on many of the intensive livestock operations, potato storage, 

fruit storage, and greenhouses. 

 

And so we’ve provided some action and we are desperately 

trying to get the federal government and other provinces onside 

to monitor and try to reduce action in the private sector. You 

can’t dictate what prices are going to be. You can’t tell 

Monsanto or any chemical or fertilizer company . . . you can’t 

dictate what they’re going to charge. But what you can do on 

behalf of the producers is unify cross-Canada-wide — one 

province alone won’t do it. You’ve got to have everybody 

participating to sort of be the watchdog on behalf of people, 

farmers, who use the inputs. 

 

And one of the things that I would suggest to you that we work 

together on in the future and that is probably one of the biggest 

input costs right now farmers have, and that is the price of 

transporting the grain from their farm to market and that is the 

transportation costs. 

  



1376  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

We’ve seen, unfortunately in the province — and I’m not 

complaining about this because we’re working desperately, as 

you know, and I think you agree — that we’re trying to get the 

hog industry going to replace the $320 million of transportation 

cuts to the province. You know we’re encouraging the poultry 

industry — anybody that can use Saskatchewan grain — to do 

that and add value to our products. 

 

But unfortunately, if you take from 1997, now, till the year 

2000, compound the $320 million, you’re going to see a billion 

dollars taken out of the pockets of Saskatchewan farmers by the 

federal government. I know you don’t like that and I don’t like 

that. I know you’re not in the position to defend your federal 

cousins. All I’m saying is that if we can work together and then 

put up a unified voice from Saskatchewan, maybe we can 

accomplish many of these things that I think we both desire. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

I didn’t neglect to mention; I wanted to get into it right now, in 

terms of costs, costs perhaps that aren’t so nearly under your 

control, related to farm inputs, and of course numerous times 

these ones being cited as well. And the high cost of farm 

equipment and equipment parts, certainly one of the 

predominant threads as well in terms of responses to our 

questionnaires, as was the high cost of farm chemicals, 

fertilizers, and pesticides. 

 

Now I’ve pulled a little bit of information off of the Internet 

concerning some of these companies that certainly have been 

doing quite well off of the avails of agriculture, a number of the 

farm equipment companies being no exception, certainly, where 

John Deere reporting first quarter, 1997 earnings — net income 

of $177 million for first quarter of ’97 alone. We have New 

Holland posting a strong fourth quarter and full-year revenues, 

revenues totalling 5.5 billion. And those are up 11 per cent over 

the previous year reported. We’ve got the Case Corporation 

reporting, as of this date, 12 straight quarters of year-over-year 

improvement in operating results. Agco reporting record fourth 

quarter sales and earnings, earnings in the order of $125.9 

million. 

 

So certainly, if only we could have such an optimistic outlook 

for those people who produce the commodities, wouldn’t that 

be a grand thing in the scheme of things? But certainly those 

who would provide the equipment to agriculture are making 

sure that their net earnings are staying strong despite what is 

happening in the agricultural economy as we speak. We’ve got 

fertilizer manufacturers like Viridian — fertilizer earnings 

improving significantly, recording net earnings of 183.5 million 

in this report. Rohm and Haas, one of the chemical 

manufacturers. Financial performance in the fourth quarter was 

a fitting end to a very good year for Rohm and Haas they go on 

to say, net earnings of 75 million in 1996 alone, of which 

agriculture chemicals played a significant part, something like 

19 million, of that total figure. 

 

I’ve taken it upon myself as well to write letters to many of 

these manufacturers of farm chemicals, the manufacturers of 

farm equipment, to try and get some responses from them as to 

why they feel it necessary to see the costs of those goods that 

they are manufacturing increasing at a time when farm  

commodity prices seem to be then to head the opposite 

direction. There have been a few responses to me to date, 

Cargill being one; I’ve got one from 3M Canada. I didn’t bring 

one with me from Imperial Oil. And I’ve got Shell, who has 

indicated they will be responding soon. 

 

I wonder though in terms of this government, your government, 

and its initiative so far in this regard, would you have similar 

letters from farm equipment and farm manufacturers, chemical 

manufacturers, or the correspondence you may have had with 

them to show the people in the province, the agricultural 

producers, that you are genuine in your attempt to — use your 

words from earlier — taking a watchdog approach? Because 

essentially this is what we have to do in this matter, is to 

express our vigilance on behalf of farm producers in the case of 

farm equipment and chemical manufacturing. 

 

Would you have anything like that, either here or available to 

us, to show that your government is taking this matter very 

seriously? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, I have not written any of the 

companies. I commend you for doing so. That’s the route you 

chose and there’s nothing wrong with that. I am one that 

believes that, while you can write the company and ask them 

why they’re doing it, the answer will be . . . they’ll explain 

exactly why they’re doing it but they won’t tell you they’re 

going to do anything to change. 

 

So I’ve taken the alternate route. And I’ll tell you something, if 

it had not been for the Government of Saskatchewan, we 

wouldn’t have the input cost issue on the federal-provincial 

table. It’s taken me, it’ll be a year and a half almost in July, to 

come to where we might have a decision item on the table, or a 

process on the table that we can monitor the input costs across 

this country on behalf of producers and the people who use 

them. 

 

So like I say, I commend you on writing those letters, but if you 

don’t . . . You can’t dictate the price. I mean if we were in 

another, if we were in another economy, you may be able to 

say, okay here’s the price of fertilizer and nitrogen, here’s the 

price of phosphate, here’s the price of a tractor of 130 horse, 

here’s the price of a 200 horse — can’t do that. 

 

Supply and demand, supply and demand . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Kindersley says there’s 

some places or people who advocate that. Well I’m not one of 

those people, because I live in the real world, I think, as maybe 

you do and he does, that says you can’t dictate price. 

 

But what you can do on behalf of producers . . . If you can’t 

dictate the price, what can you do? You can monitor the 

situation. You can look into whether or not there’s 

inconsistencies in pricing. You can look into whether or not 

there’s inconsistencies of supply and demand. Just be the 

watchdog looking over the shoulder of . . . and I would be sure 

that the chemical companies and farm machinery companies, 

everybody who supplies inputs, wouldn’t mind that, because 

I’m sure they want to be fairly open as well. 

 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

But nobody’s doing it right now. We have provisions in Ottawa 

to do it. They failed miserably two years ago, a year and a half 

ago. 

 

So all we’re trying to do in Saskatchewan . . . And like I say, I 

got to repeat again, not to brag, but had it not been for the 

Government of Saskatchewan since February 1996, we 

wouldn’t have this issue on the table. And we’re going to 

pursue it the way we can. You’re pursuing it by writing those 

people; I commend you for that. And I think that through these 

processes, each of our processes, we can maybe make those 

people who are supplying inputs look over their shoulder and 

say, well you know we better make sure that everything’s above 

board. 

 

Because you can look at their margins. What are the profit 

margins? 5 per cent? 10 per cent? 30 per cent? 50 per cent? 

You’ve got to be able to look at all these things and decide 

whether or not they’re gouging, whether there’s price fixing, 

whether there’s supply fixing, and the like. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 

Minister, I would just maintain that if you were only to use the 

power of your office as well and join with us in terms of writing 

formally some of these manufacturers, as we have done, that in 

terms of the watchdog approach, being ever vigilant on behalf 

of farmers — not necessarily promoting price control as some 

might dictate in some other economy — but certainly using the 

weight of your office essentially, would no doubt lead some of 

the manufacturers to have some second thoughts when it comes 

to trying to increase some margins in some of these sectors. 

 

Now I note, and I think earlier on in your response, you may 

have made reference to a July 1997 meeting, and would that be 

with respect to the interprovincial committee that you refer to in 

your letter that’s examining these farm input costs? Would you 

be able to just . . . I didn’t catch that. When is the date of the 

meeting and location? And how many resources from your 

department of the monies we see in these estimates tonight 

would be devoted to that undertaking and to the ongoing 

examination and study of farm input costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think that . . . You know, what we 

can do here is we can write, as my colleague says, Ford Motor 

Co. and tell them the price of cars are too high too, but whether 

that will do a lot of good, I’m not sure. 

 

But maybe that you could help me in tabling the documents that 

you have referred to in this debate; so we might have the 

advantage of knowing exactly what they say, to add to our 

cause. I’d appreciate that very much. And any further 

documents you might receive, I’d ask you to table those as well. 

 

One of the things that we have done is met with the Crop 

Protection Institute of Canada, CPIC, a few months ago. That’s 

where all the major players for crop protection belong to. And 

we sat down with them. We talked about a number of things, 

including the cost of inputs and the fact that it’s one of the 

major problems that farmers are facing on the Prairies today. 

 

(2030) 

 

And as far as what we’re doing in our federal-provincial 

meetings, it’ll be in Quebec this July. And we’re going to have 

a progress report because right now studies are being done by 

our department on inputs. So we’re trying to get . . . While the 

final report won’t be done, we’ll be able to have a progress 

report. And at that point in time I think we will know exactly 

. . . or about when the final report will be done. And then when 

the final report’s done, what we’ll do is come together again, 

decide exactly what should be done, what should be put in place 

to monitor the situation. That’s a rough outline of what will take 

place. 

 

And as far as the province of Saskatchewan is concerned, we 

put in, in cash or in kind, in this process  and I repeat again, 

had it not been for us, this wouldn’t have happened  but we 

put in, out of our provincial coffers, about $100,000 in cash or 

in kind up to date to make sure this is happening, and there 

could be and probably will be more in the future. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  I thank you, Mr. Minister, for the reply and 

also to let you know that we are very genuine in our concerns 

for farmers in this province. And if there’s anything as official 

opposition that you require from us in terms of the information 

that we’re gleaning from constituents province-wide in this 

regard, we will certainly share it with you if it goes towards 

what is a common good here, which is to try and keep a lid, so 

to speak, on some of these farm input costs. 

 

But if I could turn just briefly to one item, of course, which is 

directly under your jurisdiction, and you do make some mention 

of it in your correspondence to me, and that was with respect to 

department Crown land grazing rates. And you in your letter 

referred to the fact that they’re tied directly to market returns 

and they’re adjusted automatically to fluctuations in the 

livestock economy. 

 

Well I have concerns expressed to me on a fairly regular basis 

in terms of grazing fees charged by this province. One before 

me right here from Richard and Sandra Voisin of Mossbank 

expressing that very same concern. 

 

Now in a response to a request for information pertaining to the 

revenues derived from both leasing and rental of Crown grazing 

land, I see for the fiscal year ’96-97 it was estimated at $6.3 

million. The year previous was 7.9. There’s still some rather 

significant revenues being attained there, and I’m told that there 

hasn’t really been much of an adjustment in terms of the 

grazing fees that are charged in provincial pastures. I may stand 

corrected on that. 

 

As a matter of fact, I’m a patron of one of them. I haven’t paid 

that close attention to it for my own particular circumstance, but 

a number of constituents have expressed concern that grazing 

fees haven’t really decreased in any way. And certainly coming 

through what was a very difficult winter for cattle producers in 

this province again, back to back with what was a difficult 

winter of 1995 — ’6 as well — that there should be some 

further consideration given to livestock producers and also too 

with the cattle prices . . . cow prices having dropped as they did  

  



1378  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

in late 1996, how do you factor these into your formulas? 

 

You’ve made reference that it is, but it seems to me that there 

isn’t enough consideration being given to market forces in the 

cattle industry as it relates to fees that you attach to Crown 

grazing land. Could I just get a comment from you in this 

regard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I have here the recent history of 

grazing rates for Saskatchewan. And of course the grazing rates 

are based on a weighted average — the weighted average price 

of cattle sales, okay. And that gives you the rent formula. Now 

I’ll just give you the recent history — 1994, the actual rent was 

$5.42; ’95, it was $5.05; in ’96, it was $4.06; and in ’97, $3.67. 

So you can see that the trend has been down. 

 

Now as government I’m not going to stand up and take credit 

for that  for lower grazing rates  because it’s hooked to the 

price of cattle. And I think if we were all being honest with 

ourselves . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the prices are 

dropping, exactly. That’s why the rents are going down. I think 

that producers out there would like to see more of a constant 

rent and keep their price at a constant level rather than having 

the ups and downs. But the actual rents have gone down, but 

like I say that’s basically hooked to the price of cattle so in . . . 

by formula. I hope that’s answered your question. If I haven’t 

answered your question, just tell me what I haven’t answered. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, I only have a couple of questions for you, but I’d like 

to comment on a couple of things you said to the member for 

Thunder Creek. And you talked about the input costs coming 

down more than anything governments have done in history 

around here. And I think you’re familiar with that because if I 

remember right the member for Rosetown was Minister of 

Agriculture when he did more damage to farmers in this 

province than anybody in the history of Canada has ever done 

with the GRIP program and I’m sure you’re very familiar with 

that. So I wouldn’t stand up and start blowing your horn too 

loud because your record in agriculture in this province is 

dismal at best. 

 

You talk, Mr. Minister, about the Crow being gone, and yes, it 

hurts when we haul grain. Every farmer in this province when 

they haul a load of grain and look at their cheque can’t believe 

the amount of freight we pay. On the other hand, I think in 10 to 

15 to 20 years we’re going to be far better off because we have 

to get off our butts here in Saskatchewan and start looking after 

ourselves. 

 

And I think that you talked about showing leadership over 

there. I think what that has done is forced you into for once 

doing something in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, you had answered a farmer of mine 

lately that had wrote in about the GRIP program; and you had 

answered him. And I’m not questioning on that. But in this 

report it says receivables as to the GRIP bills left outstanding as 

of April 10, ’97 was $1.527 million. That farmer received a bill, 

his GRIP bill that he had not paid, and why he had not paid it 

was more on principle than not because he didn’t have the  

money. Were all the other farmers that are still outstanding also 

turned over to Crop Insurance, like the same as he was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. Crop Insurance administers the 

wind-down of the GRIP program, so everything’s been moved 

over to Crop Insurance. And I’m really pleased that we agree on 

the fact that . . . While I can’t comment on the GRIP program 

because it’s before the courts right now, I would like to say that 

Saskatchewan . . . I would have to disagree that we have 

devastated the farm economy. 

 

And I don’t want to get into a whodunit mode. But if you look 

at the crop insurance program, if you look at the E&H 

(education and health) reductions that we’ve had across the 

piece, if you look at the agri-food innovation fund  $91 

million in that  if you look at the agri-food equity fund where 

you put money into . . . $20 million into value added 

processing, if you look at the ag development fund where 

we’re, in all those funds, putting emphasis on adding value to 

Saskatchewan products, I just really disagree with your analysis 

of the fact we haven’t done anything for agriculture as opposed 

to the federal government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. I 

did give . . . 

 

I took credit . . . I mean you gave us credit for moving into a 

very positive, real environment, and I think that’s what we plan 

to continue to do. But we did it on a gradual basis. The problem 

that I have with your comment on Saskatchewan is that you 

seem to take no credit or no ownership of the fact that, if you 

look at what the federal government’s done to Saskatchewan in 

the last few years, we’ve had $250 million safety-net funding 

reduced; $250 million annually. We have Crow benefit 

eliminated — $320 million annually. 

 

We have cost recovery for grading and inspection now from the 

federal government. We have cost recovery for pesticide 

registration. We’ve seen reduced spending on agricultural 

research. They’ve closed the Regina research station. We’ve 

seen the dairy subsidy cut. We’ve seen deregulated 

transportation from WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 

to the CTA, Canadian Transportation Act. That’s costs us 

basically $200 million this year as producers. 

 

You’ve seen discontinued green plan, PARD (Partnership 

Agreement on Rural Development) and PAWBED (Partnership 

Agreement on Water Based Economic Development), and a 

reduced role in the Farm Debt Review. 

 

So while we haven’t done everything right in Saskatchewan Ag 

and Food  I’ll admit that  we’ve done a lot of things right. 

But I’ll tell you, if you add up the 250 million from safety net, 

320 million from Crow benefit, that’s 570 million. You add 200 

million on this year for demurrage and lost sales because the 

federal government didn't put in place any serious penalties for 

people like the railroads who didn’t get the grain in on time, I 

mean you’re getting close to a billion dollars in one year, in one 

year. 

 

So I mean, you may say that the Government of Saskatchewan 

hasn’t done everything, but I’ll tell you; we’ve really been 

kicked and kicked harder than we’ve ever been kicked by the  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

federal Liberal government, including when the Conservative 

government was in power. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you for that short answer, Mr. 

Minister. I’d like to follow up — I think, for I can’t even 

remember what question I asked — but I think it goes back to 

something about . . . no it wasn’t . . . yes it was GRIP. 

 

Okay, Mr. Minister. you know the question I’m asking. That 

farmer that I talked about . . . and I think a number of others out 

there either didn’t have crop insurance or were not in arrears 

with crop insurance until this point. Now all of a sudden we’ve 

taken this money and handed it over to crop insurance 

collections. These farmers in arrears, now if they want crop 

insurance this year, are they eligible for crop insurance without 

paying this bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I just want to take a minute to make sure 

I give you the right answer because — believe it or not — I 

don’t know everything. Okay, I won’t make a good stand-up 

comic either. 

 

First of all, let me say that when the bills went out in 1996, we 

said at that time we weren’t going to penalize you; so we gave 

the farmers a year’s grace for 1996, okay. Then we rolled it 

over into the . . . GRIP . . . you know, the crop insurance 

administrative . . . and what we said to producers is, you either 

had to have it paid up in full by April 15, or you had to come 

into the corporation or talk to the corporation and make a 

repayment plan. That repayment plan was based on some 

standard criteria. But in extenuating circumstances, if you could 

make a good case, then the Crop Insurance people would look 

at that as well. 

 

So yes, either pay up or come in and make arrangements to pay, 

and then you’d be eligible for 1997 after having sort of 1996 as 

a free year without penalty. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t 

think that’s going to make these farmers happy that are in 

arrears out there, that have been in good standing with Crop 

Insurance. 

 

I just want to touch on it . . . and I knew you touched on it 

before and said you wouldn’t like to comment on it, but I think 

you’ve had ample time now, with the delay in the GRIP 

decision. And I think a number of us feel that the longer this 

delay goes, that it’s probably going to be in favour of the 

farmers. And you’ve had a fair number of time lapse now that 

you should have been able to — probably and I’m sure you 

have — figure out the amount of the money that would be 

owing in GRIP. 

 

And I guess it’s a threefold question I’d like to ask. When the 

decision comes down, and if it’s shortly in favour of the 

farmers, when will the cheques be mailed to the farmers? What 

will the average cheque be? And what is the total amount of the 

pay-out that will be owing to farmers? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I just want to clarify one thing for the 

member. Under the rules from the time that GRIP began, Crop 

Insurance administered it. And basically the rules were the 

same. I mean it was a bill from one year. Whether you had crop 

insurance outstanding premium or GRIP, if you didn’t have 

your arrangements made, you were putting yourself in the same 

position as those people are this year who don’t have 

arrangements made. 

 

And I’m not sure what you’re suggesting. If you’re suggesting 

that we should sort of push the GRIP bills aside and forget 

about them and not have them hooked into having crop 

insurance, if that’s what you’re suggesting, then you need to tell 

me how we should, as a responsible government, try to collect 

that money for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. You know, you 

might want to give me your suggestions on that. 

 

As far as your questions are concerned about GRIP, I think that 

you know that I cannot answer those questions  because it 

may prejudice the case that’s before the courts  before the 

judgement comes. 

 

When after the judgement comes and there’s no appeals from 

either side, or when this is absolutely done, then I’d be glad to 

sit and talk to you about that and argue that point with you for 

as long as you’d like to argue. But I think you can appreciate 

the fact that I just simply can’t answer those because I don’t 

want to put myself in a position to prejudice the case in any 

way. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The point I’m 

trying to get across is that these GRIP premiums were owing 

from the GRIP gross revenue insurance plan which, in my mind 

as a farmer, I thought was a separate entity from the crop 

insurance. And being especially now that the decision of the 

judge is being withheld and you don’t like to comment on it 

when that’s happening  and I guess that’s fair game  but 

then at the same time, how can we ask these farmers to pay this 

back when we’re not even sure they owe you? If the judge 

comes down in favour of the farmers, you owe them. So on one 

hand we’re saying no, you can’t have crop insurance unless you 

pay your debt, and we’re not even sure they owe you, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well you can’t bring the two together. I 

can give you a detail on the GRIP bills. Keeping in mind that 

there were a large number of people . . . I just forget; what was 

the total pay-out? — that there was a $12 million pay-out to 

farmers at the GRIP wind-up, and we know the process that was 

gone through. But despite that, we had 11 and just about $12 

million, $11.691 million outstanding, and 11,719 farmers who 

owed GRIP bills in January 1996. 

 

I think we gave them lots of time, lots of leeway. And for the 

most part, they’ve responded very well because as of April 4 — 

that’s just a month ago, less than a month ago, about a month 

ago — we had 1,598 farmers who hadn’t paid their bills and 

with the total outstanding amount of $1.5 million. 

 

So I understand there’s always a number of people out there 

who can’t pay their bills. But of these people, with over 1,500  

  



1380  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

. . . So that’s what? A thousand dollars average per person. 

Okay, 1,598, is that right? With $1.5 million? It’s about a 

thousand dollar average. All they have to do is come in to the 

corporation and make arrangements to repay. They don’t have 

to, as somebody said, cut the cheque. They have to pay part of it 

and show good faith and make arrangements to pay the rest 

over a term, whatever that term may be. 

 

So I think that the corporation has been more than fair or very 

fair with these people. There’s not a whole lot left: 13, 14 per 

cent, 13 per cent of the money outstanding. And if I know the 

majority of the people of Saskatchewan, those people would 

want to pay. If they’re not going to repay because of 

philosophical reasons that they just didn’t like what we did with 

GRIP, that’s their prerogative. But we have to establish a set of 

rules. We’ve done that, and the overwhelming majority of 

people have complied with that and paid their bills, or made 

arrangements. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

committees. I’d like to welcome the minister and his officials 

here today. 

 

And I guess when that person takes it as his prerogative not to 

pay back the GRIP overpayment that you have claimed, 

according to you, that he’s also taken the prerogative of not 

having crop insurance. So it’s kind of a heavy-handed 

prerogative that he has to deal with. I guess it’s sort of like 

Spartacus and every slave holds the price of his freedom. You 

just don’t ever want to have to pay that price. 

 

Mr. Minister, what I would like to talk to you a little bit about is 

the Crow pay-out and what’s been happening with the money 

that goes to Crown lands, be they federal or provincial. I have 

before me a news item from the paper, from the Star-Phoenix, 

that talks about FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) using the Crow 

pay-out as a lever to try and get people to buy the land last fall 

at an elevated price to what it had been previously in an attempt 

. . . so that those producers who were farming the land could 

access the Crow pay-out. 

 

Mr. Minister, what has happened with the ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) lands, with lands branch 

lands of a similar nature? What has happened with that Crow 

pay-out? Has it been paid out to the producers who are farming 

the land, who own the land and are paying . . . either are leasing 

it from lands branch or are buying it through ACS? What has 

happened with the Crow pay-out in those particular areas? Is 

your department trying to drive up the prices by trying to force 

farmers to purchase that land to access those Crow pay-outs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, we’re not trying to drive up the price 

of land, or forcing them, rather, to buy. We gave an option. If a 

producer wanted to purchase the land, then he would receive the 

entire benefit of the pay-out, as a private individual would 

receive the benefit of the entire pay-out if he owned the land. 

But you must understand that what we tried to do, if somebody 

didn’t want to buy the land, then we had to amortize the benefit 

of that pay-out over a period of years. Because if we were to 

give it to a renter, to a lessee, in one year, then he dropped that 

lease the next year — somebody else got  

the lease — the value of that Crow benefit would be gone to the 

one person. So we gave them an option: buy the land and 

receive it all as a person who owned their land already in the 

first year, or we were going to amortize that benefit over a 

period of time to ensure that everybody was fairly treated; 

because as you know there was always leases changing hands. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Over 

what time period were you amortizing the Crow pay-outs and 

were you including any interest? Because obviously if you were 

to amortize it at today’s rates over a 20-year period, all you 

would be paying that leaseholder would be the interest off of 

the money, assuming you’re getting 5 per cent. And I think if 

you shop around a little bit you can get that much and still be a 

fairly secure investment. 

 

So what are you doing? Are you shortening it up? Are you 

including the interest? Or what is your amortization period? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the interest costs aren’t taken into 

account. The interest generation isn’t taken into account, but 

remember that the benefit from the reduction is passed on right 

through the system for . . . in perpetuity. And if you . . . I’ll give 

you an example — in 1996 the average rent per acre without 

WGTA would have been $12.45, and the actual, the actual was 

$10.87. In 1995 it was 10.43 to 9.02. So the rent has been 

reduced by that price for that year, the next year, and the 

continuing years, because you’ve had the two-year lag come 

into it, and now it goes all the way out to the out years. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 

that works out to probably what? — about a 10 per cent 

reduction in the lease costs. Roughly. So if you . . . that’s a 

20-year pay-out of the principal, so basically they’re getting the 

principal over 20 years plus the interest off of it so, barely 

acceptable — C. 

 

Mr. Minister, what about the other government agencies though 

to which the Crow pay-out would have gone, such as some of 

the Crown lands on which is being farmed. Crow money would 

have . . . goes to those. I’m thinking specifically of SaskPower 

in the Estevan area. What has happened with their money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  During the process we consulted with 

other agencies, and for the most part, they did basically the 

same . . . follow the same procedure, a very similar procedure, 

as we did with the lands that they held . . . they hold. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What tax 

implications would there be involved in the reduction of the 

lease fees for those leaseholders? Would that be classified as 

income for them? Because in other sectors, if the landowner 

passed on some of the Crow rate to his leaseholder, that became 

income for the leaseholder. Now in this particular case, because 

not all landholders will have received this reduction, is that 

taxable income for some? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well because the rent was reduced, the 

expense to the farmer would be reduced and it would then affect 

your net income. So you know, it would affect your tax 

situation but not to any large degree. 

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Have you made any presentations to the 

federal minister dealing with the Crow pay-out that has gone to 

renters of farm land? Because when they receive that portion I 

know that the federal government put in place a process where 

the renter could apply for a portion, along with the landowner, 

for a portion of the pay-out. 

 

When those renters received their portion of the pay-out, that 

became income. For the landowner, it wasn’t income; it was a 

capital sale which was held off until the land was actually 

disposed of. But for the renter, it became income that year. 

Have you made any presentations to the federal minister about 

that particular situation? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  What we did do, among other things, but 

I think the most important thing that I can relate to you is that 

what we did is we certainly made representation to the federal 

government on the inadequacy of the pay-out in terms of the 

hurt that it would bring upon the producers of Saskatchewan — 

the level of pay-out when you’re losing nearly a billion dollars 

between 1997 . . . or $320 million a year. So by the year 2000, a 

billion dollars out of the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

We just said that the payment level wasn’t adequate — simply, 

it was not adequate. Mr. Goodale and the federal government 

chose not to listen to that and we can’t change that, but we 

certainly made representation to let them know that it wasn’t 

adequate. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It wasn’t 

certainly adequate when $7 billion had been offered at one time 

— not in writing, but had been talked about and offered. And at 

that point in time certain organizations didn’t want to talk about 

possible demise of the Crow; so nothing happened and a few 

years later it’s gone and we’re left with a big hole in our pocket. 

But that’s not really the same issue. 

 

Here we’re talking about more of that money, that $1.6 billion 

that went to farmers. A portion of that is going back to the 

federal government through income tax. So farmers didn’t 

benefit even by the 1.6 billion. They benefited by something 

less than that because all the monies that were passed on to 

renters was turned into income rather than being a capital sale, 

which was not taxable, for the landowners. And so that portion 

has gone back to the federal government and obviously a 

portion of it has stayed with the provincial government. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I believe that there is an avenue that still 

should be pursued because those taxes are just being paid as of 

the end of . . . the beginning of April . . . end of April. And it’s 

perhaps possible to recover some of that money yet. 

 

The other issue dealing with the Crow pay-out is the freight 

adjustment program that is in place. There are quite a number of 

inequities in that particular program, Mr. Minister. I can give 

you the example of Benson and Stoughton. Both are on 

east-west tracks. I believe the cost of shipping grain out of 

either point for spring wheat has about a 95 cent difference, and 

yet one point receives a $7 adjustment, freight adjustment, and  

the other one receives a $3-and-some-cent freight adjustment. 

 

They’re 20 miles apart on a north-south line. So they’re the 

same distance from port either direction  it doesn’t matter 

which way they go  and yet one of them is benefiting by 

twice as much as the other point. I’m sure this has occurred at 

various points around the province where that kind of a 

disparity is in place. 

 

Have you made any presentations to the minister about that 

particular item? Because again, that is another one that is still 

open for some adjustments and should be pursued. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well certainly in our talks with the 

federal government . . . And I think we both can agree on the 

fact that this whole adjustment process, we knew it was going 

to be a mess before they started because the examples that you 

put forward have come to fruition. 

 

Besides the fact that the further west you come, there’s going to 

be minimal cheques come out. And you know you might have a 

situation where — what’d you say? — 10 miles apart there’s a 

big discrepancy, and a producer might even be hauling, you 

know, in a different direction. 

 

We’ve told the federal government that there was going to be 

some problems in this area. Remembering that we disagreed 

with the reduction of the $320 million, they didn’t do anything 

about it. We disagreed with the adjustment process, and they 

weren’t going to do anything about it. We disagreed with 

leaving forage crops out. We made representation time and time 

again to the federal government, my predecessors and myself. 

 

Unfortunately, like we say, the federal government had the bit 

in their teeth, and they weren’t going to listen to anybody. They 

had gone ahead. And all what we’re trying to do in 

Saskatchewan now is respond to that drastic cut, take advantage 

of the new realities, build our livestock value added industry, 

and go boldly forward and try to return the economy of this 

province . . . try to regenerate the $320 million of Crow that 

we’ve lost, through adding value to our livestock, grains, and 

many other ways. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, Mr. Minister, we all want to live 

long and prosper also. For those of you who don’t know what 

that is, that’s a quote from Star Trek. 

 

Mr. Minister, since we’ve been talking about the federal 

government, I have another federal item that I would like to talk 

about, and that’s the CWB (Canadian Wheat Board) barley 

vote. 

 

And what money did the provincial government put into that 

particular vote? And where were those advertisements, because 

I know you were doing some advertising. Was that the entire 

amount of money, and where did it go to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We spent in total — there was two 

go-rounds — in total about $84,000 in the process of trying to 

join with the farmers, the majority of the farmers in 

Saskatchewan, and save the Canadian Wheat Board through  

  



1382  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

advertising in weekly papers, The Western Producer, and a host 

of other things that . . . we worked with a coalition of groups 

who came together to try to save the Canadian Wheat Board 

and especially barley in the board. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can give 

me some indication as to the number of barley producers in 

Saskatchewan, the number of permit holders that would have 

been eligible to vote. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The vote was not broken down by 

province. So at this point in time I don’t think that we would be 

able to get the number of producers from Saskatchewan — at 

least the federal government has not indicated that we would be 

able to. When the vote was put forward it was done on a Wheat 

Board-area basis and unless something has changed, we’re not 

able to break out Saskatchewan’s numbers from the global 

picture. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister; that’s too 

bad because I think it would have been an important number. 

 

I know in the past we have criticized you for spending this 

money but I think in the long run it has been worthwhile, 

because your advertisement, and the whole campaign, managed 

to move prairie farmers from 2 per cent in support of the total 

open market to 35 per cent. So I think, on behalf of those who 

supported the open market, we would like to thank you for your 

advertising campaign. It certainly was a benefit to us. 

 

Mr. Minister, part of what’s happening now with the Canadian 

Wheat Board is Bill . . . I believe it’s No. 72 — or 71 or 72 of 

the federal government — that it’s going to change some of the 

rules and regulations with the Canadian Wheat Board. Part of 

that is governance. 

 

I wonder if you have any comments to make on that, because 

we believe that, even though it seems to be in it a move to open 

up the governance of the Canadian Wheat Board by allowing 

voting to vote for the members that would sit on the board, 

some of those members would continue to be appointed, and all 

of the members would be appointed by government with the 

federal government picking the chairman and being able to 

remove any of the board members at any time they decided that 

particular board member no longer followed their wishes. 

 

And so we believe that’s not the way that even a revised 

Canadian Wheat Board should be; that it should have full 

farmer representation on the board and that those should be 

elected by the producers themselves and accountable to those 

producers, not to the federal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the first thing I want to say is to 

explain to you how disgusted I am that the federal Liberal 

government chose not to pass this legislation before they called 

a federal election. 

 

In Saskatchewan they were very, very eager and able to push 

through The Election Act despite the fact that they didn’t know 

what time it was in Saskatchewan and don’t seem to care if they 

inconvenience our people in Saskatchewan, as they don’t seem  

to care if they inconvenience the people of Manitoba during the 

flood. But put that aside — that’s their prerogative. And I think 

they’ll pay the price for that in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 

 

But the most disgusting part of it all is, I think this is a little too 

cute by half on the part of the federal Liberal government, 

because you have legislation, and now what you’re doing is 

what I think they want people to do. They want you to assume 

that the Liberals are going to win the election and this 

legislation is just going to continue . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Okay. Well I hope they’re wrong. But that the Liberals 

would again come to government and that they would just carry 

on with this legislation. 

 

Well that’s not the way the world works. What happens, what 

happens is that legislation dies on the order paper. So what the 

federal Liberal government and Mr. Goodale have successfully 

done, they’ve tried to keep everybody happy. Because the 

people who oppose the legislation, the Farmers for Justice and 

others, they’re going to say, oh, new life. We got new life. 

We’re going to be able to go in there again and get our point 

across. 

 

And the people who support the legislation are sitting out in the 

country and sort of assuming, as I think you are, that well, this 

legislation is going to go forward after the election as is. Don’t 

for a minute, don’t for a minute assume that the legislation that 

as we see it in Ottawa today, died on the order paper, is going to 

be the same legislation that they put through if they get to be 

government. 

 

And so what they’ve successfully done is try to keep everybody 

happy. And I think we’ve got to make sure . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  They’re Liberals. What do you expect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  They’re Liberals; what do you expect? 

Exactly. 

 

What we have to do is make sure that everybody in this 

province especially, in western Canada, know that. I don’t care 

what side of the issue you’re on in this one, you can’t play both 

sides of the fence, as the federal government’s trying to do on 

this issue. 

 

Now to the point of the question. What we said, what I said 

when I was before the Standing Committee on Agriculture, is 

that the president, the CEO (chief executive officer), and the 

chairman should be named by the board of directors. If you 

elect the board of directors, then that board should be able to do 

like every other duly elected board, is to name the Chair and 

CEO. 

 

And the Liberal government said, well but we want to have 

power to appoint them. And what we said is no, you shouldn’t 

have power to appoint them but you should have the power to 

veto that appointment if they’re not acting in the best interests 

of the Canadian Wheat Board region and doing the job 

properly. 

 

So we took the other approach. But the fact of the matter  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

remains, who knows what they’re going to do? Who knows 

what Mr. Goodale and the federal Liberals are going to do, 

because this thing died on the order paper. They may scrub it 

after the election if they win. If they win, they may make some 

other changes. We don’t know. Right now he’s trying to play 

both sides of this political fence, and I think we’ve got to stick 

the barb where it belongs. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, we certainly have 

not made any assumptions that the Liberals are going to win the 

election. Indeed if they continue to campaign in the same 

manner that they have been, they must have been taking lessons 

from you in the barley vote because their polls are dropping just 

like yours were during the barley vote, Mr. Minister. So I think 

they’ve got a long ways to go yet before Ralph wins his seat 

back, Mr. Minister. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, part of our concern with the governance that 

was proposed by Ralph Goodale was that it gave equal weight 

to the other provinces. We believe that it should be weighted to 

those that are producing the grain, which is Saskatchewan — 

producing the higher value grains that go through the Canadian 

Wheat Board — because that doesn’t include things like canola, 

rather than say equal weight to northern British Columbia, 

which is a very small portion of the Wheat Board commodities. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are your thoughts on the governance 

structure? Should it be equal for all provinces or should 

Saskatchewan somehow be weighted in . . . the board be 

weighted somehow in favour of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  In the representation I made to the 

standing committee, we made it very clear that we thought that 

the representation should be based on the percentage of product 

that your province ships. Therefore Saskatchewan should get 

roughly 60 per cent of the representation on the board. 

 

An Hon. Member:  That’s only fair. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the member for Swift Current 

thinks that’s only fair. You know what — I even agree with 

him. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, now that we have come to a situation where 

the amount of production is translated into the number of votes 

on the board, why would you not also allow the same thing to 

take place when you have, say, the barley vote? The producers 

who grow the grain should get more votes than the guy who 

grows 5 acres worth of barley. 

 

You’re saying Saskatchewan should have a preponderance of 

voting power on the board — because we produce 60 per cent 

of the grain, we should get 60 per cent of the vote. Surely the 

producers that are growing 80 per cent of the barley, that 

represent approximately 20 per cent of the actual number of 

producers, should have got an equivalent amount of vote in the 

barley vote — your argument, the same, Mr. Minister. The rest 

of the voters would have remained at the 20 per cent. If it’s 

good for the goose in the governance of the Canadian Wheat  

Board, surely it should also be good for the gander in the barley 

vote. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think the member is making one 

huge basic assumption. From listening to what your comment 

was, you’re saying that the people who produce smaller 

amounts of barley are board supporters and the people who 

produce a larger amount of barley are not board supporters . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s what you’re insinuating, 

and for the life of me I don’t think that’s true. I don’t think 

that’s true. 

 

And besides, the fundamental principle, if you look at the 

Alberta . . . if the judgement from the Alberta case where the 

judge said, the fundamental principle here is that if it’s going 

. . . if the change to the Wheat Board is going to affect the 

general Wheat Board area and the producers negatively, then 

the people who are in the minority position should not be 

allowed to let that happen. 

 

So if you want to make the assumption that the large producers 

are anti-board and the small ones are board, you can do that but 

I don’t think, I don’t think that it would make any difference — 

any difference — if you did it by acres or by producers. But you 

got to remember the fundamental principle is that what’s good 

for the whole board region is what’s important, not what’s good 

for the one person or few people who want to ship their grain 

across the border. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I guess it’s just 

simply an assumption on somebody’s part as to what is good 

and what is not good for the board. You seem to be making the 

assumption that if Saskatchewan had 60 per cent of the vote on 

the governance board, that would be good for the Canadian 

Wheat Board. Well maybe somebody in Manitoba disagrees 

with that and doesn’t believe that it would be in the best 

interests of the Canadian Wheat Board if Saskatchewan had 60 

per cent of the vote. 

 

To translate that back to the barley vote, who makes the 

assumption that one producer, one vote, was good for the 

Canadian Wheat Board? Or that one bushel, one vote, is good 

for the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

If you’re giving people a vote on an issue, who says it has to be 

good one way or the other? That’s why you’re having a vote for 

people to decide what is best for themselves. That’s where the 

decision is made. We have a federal election going on. Our 

colleagues next door here, they would say that a vote for the 

current government was good for Canada. You would say that a 

vote for that party would not be good for Canada and we would 

have to agree with that, but everybody is making their own 

assumptions. So when you make the assumption that the vote 

has to . . . whatever decisions have to be made have to be good 

for the Canadian Wheat Board, obviously the fact that you’re 

having a vote means there’s some contention there as to what is 

good for the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Now would you support a weighted vote if barley or wheat ever 

comes up again for a vote across the Canadian Wheat Board 

area as to whether or not to open up the markets? Would you  

  



1384  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

favour a weighted vote based on production? Because that’s 

basically what you’re saying to do on the government side. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You better say no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No. I’ll tell you why . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No, I don’t think I’ve been sucked in at all. I 

know where the member is trying to go, but he’s not very 

successful at going there. 

 

I’ll tell you what I do support. Because of the value of the 

board, what I support . . . and I’m not defending Mr. Goodale’s 

decision as to how the vote was taken place at all because I 

didn’t agree with it because it wasn’t barley. I mean this vote 

wasn’t on barley. This vote was on the Canadian Wheat Board, 

whether we should have it or not, and barley was one of the 

issues. What I support is that every producer — every producer 

— have a vote because if it affects you, you should have a vote. 

Just because you don’t grow barley, another undermining of the 

board by reducing of the crop, therefore reducing the power of 

the board, affects you whether you’re a barley producer, durum 

producer, or a wheat producer. So my opinion has been, right 

from day one, every producer should be able to vote on this 

issue. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, if you believe every 

producer, whether they actually are CWB, have a permit book 

or not, should be allowed to vote, I guess that brings open the 

question of the governance situation. Every province in Canada 

should have input into it because obviously the sales made by 

the Canadian Wheat Board also affect the barley producer in 

New Brunswick. So if you are saying every producer should 

have a vote on the Canadian Wheat Board, then every province 

should have input into the governance of that structure on the 

same basis, Mr. Minister. 

 

I happen to disagree with that, but that seems to be the logic 

that you are pursuing in this particular area. I believe that the 

votes taken on the changes to the Canadian Wheat Board, such 

as the barley vote, should have been weighted to those 

producers that are producing the grain. If I grow 5 bushels of 

barley to fed my pet pig at home, why should I have the same 

amount of vote as the guy down the road who is growing it to 

either feed a thousand-hog barn or a malt barley, as the case 

may be. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to go on to another deal with the 

Canadian Wheat Board, and that’s the Warburton contract 

where Manitoba producers are being given a special privilege to 

export grain to the Warburton mills in England at a premium 

price which goes strictly to those producers. The contracts were 

not opened up to Saskatchewan farmers whatsoever. We didn’t 

have a chance to get any piece of that. The extra money is not 

going into the Pool accounts; it’s going straight to the 

individual producers that are providing that grain to the 

Canadian Wheat Board for export directly to England. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you approached the Canadian Wheat Board 

to get a piece of that action for Saskatchewan farmers? And do 

you support the fact that the premium money is going to the 

farmers and not to the Pool accounts? 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I have a letter on file — I don’t think we 

have it here — that explains that there was no favouritism 

involved. They were agents of the board and in this particular 

case they weren’t the only one; there was other companies that 

were agents of the board. And the accusation was that the 

Wheat Board was favouring some people in Manitoba. Well 

that simply wasn’t the case. 

 

It all went into the Pool account, and those people who . . . or 

agents of the board supplied the grain to that company in 

England, and we have . . . as I say, I can supply you with a letter 

from the board that explains how that process worked. I 

checked this out because I know the accusation was there. So 

there was nobody who lost. No farmers lost or gained because 

of this. It is simply a transaction that went down the same as 

many other agents of the board operate. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, we’d certainly be 

interested in seeing that letter and a copy of those contracts 

which state that the premiums go into the Pool accounts. 

Because from our information, it went straight to the farmers 

through the Manitoba Wheat Pool elevators delivering to . . . 

other systems were not given an opportunity to deliver that 

grain. 

 

So we’d be very interested in seeing both that letter and the 

contracts involved in that to ensure that indeed any premiums 

went into the Pool accounts. But I’d ask you to explain why 

Saskatchewan farmers were not allowed to participate in 

delivery of these contracts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I can just go through this for you. Now 

there was an article in the March 4 issue of Grainews that was 

complaining about this. And Mr. Pallister, a spokesperson for 

the Farmers for Justice and a member of the Canadian Wheat 

Growers Association . . . The Grainews issue of March 18 had 

several references to misinformation in the article. And I want 

to clear that up. But most specifically, there was a letter from 

representatives of Warburton, which they indicated that the 

supply contracts were arranged by Warburton, not by the board, 

okay. 

 

And like I say, that letter, I just don’t seem to have. We’ve got 

everything else. There was a letter . . . oh here, yes, this is the 

letter to the editor. Anyway I’ll give it to you in brief. 

 

Warburton did not have an exclusive contract with the 

Manitoba Wheat Pool, but a dual contract that included 

Paterson grain as well as Warburton . . . as well as the Manitoba 

Pool, rather. The premiums paid to producers for the 1996 

contract and the 1997 contract is $20 per tonne, not $30 per 

tonne as Mr. Pallister had indicated. 

 

(2130) 

 

A premium was paid to producers because of the strict 

conditions in the contract which included the use of certified 

seed only. These were some specifics that the growers were 

using — specific varieties, identified by Warburton; submission 

of special growing season reports; guarantee of purity on 

delivery. And even after all that, the contract is void if specific  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

protein levels and baking tests were not met by the wheat 

delivered. 

 

So the premiums were paid because they related to very 

specific, extra things that the contract holder had to hold out. 

Well this was an arrangement by Warburton, not by the 

Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then you’re 

saying that if a farmer in Saskatchewan can arrange a special 

contract with a miller some place, that he would be given the 

same privileges as the Warburton contract to go outside of the 

Canadian Wheat Board and not have to go through the Pool? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well no, they’re agents of the Canadian 

Wheat Board. So it wasn’t outside of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well that’s what you had said earlier, 

that they had not gone through the Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. 

Minister. So perhaps you need to clarify that. 

 

And if you can line up one of these special contracts, will the 

producer be entitled to continue to receive the $20 premium or 

$30 premium, whatever it might be? Let’s say someone can line 

up a premium durum contract. Will they be allowed to deliver 

that contract and retain any premiums that they can garner if 

they go through the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m just trying to refresh my memory in 

this case because it came awhile ago. But it worked like a 

buy-back situation, so it does go through the Pool. And if 

Warburton, Paterson wanted to put that through the Pool, then 

buy it back, then through special arrangements — as I said, 

certified seed — and they’re paying it; not coming out of the 

Pool . . . they’re paying the producers after they’ve accessed . . . 

This is a very high quality niche market they’ve developed on 

their own. There’s nothing wrong with that. But it’s gone 

through the Wheat Board, through the pooling system 

buy-back. Like any farmer can use the buy-back system to sell 

his grain, then buy it back through the Board, but it all goes 

through the pooling system. 

 

And this company has worked very diligently on very high 

quality contracts. And if the producers are willing to participate 

with all the extra work that goes into it, then they’re going to 

get a $20 premium for that. But it’s nothing to do with the 

pooling or the way the Wheat Board operates; it’s simply a 

provision the board’s put in place to allow more flexibility for 

sales of our grain overseas. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. The 

more we talk about this particular case, it seems to be more and 

more that the story shifts a little bit. The sands are unsteady 

underneath this particular item, and the Canadian Wheat Board 

seems to be grasping at excuses as to how they did things. 

 

I’d like to move on to the grain transportation issue right now. 

Across the Prairies this past winter, as you are very familiar, we 

had a great deal of difficulty shipping our commodities to port.  

That backlog is still in place, because farmers are just coming 

through the period of road bans and now are getting into 

seeding. So it relates back to some of the issues on crop 

insurance; people didn’t have the cash flow to make their 

payments. I know I’ve discussed this with you privately in the 

past as to some of the concerns that are in place with people 

who don’t like the idea of postdated cheques and want to make 

some other arrangements, Mr. Minister. 

 

But that’s not particularly where I want to go on this. It’s the 

delays and who is responsible. We believe that a change needs 

to be made to the whole transportation structure to hold each of 

the parties that might affect the grain transportation and 

movement, responsible for any part they play in this particular 

issue; be it the farmer, if he doesn’t deliver the grain, then he 

should be the one who pays for the demurrage. If the rail . . . if 

the elevator companies don’t provide the facilities and unload 

the grain on time, then they should be the ones to bear the 

responsibility; same with the railroads, and indeed the same 

with the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Now in the case of the Canadian Wheat Board though, again 

that relates back to the farmers. Somehow or another the 

managers, the people who are making the decisions at the 

Canadian Wheat Board, need to also be held responsible, and 

perhaps there needs to be some sort of mechanism put in place 

to dock their pay if things don’t move properly. 

 

Now I know some . . . You might question, how can the 

Canadian Wheat Board be responsible for the lack of 

movement. But if you look at what grains were in place in 

Vancouver last fall — 75 per cent of the storage capacity in the 

Vancouver terminals was full of Canadian Wheat Board grain, 

but unfortunately it was not the grain that the ships were there 

to load. So somebody in the Canadian Wheat Board had messed 

up and put the wrong grain in place in Vancouver and Thunder 

Bay. And that wasn’t what was needed, and the railroads 

couldn’t move the rest of it fast enough. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, do you favour having penalties in place for all 

of the participants in the transportation system, including the 

managers and the people responsible at the Canadian Wheat 

Board, not the farmers paying both for their own reluctance to 

ship or any failures by the Canadian Wheat Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I know that we want to move on to 

Highways and Transportation, and you’re not going to vote this 

off, so we can continue this debate another time. But I’ll just 

make a quick response to two things. 

 

First of all, just on the last issue we were talking about, where 

you were saying that it’s the Canadian Wheat Board’s problem 

that they were trying to grab . . . I don’t know exactly what 

you’re talking about. But it’s no different what Warburtons 

were doing than what the organic producers do. The organic 

producers . . . The Wheat Board have become flexible. They’ll 

let the organic producers sell through the board. They can buy it 

back, and then they can access any market they want in the 

world. That’s the way the buy-back system works. This is a 

flexibility built in by the board, and if the Liberals had passed 

legislation there would be more flexibility. 

  



1386  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

And then with regard to your question, the answer is yes. I 

believe that everybody who handles the grain has a 

responsibility to be liable if they do not do that to the best of 

their abilities or if they cause a delay that causes a demurrage 

charge to be paid. 

 

Now how do you do that? Well you talk about labour, yes. But 

the question is how you do it? You don’t want to take away 

collective bargaining rights of labour, but they have a 

responsibility in making sure our grain gets on that ship. The 

same way, you know, you . . . How do you penalize the Wheat 

Board? Dock the person’s pay. I mean that doesn’t make a 

whole lot of sense. But I mean if you wanted to argue that you 

could. 

 

All I’m saying is . . . what I’m saying, everybody should have a 

responsibility. Let’s sit down, get together and carve out the 

terms of reference and make sure that we can get this grain 

moving. Because next crop year we don’t want the same thing 

happening as we had this crop year. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  In order that we get to Highways and 

Transportation, I now move that we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair:  Before we start, I would ask the minister to 

introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

Seated to my right is Mr. Brian King, who’s the deputy minister 

of Highways and Transportation. To my left is Mr. Barry 

Martin, who’s the executive director of engineering and 

services division. To my far right is Mr. George Stamatinos, 

who’s the executive director of preservation and operation, 

southern region. And directly behind me is Lynn Tulloch, 

who’s the executive director of corporate information services. 

And behind Mr. King is Mr. Bernie Churko, who’s the 

executive director of logistics, planning, and compliance. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all, 

I want to welcome your departmental officials. And I’ve 

realized that, at the expense of the third party, they’ve been 

waiting out in the hallways for quite some time and we’ll do our 

very best to liven things up here. 

 

I guess in essence, looking at the Highways and Transportation 

budgeted from the year 1991, ‘92, ’93, ‘94, ’95, ‘96 — that’s 

almost four or five years — the total cumulative shortfall since 

1990 to 1991 has roughly been $187,192,912. That’s quite a 

drastic decrease in highways maintenance and construction in 

general. 

 

And I guess in some of the questions we’re going to be asking 

you, our focus will basically be on northern Saskatchewan and 

some of the issues that we’ve been speaking to the Assembly 

about for the past several months and for the past several years. 

I guess in essence we speak about a number of challenges in 

northern Saskatchewan, and one of them is, the connection to 

many of these communities, to other communities and of course 

to the rest of Saskatchewan, is by way of roads. And you look at 

some of the examples, as in Turnor Lake or as in Canoe Lake, 

where they have no airstrips to connect them with the rest of the 

country, basically their roads become their only source and only 

link to the outside world. 

 

For a number of years different communities have been 

approaching various ministers of Highways to talk about a 

comprehensive strategy dealing with northern Saskatchewan 

roads and their challenges. And just for your information, Mr. 

Minister, I wish to clarify some of the roads in northern 

Saskatchewan that do need immediate attention, and some of 

the roads that have consistently provided very, very limited use, 

because of their condition, to the residents of Saskatchewan’s 

North. And I share this information with you, Mr. Minister, so 

you’re fully aware of what the challenges are. 

 

(2145) 

 

Are the people of Athabasca asking for 2,000 kilometres of road 

to be repaired and upgraded? No, Mr. Minister. Are they asking 

for 1,500 kilometres of road to be repaired, Mr. Minister? The 

answer is no. They’re asking for a little over 200 kilometres of 

road to be fixed, and which would serve at least 7, maybe 8,000 

people. 

 

And let me explain to you, Mr. Minister, those roads I speak 

about. The first road is of course the most important road, we 

feel, in northern Saskatchewan. This is the road going on to 

Garson Lake. As you’re aware, over the number of years people 

from Garson Lake and La Loche have been fighting to have the 

road built using training dollars and welfare reform dollars and 

equipment that’s being offered by training institutions. And the 

amount that they have to finish this road, Mr. Minister, is 

anywhere between 30 to 40 kilometres. 

 

And what that will do is it’ll connect the community of roughly 

200 people to the rest of Saskatchewan; a community that is 

isolated and a community that definitely needs to be connected 

to the rest of Saskatchewan. So Garson Lake is probably very 

important for a number of reasons, but the number one reason is 

to connect that community with the rest of Saskatchewan, and I 

hope the government hears me loud and clear on that. 

 

The second reason why, Mr. Minister, we should be connecting 

Garson Lake to the rest of the province is on from Garson Lake 

is the potential connection to Fort McMurray. And we all know 

that Fort McMurray is a bustling city in northern Alberta, a city 

that’s probably going to be of benefit to the whole north-west 

region, if and only if it’s connected to the west side of the North 

— which is of course referred by many government 

departments as simply the west side. 

 

Why, Mr. Minister, should we make the extra effort of trying to 

connect Garson Lake? One is for the people and, of course, 

number two is that to hopefully impress upon the Alberta 

government that we want to have our Garson Lake connected to 

Fort McMurray as well, so there is really a western-eastern  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

connection between the two communities. 

 

Now as you are probably aware, Mr. Minister — I’ll clarify 

again — Garson Lake is in Saskatchewan, an actual community 

in Saskatchewan. Its mayor or chairperson of the LAC (local 

advisory council) is Donald Laprice, and Donald has been for 

years talking about the need for this road to be constructed. 

 

And we’re not asking for a huge amount of dollars, Mr. 

Minister. What they’re asking for is 30 or 40 kilometres to be 

built using our welfare reform dollars and training dollars so 

that people themselves can build that. Now they’ve asked on a 

number of occasions up to $250,000 per year to assist in the 

training needs to cover some of the training costs to have these 

roads built, and they’ve asked that for a period of three years — 

to come up with 250,000 each year. And that in essence would 

have a road built to accomplish both the objectives of having 

this community connected to the province and, of course, being 

connected to Fort McMurray. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the key thing I’d like to focus on today as 

well, and the third reason why we need to have a Fort 

McMurray-Garson Lake-La Loche road is, because as you’re 

probably aware, there’s a number of roads being built and 

developed in the north-west, and these roads are being primarily 

developed by the forestry industry in cooperation with the 

government. We understand that these negotiations and these 

discussions and these plans have also been developed over the 

past years in concert and in consultation with the forestry 

companies. So as a result, most of these roads were planned 

four or five, six, seven years ago. 

 

Now these roads do begin to open up. These roads, these 

logging roads, will have an adverse impact on the traffic flows 

of the north-west. 

 

As you’re probably aware, Mr. Minister, the main route in 

northern Saskatchewan or the main road is Highway No. 155. It 

goes from Green Lake on to Beauval on to Ile-a-la-Crosse, 

Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, and on to Cluff Lake. 

 

Now what we have is we have an unsteady, an uncomfortable 

level of service to that main road. A lot of the focus has been on 

a secondary road that travels in from Meadow Lake pulp mill in 

to Canoe Lake and now is now connected on to Dillon. So we 

now have traffic trends that are adversely affected by some of 

these logging roads. 

 

And if you look at a map, Mr. Minister, what you see is you see 

that there is potential to go in from Dillon on into Garson, 

because in the area I speak of, we now have natural gas 

exploration; we have the forestry area that’s really rich in terms 

of the abundance of timber and the size of timber. And in 

essence what you have, Mr. Minister, is you have a potentially 

damaging alteration of traffic and that’s going to affect the main 

Highway 155. And that’s the third and most important reason 

why we must protect the main highway and we must have effort 

to make sure this road is properly upgraded and kept to the 

current level of standard, if not greater. 

 

So the key thing on this road, Mr. Minister — the Garson Lake 

 Road — it does a number of things. First you provide linkage 

to the province for Garson Lake. Secondly, you also provide 

linkage on to Fort Mac which could provide a huge, tremendous 

traffic flow for the people of the north-west, thereby perhaps 

stimulating the economy. And third, Mr. Minister, is you also 

displace the effort that has been undertaken in the last several 

years to alter traffic flows in the north-west and to have the 

traffic flows go into the resource-rich area, and again shift from 

the communities of Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, Beauval, and 

Pinehouse, and Patuanak on to a more southerly super-highway 

that has been built for the extraction of the resources. 

 

So those are the primary, necessary reasons why we have to talk 

about these things when you talk about highways. I invite you 

to consult with the mayors and certainly the mayor of La Loche, 

Mr. Wilbur Janvier, and his councillors and his staff, as well as 

the mayor of Garson Lake, and of course Donald Laprice, as I 

mentioned, was the mayor. These are some of the people that 

we have to get in touch with to talk to them about the traffic 

patterns and the problems associated with the reason why we 

have to make sure the Garson Lake Road is built. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I’ll clarify that the Garson Lake Road is 30 

kilometres in terms of needed construction, and then you will 

see most of these problems will disappear. So in my humble 

opinion, aside from the Black Lake Road, the Garson Lake 

Road is probably the most critical and the most important road 

that needs to be developed. 

 

And some of the other roads that I speak about — well I’ll give 

you a chance to answer in a few minutes — include the 

communities of Dillon, again connecting to the main road of 

Highway 155; the communities of Turnor Lake, again 

connecting to Highway 155; the community of Patuanak, again 

connecting to Highway 155; and the community of Pinehouse, 

again connecting to Highway 155. 

 

And to give you some examples, Mr. Minister, some of these 

roads, for example Patuanak, they had six wash-outs last year, 

and these wash-outs were quite severe, and as a result people 

were stranded. And there’s roughly 12 to 13 to 1400 people in 

the community of Patuanak that had no choice but to stay home 

or hop in a boat and take a long and scenic route out of 

Patuanak. So six wash-outs in one road, and the total amount of 

kilometres that need to be repaired, Mr. Minister, is probably 

roughly about 70 kilometres into Patuanak. 

 

And into Dillon, we also have training proposals that would 

really benefit the whole north-west when you look at the Turnor 

Lake and to Highway 155. Again, Mr. Minister, it’s not 300 

kilometres they’re talking about; it’s 30 kilometres, 18 miles. 

And you look at Dillon, Mr. Minister, again it’s 60 kilometres, 

not 600 kilometres. 

 

Now these roads are very dangerous, and practically people are 

having a difficult time travelling on them, and we spoke about a 

teacher named Barb Gibb several weeks ago when she was 

travelling on a logging road, and unfortunately that road was 

probably in better shape than the main road. But nonetheless, 

you know, these are some of the examples of the danger that  

  



1388  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

many northern people face when they travel these roads. 

 

So we look at the Garson Lake Road of 40 kilometres. You look 

at the Turnor Lake Road of 30 kilometres. You look at the 

Dillion road of 60 kilometres. You look at the Patuanak road of 

80 kilometres. That’s roughly 180 to 190 kilometres. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Minister, we’re not asking for a million 

kilometres of road to be built, and we’re not asking for a 

massive amount of monies to talk about these roads. But, Mr. 

Minister, what we’re asking you to do here today is to look at a 

comprehensive strategy, that within five years to ten years the 

people that we’ve been neglecting for many years again have a 

decent road on which they can travel on, a road that will not 

threaten their lives, a road that you could regularly travel on no 

matter what the weather’s like, and a road that would not 

damage their vehicles. And it all makes sense, Mr. Minister. 

 

So when you talk about a comprehensive highway strategy and 

a strategy which deals with developing roads in northern 

Saskatchewan, people are saying: let’s even look at the training 

option. We don’t have to go through the expensive route of 

hiring contractors for every kilometre that needs to be rebuilt 

and built up in northern Saskatchewan. How about if we do a 

five-year, X amount of million-dollar training program to 

rebuild these roads in concert with the federal government, in 

concert with the different training institutions out there in 

Saskatchewan? That could be done. It’s a cost-efficient, very 

powerful message that people will support. 

 

And hopefully one of these days, Mr. Minister, when you look 

at the situation . . . is a member from Regina South that travels 

2 kilometres on a beautiful road to come to work here. Maybe 

one of these days he’ll appreciate the fact that some people have 

60 kilometres to travel on very poor roads to get medical 

attention. And today now he thinks it’s a big joke. Well, Mr. 

Minister, the people of northern Saskatchewan don’t feel it’s a 

joke. They don’t feel it’s a joke. And he can harp all day if he 

wants, but the fact of the matter is the people of northern 

Saskatchewan will hear how he’s been harping, and they’ll 

continue to hear how he’s been harping. 

 

You know the fact of the matter is the North needs to be caught 

up with the rest of the province. And when we’re trying to put 

that message forward, we have heckling and we have comments 

that he’s making across the room. That’s not fair to the 

Saskatchewan people. These are words that are coming from the 

people of northern Saskatchewan, not me. I’m merely their 

voice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the fact of the matter is — again I reiterate my comments — 

is that the member from Regina South should stop cooking his 

food in aluminium pots. You know it’s very damaging to your 

mental faculties. 

 

However we must make sure the people’s voice of the North, 

their problems of the North, is simply heard in this Assembly. 

So with that, Mr. Minister, I’ll give you a quick summary of the 

overall problems with the roads in northern Saskatchewan and 

the problems that we have. And I urge you at this point in time 

to simply fix the problem, and we’ll go back and forth in  

question and answer here. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

I think that the member has pretty well covered the entire 

highway system that you have in northern Saskatchewan, and 

certainly appreciate, for me in particular, the opportunity for 

you to do that because I have yet not had the privilege or the 

pleasure to travel in northern Saskatchewan and get sort of a 

firsthand view of all of the roadways that exist up there. 

 

But as I certainly paid attention to the map as you spoke of the 

number of roadways that exist in the North and some of the 

issues that are related to the need for improvement to some of 

those areas. I certainly made a note of them and I want to thank 

you for the opportunity to have a brief visit to the North through 

your explanation of the roadways that are there. 

 

I want to say to the member from Athabasca that . . . or from 

Athabasca that certainly your comment about the need to have a 

comprehensive transportation system in the province is critical. 

And I know that you are certainly aware of this but we have 

now in Saskatchewan developed a very comprehensive strategy 

for transportation across the entire province which certainly 

encompasses many of the issues that you talked about that exist 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And some of the things that you talked about that are imperative 

I think, for the people who live in the North are certainly critical 

for all of the folks who live across Saskatchewan. I think you 

talked about sort of the easy access of movement of individuals 

from one community to another or from a trading centre or 

shopping centre, from one part of your region to another is 

critical. I mean that concept exists not only in northern 

Saskatchewan but certainly consists across the entire province 

and fits in nicely to the strategy that we talk about in the 

development of the highway strategy that has been put together 

over the next couple of years. 

 

I think you also talked about the importance of having low-cost, 

safe roadways in the North and certainly that’s consistent with 

what the strategy document talks about: ensuring that people 

have access to things like employment opportunities; that they 

have access to health care services; that they have good access 

to schools; to recreational facilities and centres, are essential in 

today’s modern society. 

 

(2200) 

 

And certainly I concur with all of those comments and 

statements that you make. And through the course of the future 

months we’re going to be working hard at ensuring that across 

the province we have that kind of accessibility for all people 

irrespective of where they live — be it in the northern part of 

the province or whether they live in the southern part of the 

province. 

 

But clearly I think some of the issues that you articulate as it 

relates to the northern part of the province are a bit more unique 

than maybe what we experience for sure in the southern part of 

the province. Part of that is you don’t have the large road 

networks that we have in the southern part of Saskatchewan and  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

as a result of that you have a greater dependency on things like 

air travel. In the case of some of your lake or water travel that 

some of your residents need to access throughout the various 

different times of the year, ice roads that you need to include in 

some of your transportation systems there in order to make 

communities accessible, those are all critical to the way of life 

in the northern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

This year of course, our government has announced that we’re 

going to be spending somewhere in the neighbourhood of $30 

million on roadways in the province. Some of that of course, 

will be making its way to the northern part of Saskatchewan, 

will be included of course in the comprehensive strategy. 

 

As you know, we use a rate, cost/benefit factor in terms of 

determining where in fact roadways should be built across the 

province, and retrofit. And there will be some improvements 

and some added revenue funding to the North for some of the 

roadways that exist there today. 

 

Specifically, I think some work — as my officials indicate to 

me — is being done on Highway 965. Some work is also being 

done on roadway 903. But specifically to the roadway that you 

spent some time talking about as the important linkage between 

Garson Lake, La Loche, and I think on to Fort McMurray, that 

particular piece of roadway in this given budget, ‘97-98, we 

have not set aside any significant dollars to attain the kinds of 

requests that I think you’ve put before me tonight. 

 

That doesn’t of course preclude the fact that into the future, as 

we continue to do the cost/benefit analysis on roads in 

Saskatchewan, that that won’t be considered in a roadway that 

will get additional funding. 

 

As you are likely more aware than I am, I know that there are 

some partnerships of course that have been established in the 

North and it’s consistent with the kinds of partnerships that 

we’re entering into with both the various different grain 

companies in the southern part of the province, some of the 

railroads, a partnership of course that we talk about with Mystic 

Lake, where I think there’s about $230,000 that’s being set 

aside for that particular development. 

 

So all in all, I really do appreciate the fact that you’ve indicated 

that there needs to be I think, a broader consultation process. 

You talked briefly about the importance of sitting down with 

some of the mayors in the northern part of the province, talking 

with them about some of the requirements for area planning. 

 

And that’s essential I think, when we take a look at the strategy 

document that I’ve mentioned a couple of times already for the 

future, because when you look at the south-west part of the 

province, there is today a very significant group of folks there 

who were working on a transportation area planning strategy 

that have incorporated the expertise of municipal levels of 

governance. Certainly the stakeholders that live and reside and 

do business within a particular area planning module are all 

involved in those kinds of discussions that will certainly 

enhance the quality of transportation in those areas. 

 

And so when you make the comment about the need to have  

that kind of discussion with our northern leaders, that’s 

imperative. And as we move on into the future with our 

transportation strategy, you can be assured that those kinds of 

discussions will take place and allocations will be made 

accordingly as the budgets certainly allow them to occur, and 

with the kinds of planning that takes place with the individuals 

who are involved in that process. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess some of the 

questions we have in terms of the ongoing consultation that has 

been coming from the northern mayors and northern leadership, 

there is a resolution passed by the North West Saskatchewan 

Municipalities Association over a period of four or five years 

— consistent resolutions — and I’m sure the Department of 

Highways has copies of them. 

 

And I believe also as well, New North, which is an organization 

I think partly founded by the Government of Saskatchewan to 

deal with northern issues, also expressed a strong desire to look 

at the impacts of the logging roads in terms of the changes to 

the traffic routes as a result of these new roads coming in. 

 

But the most important thing was Garson Lake. There’s an 

overwhelming, resounding level of support from all the 

communities in that area. And the primary reason, Mr. Minister, 

is the fact that if the Garson Lake Road does not happen — and 

I mean Garson Lake connecting to La Loche and Garson Lake 

connecting to Fort McMurray — what you’re going to have is 

you’re going to have a different road coming up a different area, 

and that will adversely affect the economies of all these 

communities. 

 

And we’re talking Buffalo Narrows, we’re talking 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, we’re talking La Loche, we’re talking Beauval, 

and we’re talking all the communities on the west side. So it’s 

very, very important, Mr. Minister, that you understand. 

 

And I appreciate the offer you made today in terms of 

consulting with the communities along that area as to exactly 

what would happen if that super-highway that’s built for 

collecting resources, namely forestry at this point in time, is 

built. It will alter the traffic flows for the entire west side. And 

as a result the many businesses in these communities and the 

millions of dollars of infrastructures in some of these northern 

communities and the homes and all that of different people 

would be adversely affected if the traffic flow was not 

maintained on Highway 155, and that’s why it’s very important 

to understand the critical challenge that your department faces 

in reference to the Garson Lake Road issue. 

 

I know they’ve been putting a lot of effort into trying to get the 

road built. And from the last discussion we had with various 

people from the community of La Loche and Garson Lake . . . 

is that they requested 250,000 per year over a period of three 

years to have that road built and completed within three years. 

Would you undertake at this point in time to re-look at that 

issue and wish that once it was turned down to see if you could 

possibly regenerate interest amongst the cabinet and perhaps 

reverse the decision not to allocate 250,000 per year for three 

years for the Garson Lake Road building training program? 

 

  



1390  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well I think what’s important to realize, 

and I tried to summarize it I think, in my brief comments to the 

member, and that is that we are having some significant 

discussions already with the folks of course in the north-west 

and the north-west planning group. The importance of the 

linkage, as you put it, with Garson Lake and La Loche and Fort 

McMurray I think is, as you define it, is a critical linkage. 

 

I think part of the issue here I think that needs to be resolved 

and discussed, is some work of course needs to be done on the 

Alberta side as I understand this. There hasn’t been a 

commitment, as I understand it and have been advised, in 

respect to the Alberta government’s commitment to this 

particular piece of roadway. I think that there’s a county road of 

course that’s currently in that area, but there hasn’t been any 

kind of confirmation — I guess is the word I’m looking for — 

on that piece of roadway. Your request in terms of, are we 

prepared to revisit this in this particular budget year, I think the 

commitment of course is that we’ll continue to work closely 

with the north-west planning committee. 

 

We have had some discussions of course with Mistik here, 

which is the forest partnership. My commitment to you this 

evening will be that we’ll continue to have those kinds of 

discussions through the course of this given year and work hard, 

I think, or diligently with all of the folks that are in that area, 

keeping in mind that the comments that you’ve made as it 

relates to the importance of that particular roadway to the folks 

who live in that area of your community. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think the 

important thing is that the people of the North and the 

north-west in general would appreciate efforts of that nature, 

and certainly by way of Hansard, we will forward the copies 

and the discussions of this evening’s talk about the highway 

problems in northern Saskatchewan. And obviously when you 

talk about consultation in reference to the highway problems, 

you’re talking about consultation, not only to the Garson Lake 

issue, but the Turnor Lake issue, the Dillon issue, the Black 

Lake issue, and also the Patuanak and Pinehouse issue. 

 

I think the key reason why we must do this is, it’s much 

different in the North than it is in the South as you’re probably 

aware. If there is a road washed out 20 kilometres, there’s 

another road in which you could take as a route. So really the 

key thing here is the main roads that are serving these 

communities are the only links. 

 

And we must make an effort to do either of two things. Either 

say yes, we will develop within three years sound road systems 

in which that’ll cost the provincial taxpayers 13, 14, $15 

million. Or we can do with the other option saying yes, within 

five years we will have these roads developed to an acceptable 

level in concert and in cooperation with the communities on a 

training program to amalgamate all kinds of training dollars. So 

local people could be trained, so the people of Patuanak could 

build their own road, the people of Turnor Lake could build 

their own road, and the people of Garson Lake could build their 

own road, and Dillon, and on and on and on. 

 

So the key thing here is not only are you looking at this option  

as a short-term employment strategy, Mr. Minister, you’re also 

dealing with the very critical issue of infrastructure, because 

roads in northern Saskatchewan are very, very dangerous. And I 

really look forward to you travelling to northern Saskatchewan 

on some of these roads to see some of the conditions that 

they’re in. 

 

And I’ve had nurses that have phoned. I’ve had taxi driver 

operators that have written me letters complaining about the 

roads. I’ve had taxpayers and teachers that have phoned my 

office complaining about the roads. So these aren’t imaginary 

problems we’re making up here, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure you 

would more likely agree that these problems are persistent. 

 

But northern Saskatchewan as a whole is an area in which we 

simply want to be on par with the rest of the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s the key thing, is we don’t want any extra 

special treatment. We don’t want billions of dollars thrown in 

the North. We just want to have equal treatment as the rest of 

southern Saskatchewan has in terms of economic opportunity, 

housing, health care, and now, of course, roads. 

 

So I think the key thing is, do you have a time line in which you 

hope to have consultations with these various communities I’m 

speaking about in reference to a strategy to deal with the road 

problem issue in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chair, just to state again I think, to the 

member the importance of recognizing the kinds of road 

linkages that exist in the northern part of the province. I don’t 

think that this government needs to be convinced, and certainly 

I don’t need to be convinced that we need to do a lot more work 

as we continue to develop our strategy in terms of 

transportation in the North. As I’ve indicated to you earlier 

though, the entire transportation strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan is all-inclusive. And within that transportation 

strategy of course, will be some . . . a great deal of effort of 

course in all parts of the province, but recognizing the kinds of 

individual issues that you raised with me tonight. 

 

I think it’s important to keep in mind that in this particular 

budget for Saskatchewan — it’s been announced already and 

you’re aware — that we’re going to be spending somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of $30 million on roadways across the 

province. And we know that a portion of those will go in — as 

I’ve identified earlier — into the northern part of your province, 

part of our province. 

 

As you are also aware, that over the next couple of years — 10 

years — we’re going to be putting an additional $2.5 billion 

into roadways, into . . . I mean Highways and Transportation 

across the province. And a portion of those dollars of course, 

will be making their way into the northern part of the province 

of which you represent. 

 

(2215) 

 

I realize as well the importance of the kind of connector that 

you talked about again. This is about jobs. And any time that 

you’re undertaking these kinds of opportunities in the 

development of infrastructure, it always creates opportunities  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

for people, both in the individual areas in which you’re doing 

the work, and also provides some opportunity for economic 

growth in those regions. And so I understand what you’re 

saying around those areas, and we’ll continue to keep those 

factors in mind. 

 

Those partnerships that you talked about and I talked about 

earlier are ones that we are already involved in to a small 

degree. And when you asked me specifically about the kinds of 

time lines that we're working on, I think it would be fair to say 

that within the period of the next six months you will see some 

additional involvement, or increased involvement, by officials 

from my department with folks who are in leadership roles in 

the northern part of Saskatchewan, to work closely with them to 

develop some of those partnerships that we’re talking about, 

that include Mistik of course, and some of the local leadership 

that exists in your communities. 

 

I’m also going to take the opportunity, as you’ve raised it again 

with me tonight, to travel up into the northern part of the 

province; have a firsthand look at what exists there. I expect 

that some of those roads that we’re talking about today were 

likely developed in their initial stages as logging roads, have 

since been converted for use, I think, for transportation by the 

local individual residents who live in those areas and of course 

were never, ever designed to be anything more than that, and 

are certainly being used, I expect, for transportation purpose 

today. 

 

I know that when I talked earlier about some of the work that’s 

been done, I think with individual bands, there’s likely some 

partnerships that we’re involved in today where roadways from 

main arteries are now running to reserves. Some of that work, I 

expect, has been . . . we’ve been involved in through the 

Department of Highways. I expect that into the future some of 

our involvement will increase in those areas. 

 

But those are just, I think, some of the commitments that we’re 

prepared to make tonight to you as we work along in the 

broader picture of enhancing and ensuring that we have a 

comprehensive transportation system for all of the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. A couple of questions. The first 

question I have is, how does a road allocation in terms of 

budgetary processes to improve a certain highway system . . . 

how is the process come about in terms of, do you have the 

initial request from a departmental official? Or do you have a 

request from the community? Or do you put all these requests 

forth in cabinet and they decide which roads are priorized? Like 

how does a road become a priority for your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chair, there are two methods that are 

used, of course, to determine the priority in roadway, 

particularly in the development of roadway in the province. 

 

The one of course is a capital benefit cost one which is on new 

construction. And of course what would happen here is that 

there would be a formula that would be used that would look at 

two or three different areas. Like the issue around safety 

benefits to a particular area, the economic benefits of 

developing a roadway, and what might be the return of use on  

that particular piece of road once it’s constructed. That capital 

request of course, would come through the department’s 

budgeting process and then that particular cost/benefit formula 

would be applied to it. 

 

In regards to the expenditure on the preservation side, what we 

would do is do an evaluation, and it’s ongoing on all of the 

roadways that exist around the province. And then on a priority 

list as it relates to roads that require the greatest need, would 

then be priorized as receiving the bulk of the funding for 

preservation. That would be the process that we would be using, 

that’s being used today in terms of determination, in terms of 

expenditure of cost both on capital and on preservation. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to clarify the 

answer, so the decision on which highway you wish to repair or 

to upgrade or to bring to an acceptable level is basically in your 

departmental decision. What I’m leading to here, Mr. Minister, 

is what can the communities do to assist you in prioritizing 

some of these highways? Is there a role that the municipalities 

or the Indian bands can play in impressing upon you the need to 

repair or to build certain roads? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I really appreciate your comment or your 

question, because I think that it blends nicely to the earlier 

comments that I made in respect to the new transportation 

strategy and of course what the transportation strategy really 

identifies — and I think the strength of the strategy is about — 

is it really tries to partner up with local regional planning areas 

or authorities. Because through those local planning authorities 

what you’ll see and what will increase of course, is greater 

input at that local level in terms of identifying the roadways that 

are of the highest need or that require the greatest retrofit, if I 

might use that in respect to the preservation. 

 

And so as our area planning authorities develop in the future, as 

we have already two in the province and building on a third, 

more and more of that kind of information will make its way 

into the system through the people who are responsible at the 

municipal local levels in terms of identifying the needs that are 

necessary for preservation. So that’s the process that we’re 

using today in respect, as I said earlier, to the capital 

construction. By and large, those are identified currently by the 

department. Some of that of course, would also be involved in 

the area planning processes into the future. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I wish to 

clarify in terms of a couple more issues on the roads in general 

to Garson Lake. The roads I was referring to of course — again 

talking about our main Highway 155 — I’m talking about the 

connecting road of 903 from Meadow Lake into the 

neighbourhood of Cole Bay, and then 903 connecting onto 925, 

which is roughly the Dillon area. And those are the secondary 

super-highways that I referred to in terms of the extraction of all 

the resources. So just to clarify which highway I am talking 

about, that is a stretch through Highway 155. So that’s just for 

clarification. 

 

The second point is, in these various regions that you’re talking 

about in terms of planning committees or planning areas, is  

  



1392  Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1997 

there a policy within your department that, in essence when you 

talk about reducing or saving in the Highways department, is 

there a policy in your department that you are aware of that 

rewards regional managers or sector bosses — or whatever the 

phrase is — a certain percentage of any money that they save 

from their allocation of the Highways budget for that particular 

region? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  In respect to your first question, the two 

roadways that I think I’d mentioned that we were going to do 

some work on, I believe I said 903 and the other one that I’d 

mentioned that there would be some work done in the 1997-98 

budget year was 965. 

 

In respect to your final question that you’d asked of whether or 

not there’s any kind of additional remuneration or performance 

bonuses — if I might use as a term — for regional managers or 

for that matter, senior officials of the department, there isn’t 

that kind of an option available today and I don’t anticipate that 

you’ll see that at least in the next little while. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, so the simple question. Now the 

simple answer to the question, do you reward any of your 

regional bosses any percentage of any savings for their 

particular department . . . for the Highways department and 

their particular area, is no. Unequivocally, no. There are no 

bonuses of such a nature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  This response will be relatively quick. The 

answer to that is no. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The second part of my question is going to 

. . . a Bill that we introduced in terms of allowing the 

municipalities to name airports within their jurisdiction and of 

course the Indian bands would have the same opportunity. 

 

One of the things we spoke about, Mr. Minister, is for example 

the Semchuk Trail from La Loche on to Cluff Lake. Semchuk 

Trail was of course named after the previous Highways minister 

and many local people there really wanted to name that trail 

Clarke Trail. In fact I think the reason why they wanted to call 

it Clarke Trail, it was really the person that blazed the trail into 

Cluff Lake was Jonas Clarke. He was a respected elder, a 

fisherman and a trapper, and really a guy that knew the land in 

and around La Loche and on northwards to Cluff Lake. So they 

tried for many, many years to try and convince the government 

to rename Semchuk Trail, Clarke Trail. If not Clarke Trail then 

perhaps looking at the airport of being a Jonas Clarke field or 

something of that nature. 

 

Again, what the northern people want to do is they want to 

emphasize and they want to, I guess show off and show 

compassion to some of these pioneers that had the ability, the 

intelligence, and the leadership to really build up northern 

Saskatchewan and its people. So really it’s an incredible 

opportunity for your government to look at possibly either 

renaming Semchuk Trail to Clarke Trail, or looking at least to 

extending and affording the opportunity of the municipality to 

name an airport in favour of some of their local people that have 

really helped build those communities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I appreciate the question that the member 

raises in terms of whether or not there can be some local input 

into the whole process of working at trying to determine what 

kinds of naming you might give to a particular roadway or 

bridge or a highway. I think, as the member . . . or maybe an 

airport. I think, as the member realizes, that this is never a very 

easy responsibility to take on, because for as many people who 

you would consult with, in many cases you would get requests 

for what the name of a particular airport or a road or a bridge 

might be. 

 

And as you probably have some sense of the infamous bridge 

that has now been built at Cumberland, as an example, we’ve 

had a number of people now who’ve petitioned us in a variety 

of different ways to name that particular bridge. And of course 

it has been identified that the person who sort of worked the 

hardest at this, in his opinion, should be the person who should 

have this particular bridge named after them. 

 

I think that the most I can say about this is that we’ll continue 

our consultations with the people of the North. When we have 

milestones that we want to celebrate or particular facilities that 

we’ve constructed that require that kind of designation, we’ll 

continue to have those kinds of discussions with your area 

planning folks in hopes that we might achieve the kinds of 

expectations that you have made of us. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’d like to thank the minister for his 

questions and again thank his officials. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

while I realize that time was passing on here, a couple of 

questions I just want to get off. In view of the fact that you’re 

fairly new in this portfolio, and there were a number of 

questions I was hoping to get into with the former minister, the 

member from Carrot River Valley, I believe, but I just wanted 

to bring a couple of questions to your attention so you’d have a 

chance to look at them before we get into department review 

next time. 

 

Number one is our caucus normally sends out a global series of 

questions. I would like to know where that global set of 

responses are to those questions, how soon we can expect to 

receive them? And secondly, Mr. Minister, a follow-up to an 

issue that was raised, I believe by the member from Melville, 

maybe in question period. I was looking for it in estimates. But 

there’s some information — it may not hurt just to touch base 

with the former minister on . . . or just review a bit regarding 

Wood Country and access to their business along Highway No. 

1. I’d like to get into some of that, at the community of 

McLean, the next time we are up for estimates on Highways. 

 

So just a couple of things that you can maybe sit down and 

refresh your memory on before we get into further debate. 

Thank you. 

 

(2230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I just want to advise the member for 

Moosomin that we’ll do both of the . . . just sort of review first 

what’s happened with the global set of questions that he’s asked 

me about. I think in a previous estimate that I was at he’d asked  

  



May 5, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

me the same question and he hadn’t had the information to date. 

I’ll just advise the member that I believe that those questions 

have been all prepared — the responses have been prepared — 

and they should in my opinion be making their way to you 

within the next little while. 

 

In respect to the Wood Country issue, I appreciate the notice on 

it. And we’ll be reviewing it for the next time that we get 

together on the estimates issue. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:33 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1365 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Finance  Vote 18 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1365 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1365 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1374 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1374 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1378 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1380 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Highways and Transportation  Vote 16 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1386 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1386 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1392 

 

 


