



















































Hansard: December 16, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1973 

 December 16, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a petition to present on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures come from Kelvington, Wadena, 

Lintlaw, Fox Valley, and Richmound. I so present. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition comes from the RM (rural municipality) of Antler, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition I’d like to present to the Assembly as well. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from the Moose Jaw area. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition to do with night hunting. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in the province for  

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 

Duval and Govan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

a petition. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather that the films be given 

away to schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service 

basis. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And these come from North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition on behalf of people concerned about the 

Saskatchewan film library. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to make a commitment to 

develop a long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan 

film library, ensuring that under no circumstances will any 

more films be destroyed; rather the films be given away to 

schools, sold, or provided on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

The people that have signed their signature, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Saskatoon and the area around it. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 

to present. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 

with aboriginal and Metis leaders in the province of 

Saskatchewan in an immediate effort to end the destructive 

and dangerous practice of night hunting in this province for 

everyone regardless of their heritage. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Leader. 

 

Mr. McLane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today to 

present on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by the residents of Lake 

Lenore. 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a petition 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the dangers of night hunting and the long-term viability 

of our wildlife species. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the signatures on this petition are primarily from Hague, 

Laird, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present a 

petition on the issue of night hunting and the dangerousness of 

night hunting and the survival of the species. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of 

Turtleford and the Battlefords. I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1, and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 

these funds toward capital construction projects in the 

province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are from 

the Shaunavon area. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1, 

and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 

any monies available from the federal infrastructure 

program towards double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than 

allocating these funds towards capital construction projects 

in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Swift Current, from Shaunavon, from Climax, and some as far 

away as Edmonton and Lethbridge, Alberta. I so present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present  

petitions on behalf of citizens concerned over the Highway No. 

1 situation. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1, and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from the federal infrastructure program 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 

these funds toward capital construction projects in the 

province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioner will every pray. 

 

Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities of Frontier and Shaunavon. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions received 

yesterday have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they 

are hereby read and received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to develop a 

long-term plan with respect to the Saskatchewan film 

library; 

 

Of citizens petitioning the government to work with 

aboriginal and Metis leaders in an effort to end the practice 

of night hunting; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to enact legislation to 

completely ban the practice of night hunting. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, a 

number of honoured guests who are with us today. I want to 

begin by paying tribute to the civic officials and municipal 

leaders who have joined us today in the gallery, have joined us 

as provincial legislatures to make a statement about Canada for 

Saskatchewan people and for all Canadians. 

 

I want to pay special tribute to the . . . and introduce the group 

of people who has, for the last number of weeks, participated in 

a consultation on the question of Canadian unity and the values 

of our Canadian country with the MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) across Saskatchewan and 160 meetings 

as the Co-Chairs for the MLAs, who have joined us today as we 

debate and pass this motion about Canada in the House today. 

And I will ask the individual Co-Chairs to stand as I introduce 

them and we will recognize them when they have all been 

introduced. 

 

From the constituency of Arm River, Ross Kadlec; from the 

constituency of Athabasca, Nancy Morin; from the constituency 

of Cannington, Harold Madsen; from the constituency of Carrot 

River Valley, Janet Drew; from the constituency of Estevan, 

Bernie Collins; from the constituency of Humboldt, Robert 

Bandurka; from the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, 

Donnett Elder; from the constituency of Kindersley, Ken Ritter;  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

from the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, Tish 

Karpa; from the constituency of Meadow Lake, Dan Palsich; 

from the constituency of Melville, Jim Walters; from the 

constituencies of Moose Jaw North and Wakamow, Lyle 

Johnson; from the constituency of Moosomin, Rod Holowaty; 

the constituency of Redberry Lake, Peter Kingsmill; from the 

constituency of Regina Centre, J. P. Ellson; from the 

constituency of Regina Elphinstone, Rob Deglau; from the 

constituency of Regina Lakeview, Harley Weston; from the 

constituency of Regina Northeast, Alex Taylor; from the 

constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, Zach Douglas; from 

the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, Trisha Tyrer; 

from the constituency of Regina Sherwood, Francoise Stoppa; 

from the constituency of Regina South, Janis Stone; from the 

constituency of Regina Victoria, Erin Weir; from the 

constituency of Regina Victoria, Kathleen Antrobus; from the 

constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, Robert Gamble; from 

the constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, Brenda Slimmon; from 

the constituency of Saskatoon Mount Royal, Diane Horbay; 

from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, Paul Jacoby; from 

the constituency of Saskatoon Southeast, Lillian Fernandez; 

from the constituency of Swift Current, John Penner; from the 

constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, John Ferrier; and from 

the constituency of Wood River, Leslie Goldstein. 

 

May we thank these and introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank those 

Co-Chairs who could not be with us today who have also been 

part of this wonderful exercise of meeting with constituencies 

across the province, with constituents. 

 

From Battleford-Cut Knife, Jeannette Reid; from Canora-Pelly, 

Ian Cooper; from Cypress Hills, Marilyn Clary; from 

Kelvington-Wadena, Palma Little and Chad Eggerman; from 

Lloydminster, Vic Juba; from Melfort-Tisdale, Rollie Zimmer 

and Dub Henderson; from North Battleford, Wayne Ray; from 

Prince Albert Carleton, Barbara Gustafson; from Prince Albert 

Northcote, Lyla Rogers; from Regina Coronation Park, 

Madame Papini; from Regina Dewdney, Rick Turchenek; from 

Regina Lakeview, Rosella Mitchell; from Rosthern, Milton 

Block; from Saltcoats, George McIvor; from Saskatchewan 

Rivers, Bryon McKee. 

 

From Saskatoon Eastview, Mary Janvier and Jeanne 

Auramenko; from Saskatoon Fairview, Doug Cuthand; from 

Saskatoon Greystone, Gordon Barnhart; from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld, David Forbes; from Saskatoon Idylwyld, Donna 

Wilson; from Saskatoon Meewasin and Northwest, Gerard 

LeBlanc; from Saskatoon Riversdale, Maureen Strawson; from 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood, C.D. McIvor; from Saskatoon 

Sutherland, Charles Johnston; from Thunder Creek, Louis 

Stringer; from Watrous, Wayne Busch; from Yorkton, Merle 

Sherwin; from Rosetown-Biggar, Graham Mickleborough; and 

from Cumberland, Bob Imrie. 

 

Let’s thank all of these citizens who have made this big 

contribution to Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to introduce through you to the members 

of the legislature two additional guests who are in your gallery 

— my son, Alan MacKinnon, who’s a first-year university 

student studying land use and environmental studies, and his 

friend, Brian Taylor, who’s a first-year arts and science student. 

I would ask everyone to give these young men a very warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I would like to express our 

appreciation to those Co-Chairs who are here today — your 

work was invaluable. And to those who, due to other 

commitments who have not been able to make it, we want to 

express our sincere appreciation for the tremendous task that 

has been undertaken by them and completed. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add our 

voice on behalf of the Liberal caucus to thank all those people 

that helped us. I know personally my Co-Chair was a 

tremendous asset as I’m sure these other people were 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to recognize and welcome Mayor Cody, 

Mayor Boughen, and Mayor Dayday in your gallery this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and a very special guest as well from 

my perspective, the Assistant Commissioner Brian Watt, who is 

the commanding officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

for Saskatchewan, known as F division for those of us that were 

associated with the force. I’m very pleased that Assistant 

Commissioner Watt could be here today, on this day, National 

Unity Day, representing our national police force, which I have 

been very proud to have been part of. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Bradley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the legislature, a group of students that are visiting today in the 

west gallery from Weyburn Comprehensive High School. There 

are 17 students who are accompanied by their teachers, Camille 

St. Amand and Crystal Jordens, and a chaperon, Albert Ernst. 

 

I’m very pleased that they’re able to be here today, because 

actually my Co-Chair, John Ferrier, and I, one of our 

consultations was done with the Weyburn Comprehensive High 

School. So it was really nice timing that they’re able to be here 

today as we kind of further our discussion here in the legislature 

on the Calgary framework. 

 

I wish everyone to welcome them here and to make their visit a 

real pleasure. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to  



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

introduce a couple of guests in the Assembly today. Sitting 

immediately behind me is my predecessor and former MLA 

from Arm River, Mr. Gerald Muirhead. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane: — Also in the gallery opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

there is another constituent of mine and an elected 

representative, a Reform MP (Member of Parliament) from 

Saskatoon-Dundurn, Mr. Allan Kerpan, and I would ask you to 

welcome him here today, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce Mr. Dwain 

Drew. Dwain is the past president of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation and Dwain is seated at the west gallery. 

Please join with me in welcoming Dwain to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I would like to introduce to you and to 

all members of the legislature, Debbie Ward, the new president 

of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, having been 

elected some two or three weeks ago. I’d like all members to 

join me in welcoming Debbie to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome 

Brian Watt to the legislature, but in addition I would like to give 

a special welcome to the honorary Consul General for Japan, 

Art Wakabayashi, and the Consul for the Netherlands, Mr. Bill 

de Lint. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that this is 

an historic day today and it’s historic in many other ways as 

well. The good citizens and constituents of Saskatoon Southeast 

have an opportunity today to see in one room representatives 

from the municipal, provincial, and federal governments 

together. 

 

So I would like to welcome Mayor Henry Dayday of Saskatoon, 

and Allan Kerpan of Saskatoon-Dundurn. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Legislative Assembly, a distinguished citizen of 

Saskatchewan, and I’m honoured to be his member of the 

Legislative Assembly. I would like to ask the members to join 

me in welcoming the former president of the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, Mr. Ted Turner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and all members of the Assembly, I would like to as well  

welcome some guests here this afternoon. Sitting in the east 

gallery is a very important representative of the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Tom Hengen, the steering committee chairperson. 

We want to welcome Tom here this afternoon. 

 

Joined with him is a Reform MP, Allan Kerpan, who we would 

also want to extend our warm wishes and warm welcome to 

here this afternoon. And I’d ask all members to welcome those 

guests as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to bring to your attention and to the attention of the House, a 

very distinguished visitor who is here on this very significant 

and important day in our country. I’d like to welcome 

Archbishop Peter Mallon, the Archbishop of the Roman 

Catholic Diocese of Regina, who is in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 

introduce to the House my daughter, Koonu Dawn, in your 

gallery. Mr. Speaker, her name means Snow. She was born on a 

January morning a few years back. She’s doing some work and 

travel in Europe as well as in India. She’s also, I might add, Mr. 

Speaker, here to enjoy the Canadian unity discussions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, everybody might be waiting, might be waiting for 

snow, but we were dearly — my wife and I — are very dearly 

happy to see our Koonu Dawn here visiting us this Christmas. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise as well to introduce a 

very special friend of ours, Sister Michelle Blanchette, sitting in 

your gallery, who is the new director of the John Paul II Centre 

in Regina here. Before that, Sister Michelle was a director in the 

north-east for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Prince Albert, 

and more important than that, became a very dear, close friend. 

Please welcome her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you, 

and I ask all members to welcome, the Leader of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party, Dr. Jim Melenchuk. And seated 

with him in the gallery is Vic Karwacki and Mark Rogstad. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Branding of Members 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, I recently read the Premier’s 

address to the 1997 NDP (New Democratic Party) convention, 

and I see that he’s interested in getting himself a good branding 

iron. In the speech the Premier remarked that the member from 

Moosomin was quoted as saying that crossing the floor is 

political opportunism and he didn’t want to be branded an 

opportunist. 

 

Most of my constituents suggest the actions of the member  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

from Moosomin and his colleagues are those of self-interested 

politicians who are also pretty inept at picking a good 

opportunity. 

 

Like many of my constituents, I am a cattleman, and so I’m 

pleased to offer the Premier some tips if he wants to do some 

figurative branding. As for a brand, I’d suggest TC for turncoat 

or PC for poor choice, planted firmly on the extreme right 

rump. 

 

But whatever brand he chooses, I phoned Jolly’s Vet Supplies 

here in town and a convenient, two-letter electric branding iron 

can be had for all of the political opportunists on your lists for 

just $135. 

 

Regardless of how you brand them, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be happy 

trails back home to them all in 1999. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan’s Booming Oil and Gas Industry 

 

Mr. Ward: — Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons our job 

numbers are so high and our financial picture good is the 

excellent performance of the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry. 

 

Our province’s energy sector employs about 18,000 people, 

with more being added constantly. Direct and indirect 

employment in the oil patch increased by 2,675 last year, an 

increase of more than 15 per cent. 

 

Last year Saskatchewan exported about 2.8 million in 

petroleum and this year we are well on the way to breaking last 

year’s crude production record of 131 million barrels. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, this year’s petroleum and natural 

gas sales rights will be the third highest ever. The total rights 

sales for 1997 is now 131 million. In addition, more drilling 

licences have been issued than last year. The activity 

throughout the oil patch is, quite frankly, outstanding. 

 

It is also worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that this activity is spread 

across the province. My area, the Weyburn-Estevan area, is 

receiving the most bids. But Lloydminster, Kindersley, 

Kerrobert, and Swift Current are all quite active. 

 

And as you would expect, the new jobs are distributed through 

these areas in a similar proportion — 1,250 in my area; 512 

around Kindersley; 476 around Lloydminster; and 437 around 

Swift Current. A quiet drive through any of these areas will 

give all the visual evidence necessary to show that every 

available rig is in use and available worker employed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Team Schmirler’s Winning Ways 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again Team 

Schmirler has made Saskatchewan proud — first by winning 

yet another world curling championship last spring, and then by 

earning the right to represent Canada at the ’98 Olympics in 

Japan. 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is especially proud of these 

accomplishments since one member of this great team, second 

Joan McCusker, hails from the Saltcoats community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, far be it from me to try and horn in on some of 

Joan’s spotlight, but I think I deserve some of the credit for her 

considerable curling skills. Not only did my family curl against 

Joan’s family many times throughout the years, we also let 

them beat us on most of those occasions to build up her 

confidence and teach her how to be a winner. 

 

As well, I’ve had an opportunity to curl on the same team as 

Joan on a few occasions, and after watching my skills and my 

form on the ice and doing precisely the opposite, Joan has 

learned to become one of the best curlers in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to all the members of the Schmirler team, we offer 

our congratulations and the best of luck in Japan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Probationary Driver’s Program 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there are no shortages of 

wise cracks and jokes about the effectiveness of committees and 

what they accomplish. We’ve all heard that the definition of a 

camel is a horse put together by a committee. 

 

But I would like to bring to this Assembly’s attention the work 

of one particular committee — one that had a very fine 

membership, I might add, and one, Mr. Speaker, with which I 

know you are well acquainted — that is, the Select Committee 

on Driving Safety. 

 

In any case, this committee travelled the province three winters 

ago and gathered information and ideas on how to reduce motor 

vehicle accidents in our province. As a result, our provincial 

legislation on impaired driving was strengthened, and on 

August 1, 1996 the probationary driver’s program was 

implemented. 

 

A probationary driver is basically a new driver, either getting 

their first driver’s licence or someone who is new to the 

province. After one year, the probationary driver’s program is 

showing some particularly fine results. From August 1996 to 

July ’97 there was a 20 per cent reduction in the at-fault 

accidents for new drivers and there were 1,740 fewer 

new-driver accidents than for the previous years. 

 

Now whether or not these results are totally due to the Select 

Committee on Driving Safety, one thing is clear — 

Saskatchewan roads are becoming safer, Saskatchewan drivers 

are increasing their skills, and at least one committee has built a 

horse that looks like a horse. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

50th Wedding Anniversary 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 

like to ask the members to extend congratulations to William  



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

and Jean Allan, who are celebrating their 50th wedding 

anniversary today. The Allans have farmed together in the 

Tisdale area since their marriage on December 16, 1947. They 

raised four children and are now enjoying the additional 

blessings of nine grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Allan continues to be an avid curler in the senior league, 

and both Mr. and Mrs. Allan enjoy bowling. The Presbyterian 

church and community have benefited from their active 

participation over the years. Their 50th wedding anniversary is 

a milestone that has been achieved through the strength of their 

commitment and love for each other. 

 

I ask you to join me in congratulating William and Jean and 

wishing them all the best in the future. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SARCAN Recycling 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was very happy to 

participate in an announcement that will bring 12 

full-time-equivalent jobs for Saskatchewan people with 

disabilities. These jobs will be directed towards solving a 

significant environmental problem. 

 

Together, Saskatchewan’s dairy industry and SARCAN 

recycling launched a new recycling initiative that will collect 

4-litre plastic milk jugs for recycling. This program is entirely 

voluntary. It will be financed solely by Saskatchewan dairy 

processing industry. 

 

Consumers get to demonstrate their environmental ethic with 

solid recycling action. They will not be charged a deposit on the 

jugs and no refunds will be paid when the jugs are returned to 

SARCAN depots for recycling. 

 

It is estimated that at least 25 per cent of the jugs will be 

returned. That’s about 112,000 kilograms of waste not going to 

our landfills. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the only province-wide 

recycling program for these milk containers. Customers asked 

for this program. I was pleased to help the initiative along by 

arranging a meeting last December between SARCAN and 

dairy representatives, and I am happy today to announce the 

results — jobs and environmental protection brought about 

through a fine example of cooperation between government as 

facilitator, and industry as actor. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Athabasca Road Construction 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

member from Redberry spoke about the official opening of one 

of Saskatchewan’s busiest highways. I want to mention a road 

today far in the North. This road is not as busy a road, but it is 

important to the people of the North. Last month a sod-turning 

ceremony was held to start construction of a 180-kilometre 

winter road from Points North Landing to Black Lake serving 

the communities of Stony Rapids, Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac, 

and Camsell Portage.  

 

This road, Mr. Speaker, on the north-east top of our province,  

will replace summer river barging as the main supply source for 

these towns. The Athabasca Road will cost approximately 8 

million, cost-shared between the province, the Department of 

Indian Affairs, and, in this land-locked province, the federal 

coastguard. 

 

This announcement is a good news item. First the road will 

provide a land link to the world for this previously isolated area; 

and second, the construction will provide 150 much-needed 

jobs. Ongoing operation and maintenance will provide a 

number of permanent jobs following construction. 

 

The Prince Albert Grand Council, representing first nations 

people in this area, have waited for this road and are happy to 

see their transportation needs being addressed. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Call for Fall Session 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Saskatchewan legislature was recalled for what is being billed 

— notwithstanding the date — as a fall session. It continues to 

be the position of the Liberal Party that what we need is a real 

fall session where the government introduces Bills and then 

adjourns; so the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to 

consider public issues before the legislation is passed in the 

spring. 

 

The Alberta NDP agrees with us that a fall session is important 

to holding the government accountable. Not so in 

Saskatchewan, where the NDP says that this House is not the 

appropriate forum for debating public issues and that the elected 

representatives of the people should instead content themselves 

with issuing press releases. 

 

While the people of Guyana got a public debate and vote in 

their parliament on the power deal, the people of Saskatchewan 

got no such consideration when our government sent $31 

million to that country to invest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are in agreement with the recalling of 

the House this week and we are proud of the unity resolution 

and to be a part of this, we want to take this opportunity to 

again say that what we need is a real fall session of the 

legislature to reaffirm that this Assembly is the best of all places 

for the opposition, on behalf of Saskatchewan families and 

taxpayers, to hold the government accountable and to debate the 

direction of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Consequences of Separation 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, 

it’s unity day in Saskatchewan and you will be happy to know 

that all members of the Saskatchewan Party will be voting in 

favour of the resolution this afternoon. We are voting in favour 

of it because two most important issues that we heard from our 

constituents was included in the resolution: a province-wide  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

referendum was a must and so was the outlining of the 

consequences of a province separating from the rest of Canada. 

 

I know you had some trouble, Mr. Premier, and so did the 

Liberals, about including secession results in this resolution 

even though the people wanted it. My question, Mr. Premier, is, 

are you going to push the consequences of secession with the 

rest of the Canadian premiers and with the federal government 

as the Saskatchewan people want you to? Just how far are you 

going to go to advance the consequences of separation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

absolutely incorrect in his assumption that the government did 

not want to discuss the consequences of separation. In fact this 

government is only one of two provincial governments which is 

siding with the federal government in explaining to the court, 

Supreme Court of Canada, and to the people of Canada the 

impact of secession and the inability to secede — only one of 

two governments to do so. 

 

I’ve, in the past, spoken about the consequences of secession 

from the passport, economic side, dollar side, all of the issues 

that affect Canadian unity and affect Canadians on day-to-day 

side. No problems on that whatsoever. And the resolution 

reflects this. 

 

The important part to remember, however, is balance, and the 

balance is that when we talk about the consequences, we talk to 

the consequences not only to Quebec, but to Saskatchewan, to 

Alberta, to British Columbia. Don’t throw out some sort of a 

threat to Quebec, because that threat exists to each and every 

one of us in Canada. And what this resolution speaks to is a 

unified and stronger Canada in a positive way. That’s the way 

Canada should be built, positively, in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Night Hunting 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, besides 

national unity, the people of the province told us they had very 

many other concerns in the province. 

 

Last Friday, the minister proudly announced the government 

was finally ready to do at least something about the issue of 

night hunting. The minister said the government would ban all 

spotlight hunting; that aboriginal people were in favour of 

banning spotlight hunting, and that it would be done by 

February. It seems the minister was putting the cart before the 

horse, since the vice-chief of FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) said they’re way off the mark on 

this one. 

 

Which is it, Mr. Minister? Did you make a premature 

announcement just to defuse the flack you take in the 

Assembly, or are you dealing with this very important issue? 

Mr. Minister, it’s a very simple question: will you or will you 

not ban spotlight hunting in this province in February — yes or 

no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the  

opportunity to respond to the hon. member’s question. 

 

What we are dealing with is unsafe night hunting; it includes 

more than spotlight hunting. It can include a number of factors, 

including shooting from headlights of a four-wheel drive truck 

going through the field. 

 

We are working cooperatively with the FSIN and the Metis 

Nation to come up with a solution to this, and we have not got 

any preconceived idea. We are not saying we are banning 

anything at this time. Unlike some opposition members, we go 

to the table with no preconceived idea. We are going to work 

things out, and within a couple of months, we will have a 

solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we have to wonder if the 

government went to the table and lost. Mr. Minister, this is a 

safety issue that we’re talking about — a safety issue for all of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Our Bill, the Bill we presented yesterday which was held up in 

Manitoba for three years with no court challenge . . . and it’s 

ready for your support, Mr. Minister. It will deal with the night 

hunting issue and ensure the safety of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Will you support this Bill, Mr. Minister, or will you continue to 

pretend to deal with night hunting in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member 

referred to failing. I think we’ve been doing that since 1964 

when we received the first court ruling that aboriginal people 

have the right to hunt, day or night, and by any means. And this 

has failed in the courts when we’ve attempted this before, and 

we will not approach that; we will not use that approach. 

 

We are very pleased that the aboriginal people also recognize 

the safety issue. And we are going to do something about the 

unsafe practices of hunting at night, particularly with the use of 

spotlights. And we are going to come up with a solution. 

Because we cannot infringe on the treaties — we have proven 

that time and again when we have gone to court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPowers’ Investment in Guyana 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister in charge of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan). Well, Minister, the election in Guyana is 

over and according to reports within the past hour, it looks like 

the present government is to be re-elected with about a 58 per 

cent of the vote. Mr. Minister, you said cabinet was waiting 

until the election was over to give the stamp of approval for $31 

million in taxpayers’ money buying into the Guyana electric 

company. 

 

I’m sure this has been a hot topic over the cabinet; over the last 

few weeks it has been on the table and you’ve been stalling. So, 

Minister, what’s the decision of cabinet? Are you going to kiss 

$31 million away this week? Are you going to wait until we’re 

busy with our families for Christmas or when the Assembly  



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

isn’t sitting? 

 

Mr. Minister, your government said you’d listen to the people 

about unity. Will you listen to the people about this Guyana 

deal and scrap it today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the member opposite, I want to 

say the following: that he may have more current information 

than I have on the election results, but only to report to you that 

Alan Bowker from the Canadian High Commission in 

Georgetown, who is keeping the office informed as to the 

results, indicated a few moments ago, and I say a few moments 

ago, that the results so far, with 25 per cent of the votes in, with 

PPP (People’s Progressive Party), which is the governing party, 

with 55,000 votes; the PNC (People’s National Congress)with 

40,000 votes, doesn’t include Georgetown. So you may have to 

wait another day to get the final results, but we will inform you 

after the results get in as to where we’re going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Channel Lake Petroleum 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Now the hon. member from 

Moosomin has been recognized and it is his opportunity to put 

his question to the floor. And I’ll ask all hon. members, 

including his own colleagues, to allow him to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well 

while we’re discussing unity, other issues, as the Premier is 

aware of, are certainly on people’s minds and a concern I’d like 

to raise with the minister responsible for CIC. Day after day we 

read examples of how our province’s Crowns are not 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. Most recently you 

are asking people to just ignore the fact that SaskPower lost $8 

million through the Channel Lake Petroleum deal. 

 

Mr. Minister, any time your political appointee, Jack Messer, 

fails to disclose what’s going on at SaskPower is no surprise to 

the public. And that is a problem. You hide the losses of 

Crowns like NST (Network Services of Chicago) and Channel 

Lake deals because you want to avoid being accountable to the 

public. 

 

Mr. Minister, it’s time Crowns were accountable. It’s time 

people knew the real picture. In light of the NST and Channel 

Lake projects, could you tell us just how many other Crowns 

have lost millions of dollars of taxpayers’ money over the past 

few years that the public is not aware about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I intend to inform the 

member that the Channel Lake project was a gas field 

purchased in 1993 by SaskPower to use the gas within the 

operation of the Power corporation. 

 

As you know, the Power corporation buys gas long term, short 

term, medium term. The belief was they should have some  

in-the-ground storage and they made the purchase for 25 

million; 11 million of that was returned on the loan that was 

borrowed in order to make the purchase. They sold the asset for 

20 million with a $5 million deduction, which means they made 

$2 million on the deal. 

 

Now I know as a former Conservative that’s a difficult concept 

to understand; that you would actually make money on a deal. 

 

But in terms of accountability, I want to quote something that 

that member said on November 19 of ’96. He said: I was 

elected to represent the Conservative values for this 

constituency and I would never just cross the floor. I would 

never just cross the floor, he said. If I was ever to think about a 

change like that I would consult the people about it first. I 

would want to know what the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Next question. Next 

question. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplementary to the 

minister. I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I 

find it interesting that the minister will be trying to give us a 

lesson in having our facts straight. We’re quoting from the 

auditor and the auditor is pointing out this. The auditor is 

raising some serious questions about the loss. In fact he also 

points out that this deal was allowed — a $20 million deal — to 

take place without tendering it properly. 

 

Yesterday you said you didn’t think $20 million was a big 

enough problem to worry about, but I don’t think the people of 

Saskatchewan agree, and certainly our party doesn’t agree. Mr. 

Minister, I believe you need to review the way CIC tenders 

projects, but first you must review just what happened at the 

Channel Lake deal. 

 

Why wasn’t it tendered? How did a person who negotiated the 

sale for SaskPower end up as a director of Channel Lake shortly 

after? Why weren’t the losses made public? These are just a few 

of the many questions that you have failed to answer. Mr. 

Minister, will you today commit to holding a review into the 

Channel Lake Petroleum deal; will you do that for the taxpayers 

of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the annual 

report of the SaskPower Corporation will come before the 

Crown Investments Corporation for total review, and that 

member obviously is invited to come and to ask any questions. 

But obviously there’s nothing secretive about the deal. 

 

In fact while the sale was going on, four other companies were 

asked, were asked to bid on the sale of the asset. Two of them, 

Stampeder Explorations and Shining Bank Energy Ltd., did 

give firm written offers on the project. So I say to you that this 

was not a closed deal at all. 

 

But getting back to credibility of that member, I want to quote 

again, I want to quote again but from his own newspaper, from 

his own newspaper, the Moosomin Spectator. He says, he 

considers crossing the floor to being a political opportunism, a 

political opportunism, he said Friday, and he doesn’t want to be  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

branded as an opportunist. I say, get out the branding iron for 

that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Surgery Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

more than two months ago the Liberal opposition called on this 

government to explain why Hope Sawin, an elderly Coronach 

woman, was forced to wait six agonizing days for surgery to 

repair a broken hip. At the time the Premier indicated that he 

would personally get to the bottom of this situation. So, Mr. 

Premier, can you explain what the findings of your personal 

inquiry are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

member opposite is interested in learning a bit about 

waiting-lists across the province, because I hear this is where 

he’s going. 

 

I want to share with the member opposite that in this province 

currently we have, in the orthopaedic side, waiting-lists that are 

larger than they have been in the past. And the waiting-lists are 

due to the fact that we’ve had an increase in the number of 

people who are requiring orthopaedic surgery in the province. 

That number has increased by about 6 per cent. Accordingly 

there has also been an increase in the cataract surgeries. 

 

So as the member points out, in the province there is some need 

for us to attract additional specialists on the orthopaedic side 

and that will reduce the number of days of waiting that we have 

in the province today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it was the Premier that promised to get to the 

bottom of this case. Mr. Speaker, the truth is that two months 

have gone by and Hope Sawin and her family have not been 

contacted by the Premier, by the Health minister, or anyone else 

in that government. So, Mr. Premier, why the empty promises? 

If Hope Sawin can’t take you at your word, who can? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I will take the member’s 

question under advisement, in the sense that I’ll check out 

exactly what happened in this correspondence and where it sits. 

The minister has spoken to the issue in general terms. I’ll try to 

get back to him before the end of the week if not earlier. 

 

Health Care for Gravelbourg Seniors 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly was 

called back this week to discuss the important issue of national 

unity and to express a show of goodwill to our francophone 

counterparts in Quebec. 

 

However it appears this government is forgetting the needs of 

Saskatchewan’s elderly French community, particularly in the 

Gravelbourg area. Because of a funding shortage, 10 long-term 

care beds may be closed at the Gravelbourg hospital and elderly 

residents, many of whom are of French descent, may be forced 

to leave their community. 

Will the Premier explain why he is putting his hands out for 

Quebecers but is using that same hand to slap the face of 

French-speaking Saskatchewan residents in Gravelbourg? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member 

with the greatest of respect, this is really one of the longest 

bows that’s ever been drawn in a question. 

 

The member full well knows, and under our system of health 

care renewal now, the question with respect to hospitals and 

how acute care or other services are delivered are within the 

concept and the jurisdiction of the district health board, as 

properly they should be, as we say they should be. And to argue 

in this context that the decision respecting Gravelbourg is 

somehow inconsistent with what I hope will be a unanimous 

motion speaking to the issue of national unity is drawing the 

longest and irrelevant bow that I think I’ve heard in a long time 

in question period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. 

Well actions do speak louder than words and our seniors in 

Gravelbourg want more than the Premier’s empty words. NDP 

Health ministers, past and present, both promised no more bed 

closures and no more nurses would be eliminated under this 

government’s reign. 

 

Mr. Premier, when the Harris government in Ontario closed 

down the Montfort Hospital this fall, it was condemned for 

closing down a facility which served many French-speaking 

seniors. Why is your government taking the Mike Harris 

approach to health care? Why are you selling out our 

French-speaking seniors in Gravelbourg? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I said in response to the 

previous question that that was the longest bow. I stand 

corrected — this is even a longer bow and even less credible. 

 

The hon. member obviously knows that in Ontario they do not 

have a system where there’s been a devolution of authority on 

health care matters to local folks at the local level to make the 

decisions in their best interests. 

 

The district health boards have been set up specifically for that 

purpose in mind, in order to make the adjustments within the 

community at large. This is an issue which is entirely different 

than Ontario, entirely not applicable to Saskatchewan situation. 

 

And I want to conclude by saying to the hon. member opposite 

that in the province of Saskatchewan we are years ahead of 

reform of any other province in this country. And I would add, 

we are the shining example of how to do it while protecting the 

principles of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

From the closure of long-term care beds . . . was discussed at 

another recent public meeting in Gravelbourg. The Premier 

should have been there to hear his old chum and former NDP  



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

cabinet executive director of communications, Dale 

Schmeichel, as South Country Health District CEO (chief 

executive officer). He called the good people of Gravelbourg 

“Scrooges” for opposing the bed closures. If Charles Dickens 

was going to characterize anybody as Ebenezer Scrooge, it 

certainly would not be the people of Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do we need intervention from the Ghosts of 

Christmas past, present and future? Or will the Premier and his 

government do what is right and provide enough money to local 

health care needs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member does 

not want to be portrayed as the Scrooge of Christmas or the 

person who . . . the Grinch that stole Christmas, then what he 

ought to do is speak to the federal Liberal government in 

Ottawa about their $7 billion cut-back on health care — $7 

billion in health care. 

 

Now that’s all you can do — is just pick up the phone. Pick up 

the phone to your friend, Mr. Ralph Goodale, pick up the phone 

to your friend, Jean Chrétien, pick up the phone to any federal 

Liberal and say, give us back a little bit of the fiscal dividend 

for health care. 

 

I want to tell you that all of the premiers and the territorial 

leaders at their conference just concluded a couple of days ago 

in Ottawa, were unanimously of the view that the fiscal federal 

dividend should be returned back to the provinces to enhance 

acute care, because the federal budget was balanced at the 

expense of medicare and health care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge: — Supplementary to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, all we’ve heard from this premier and his 

government this afternoon are nothing but broken and hollow 

promises. I’ve not heard anything that sounds an inkling like an 

apology out of the Premier here this afternoon. 

 

I’d like to just draw the Premier’s attention to a letter in front of 

me from one Madeleine Tardis of Gravelbourg, who is writing 

the Premier — and I’ll give this to the Premier after for him to 

address these concerns — writing the Premier about health care 

concerns. And I quote: 

 

From my own pocket I gave $7,000 for our new nursing 

home and hospital. By the time I’ll be sick and very old, 

the facilities will be closed down at the rate you’re cutting 

beds. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, I wonder if, given that you haven’t 

undertaken any attempt to make contact with Ruth Sawin, this 

afternoon would you undertake to call Madeleine Tardis and 

apologize to her for having referred to her and other residents of 

Gravelbourg as Scrooges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, with the greatest of 

respect, I don’t think the hon. member knows what he’s talking 

about, because I sure don’t know what he’s talking about. 

I can say to the hon. member before and I’ll say again, if he’s 

interested in health care, if the Liberal Party is interested in 

health care, which of course no one in this province believes 

that it is — it has fought medicare since 1962, it and the Tory 

Party sitting over there fought medicare in 1962. The two of 

you people, Keep Our Doctors committee, you remember how 

they did that. They did it. How the doctors were out there on 

strike, fighting medicare. 

 

And now you have the audacity to stand up in this legislature 

and pretend that you are the defender of medicare. Not in a long 

shot will the people ever believe the Liberals or the Tories of 

this province being defenders of medicare. Forget about it; you 

won’t get that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporations Accountability 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplementary 

coming back to the minister responsible for CIC. The minister 

made a comment about raising concerns in Crown 

Corporations. The minister is quite well aware of the fact that 

when you deal in Crown Corporations, Crown Corporations 

doesn’t necessarily give you an opportunity to disclose 

information for the public. And that’s why we raise questions 

like this on the floor. 

 

And coming back to the Channel Lake deal. When the 

Provincial Auditor disclosed the over $8 million loss on 

Channel Lake, the response to why it wasn’t released to the 

public was interesting, coming from SaskPower. 

 

SaskPower said they didn’t want to talk about the loss because 

of a confidentiality agreement. Well, Mr. Minister, I think the 

confidentiality agreement is between cabinet members. If a 

Crown makes money on a deal, stand up, pat yourselves on the 

back. If a Crown loses money, keep it confidential to just 

cabinet. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think it’s time to stop hiding information from 

the public. Will you put a mechanism in place to support all 

losses in the Crowns, so we don’t have to talk about losses 

which come from leaks from the States and everywhere else? 

Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 

the member opposite, who was part of a government that I 

totally understand why he would in the dark of night cross the 

floor and try to pretend something else, having been part of the 

Grant Devine Conservative government, and I want to tell you, 

in terms of openness of government as compared to the kind of 

government that you were involved in for a number of years, 

this government is fully open. We’ve worked with the auditor. 

We’ve worked with the auditor in every way possible. 

 

Our Crown Corporation Committee gives that member and any 

member the opportunity to come and ask questions about 

Channel Lake, about Guyana. We have a process of a 90-day 

declaration and disclosure on the circumstances that are 

considered to be of significant importance, and we allow that. 



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

So for you to say . . . The member opposite, the former 

Conservative from Moosomin, once a Tory, always a Tory — 

you’re branded as a Tory. So don’t pretend that somehow you 

come here with an openness about government after what you 

were involved in for nine years as a Conservative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker 

— a supplementary to the minister. It appears the minister 

certainly feels quite proud in where he’s coming from today and 

he feels quite confident in his responses. He’s leaving us with 

the impression that this government has done everything right. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, maybe he forgot — maybe 

he’s not reading the papers very carefully — maybe he’s forgot 

about some of the comments the auditor is making. The auditor 

brought up, raised this point. The auditor brought it to the 

public’s attention. In fact just the other day, Mr. Speaker, if I’m 

not . . . if I remember correctly, it was his members who are 

now refusing to give the auditor more funds so that he can 

indeed do a good job of perusing the budgets of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you indeed show to the people of this 

province that you are putting a mechanism in place that they 

can be confident in, that the Crown corporations are all working 

equally and are totally accountable to the taxpayers of this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I say very honestly to the member 

opposite that I’m confident that the systems we have in place 

for reviewing the operation of our Crowns are as open as any 

other system in Canada. Not that we can’t make them better; I 

agree with you that you can always improve the systems. 

 

But let me tell you why there isn’t enough money for the 

auditor and many other things that we would like to have 

money for in this province, whether it’s roads or health care or 

many other areas. When you understand that we still owe $12 

billion, the largest part of it as a result of your mismanagement, 

ask the auditor. Ask the auditor what he thinks . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I will ask 

hon. members to allow the answer to be heard without calling 

from both sides of the House. Order. And I’ll . . . Order. And 

I’ll recognize the minister if he wants to conclude his remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — I just want to conclude my remarks 

today, Mr. Speaker, by saying to the member opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, who complains about the lack of money for the auditor 

to have available to him, just ask the auditor what he thinks of 

the mismanagement and the rise in debt between the period of 

1982 to 1991. We will be paying for that — we will, our 

children, and our grandchildren — for 50 years to come, based 

on the mismanagement of your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, in what is becoming a tradition 

of this government to be open, accountable, and responsible, I 

am pleased to table the answer to this question. 

 

The Speaker: — The response is tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTION 

 

Canadian Unity 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

At the end of my remarks, I will be making a motion seconded 

by my colleague, the Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

I want to begin by thanking everyone who has made this day 

possible, and especially to thank and recognize everyone in this 

Assembly: the members of the Legislative Assembly, both on 

the government side, the opposition side, including independent 

members, and those who are with us as, I would call, special 

guests — the citizen Co-Chairs who, I think, were involved 

with MLAs in what has proven to be a very unique and I think a 

very worthwhile exercise in consultative, participatory 

democracy about an issue which is so important to all of us in 

Saskatchewan — namely, Canadian unity. 

 

I want to say that to our guests, a special thanks for being here 

today. You were instrumental in playing the role as citizen 

Co-Chairs, and the fact that you’ve taken time off from your 

busy commitments at home to come and be with us today in 

such good numbers and to listen for the last hour of question 

period and statements — by the way, a testament to the great 

democracy and to the great state of Canada as it is today — is 

again proof positive of your love of this great province and this 

great country. 

 

I think I can say safely on behalf of every one of us in this 

House, thank you for a job well done and welcome to the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I might be a little bit 

grandiose in my next statement, but perhaps not. I want to also 

say that we welcome those who may be watching this debate on 

television. Grandiose because I know sometimes MLAs say that 

nobody watches the channel of the legislative proceedings. 

 

But I have to tell you frankly, Mr. Speaker, I do recall one 

occasion when in opposition — it’s one of the rare occasions 

that I can remember during my period in opposition since the 

rest is a blank — filibustering a particular matter which the 

government of the day introduced. 

 

And at 2 o’clock in the morning, one of our MLAs got up and 

said, if you protest what the government’s doing, please phone 

this number. It was 2 o’clock in the morning — everybody said, 

nobody watches the legislative channel — and I was surprised  



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

the flood of phone calls that came in at 2 o’clock. It’s an 

absolutely true story. 

 

So maybe it isn’t so grandiose to say to everybody who is 

watching this debate, thank you for tuning in. I know that you 

are, and by tuning in, you too are participating and 

demonstrating your commitment and your love for this province 

and for this great country called Canada. 

 

I want to return to the MLAs for one moment to say on a 

personal note that thanks have to be extended to all of you, to 

all of us, for taking time off at what normally is a very 

important period of the year — our holiday season, our 

Christmas period — away from family, from constituents. 

You’ve deferred that important function because you have 

believed that there are even more important functions, that 

serious duties demand our attention here today, the serious duty 

of doing our part in keeping this great country together. 

 

You know, as we sit in this session in these circumstances, I’m 

reminded of a story of a wife and her husband, which wife and 

husband shall go unnamed, but who had to make an emergency 

trip to the dentist. No names will be given but perhaps you’ll 

have a . . . I can say this much, that I have some personal 

knowledge with the facts involved. 

 

The wife told the husband that a tooth needed to be pulled. And 

because there was a hurry, she said, I don’t want any Novocain, 

to the dentist, I don’t want any anaesthetic, just pull the tooth 

and we’re going to be on our way. The dentist looked up and, 

very impressed with the wife’s courage, asked her which tooth 

she wanted pulled. And she said, oh no, Roy, show the man 

your tooth. 

 

Well most of the time, getting agreement in this Chamber is like 

pulling a tooth. But on this occasion and for this cause, we were 

able to do so. And for this occasion and for this cause, we 

should all be heartened that we introduced this resolution on 

national unity which, as has been indicated in various places, 

will receive the support of all the members of the House and all 

of the members of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I want to thank in particular the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. I want to thank in particular the Leader of the Third 

Party, Dr. Jim Melenchuk, and their advisers, for their 

cooperation. And I also want to extend my thanks to the 

independent members who also played their part in 

constructively suggesting changes and cooperating to having 

the session take place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadian unity is an issue that has taken us all on 

a long, arduous, difficult journey; one that isn’t over yet, 

unfortunately, and one that I frankly have to admit has from 

time to time tested the resolve and the patience of all 

Canadians. 

 

However, it reminds me of John Steven Akwari of Tanzania. 

Akwari was the last runner to finish the Olympic marathon, the 

last runner to finish the Olympic marathon in 1968, hours after 

the rest of the runners had crossed the finish line, hours after the 

medals had long since been presented and the stadium was all 

but empty. And there was Akwari staggering into the stadium 

and struggling around the track for the last lap, hobbling badly  

towards the finish on a leg, or legs, that were badly bruised. 

And when he crossed the line he was asked why in the world 

had he kept on running. 

 

And his answer was this, quote: “My country didn’t send me 

this far just to start the race. My country sent me this far to 

finish the race.” 

 

And now our country and our province. taking that sentiment of 

Akwari, have sent us to finish the race, to build an even 

stronger and even more unified, a more compassionate, 

civilized country — as they say, the best nation in the entire 

world in which to live — to finish the race. 

 

And we step out onto that track with the good wishes of the 

Saskatchewan people who gave us the benefit of their wisdom, 

their criticisms and suggestions, through extensive public 

consultations at meetings right across the province in this 

unique experiment of MLAs and citizen Co-Chairs, which 

experiment we might very well want to consider in other areas. 

They gave us all of their thoughts at these meetings, and they 

gave us their thoughts by telephone and by e-mail and the 1-800 

line and by questionnaires sent to every home in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We asked them, we asked you, for your opinion, for your 

advice, and for your support. And the response was there. It was 

heartening, Mr. Speaker. The people did speak up in substantial 

numbers with great passion; we know that. I attended several of 

the meetings where that passion was exhibited about the future 

of our great nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to stress this — I want to underline this 

clearly and loudly for the people of this province and this 

country and I hope for all the members of this Assembly — I 

want to stress that jobs, education, health care, highways, fiscal 

responsibility, environmental matters, and a whole host of 

similar issues are the priorities of Saskatchewan; they are the 

priorities of Canada, and they will remain our priorities — pure 

and simple. 

 

But let’s also be clear. The breakup, if that should ever come 

about — I don’t think it will, and this resolution is going to help 

to prevent that — but let’s be clear that the breakup of Canada 

would make it infinitely more difficult, if not impossible, for us 

to move forward in this province on these priorities. We would 

face the issues of passport, and currency, and the issue of the 

division of the debt, and issues of how to divide the passage and 

usage of the St. Lawrence Seaway, and what to do with the 

military, and just the pure mechanics of dividing the military 

establishment, let alone other issues of international and internal 

trade — and on and on it goes — which would bog this country 

down in an interminable period of uncertainty and perhaps even 

antipathies and perhaps even hostilities of a sense. I don’t think 

ever in the case of physical hostilities — but animosities which 

would only debilitate and destroy this great nation. 

 

This is not said as a threat to Quebec. This is a concern for 

Saskatchewan people whether they live in Sturgis, whether they 

live in Kindersley, whether they live in Saskatoon Riversdale, 

whether they live in Regina — this is an issue for all Canadians 

to contemplate — that the task of jobs and health and education, 

our priorities, our day-to-day concerns, the task of making it a  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

better life, would be greatly impaired in that eventuality. And 

that’s why the people of this province told us that they want this 

House, they want this province, to play a positive role in the 

preservation, enhancement, of the unity of this great country. 

Our people told us clearly during the consultations this fall this 

message. 

 

And in passing this motion today, this legislature will be 

following up on the clearly expressed desire on the part of our 

people to do our bit for Canada. They have told us that the 

question we must answer is not can we do this, but how best 

can we do this, because we must. 

 

Well how then do we do this? How do we enhance national 

unity? Mr. Speaker, for me, I know that often the national unity 

issue is considered by the media and some pundits and some 

academics and others in the framing of this debate, in the dry 

bones and dust of the constitution, the black letter of the 

constitution. 

 

In fact it reminds of me of that old joke of the British student 

and the American student and the Canadian student, each of 

which was asked to write an essay on the topic of the elephant. 

And so the British student said, and chose as her topic, the 

elephant and the role of the elephant in building the great 

British Empire. And the American student chose as his topic, 

the elephant: how to get a bigger and better elephant for fun and 

for profit. And the Canadian student chose the topic, the 

elephant: is it a federal or provincial responsibility? 

 

(1445) 

 

The dryness, as important as it may be, of the black letter law of 

the constitution. But that’s not what the federalist premiers had 

in mind when we met in Calgary. No. When we met in Calgary 

this year earlier and then later in Winnipeg with the aboriginal 

organizations and leadership of this country, we said that the 

most important part of the national unity issue is not the 

constitution. 

 

Instead, we described and attached ourselves to what has now 

become known as the 80/20 solution — 80 per cent of those 

things which do not require one comma’s change, one word’s 

change, one period’s change to the constitution; 80 per cent of 

governments working on a day-to-day basis, demonstrating on a 

day-to-day basis that we can speak to the needs of ordinary 

people on their day-to-day basis and daily lives. 

 

In other words, translated another way, 80 per cent of unifying 

this country is common sense government — governments 

working together, dealing effectively, day-to-day on the nuts 

and bolts issues which affect all Canadians. And the public 

consultation process recognized this and recognized this simple 

truth: all levels of government must work together to create 

what the French author, great author, Victor Hugo wrote, “in 

creating social prosperity.” Which Hugo then said would mean 

that people are happy: “the citizen is free and the nation is 

great.” Social prosperity. 

 

Or put another way — that while Ottawa and the provinces and 

the territories must respect our individual constitutional 

jurisdictions as the constitution mandates, we must never, ever 

lose sight of our reason for being here. We must never, ever  

lose sight of the fact that the constitution is the framework, but 

it is the political spirit and the will which forces us, dictates to 

us, mandates to us, indeed I would say voluntarily impulses us, 

to deal with the issues of fair taxation, quality health care, 

excellent public education, jobs, roads, highways, and 

democratic debate as we’ve experienced today in this 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

All levels of government must renew their partnerships so that 

our federation remains effective, remains flexible, creates a 

more prosperous, more generous, more compassionate, more 

unified Canada; a Canada which is cooperative, a Canada which 

works in a cooperative federalist way, efficiently, in delivering 

that more caring and more compassionate society. Or in the 

words of Hugo: where the people are happy, the citizen is free 

and the nation is great. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a concrete example only just a few days 

ago — last week. The premiers, the territorial leaders, and the 

Prime Minister, we all gathered in Ottawa at the invitation of 

the Prime Minister — each with our individual provincial, 

federal, and territorial responsibilities — to address some of 

these important issues. And I want to say a few words about 

that meeting because they describe in a different way what I’m 

talking about when I talk about the 80 per cent solution. 

 

This meeting was a continuation of Calgary and a continuation 

of Winnipeg, and it was designed to show that Canada works 

for ordinary working men and women in Canada. The meeting 

sought a national strategy on three important issues — although 

there are others, but three that I want to identify — one, child 

poverty; two, youth unemployment; three, the preservation and 

strengthening of medicare or health care. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and all my colleagues of the 

House, in my judgement, we made substantial progress and I 

want to give this House a brief report to highlight how this 80 

per cent of the solution of unity can work without one change of 

comma or period to the constitution. 

 

First, child poverty. Our task is now to complete the 

implementation of the National Child Benefit Program. What 

was this program all about, Mr. Speaker? When the Conference 

of Catholic Bishops got together several months ago and 

reviewed the situation in Canada and concluded that one child 

in five — one in five — in Canada lives in poverty, they said 

that this was, quote, “a damning indictment in one of the richest 

societies in the entire world.” Catholic bishops said it was a 

damning indictment and they are right. It’s too high in 

Saskatchewan. It’s too high in Canada. 

 

And so the National Child Benefit is a program to assist kids 

and families who are working, but families working very often 

remain at or near the poverty level, where the temptation is so 

easy to slip off working and into the welfare rolls. And it’s 

designed to make sure that those kids are properly fed and 

clothed and housed and educated, so they get a chance in the 

21st century of Canada and the world tomorrow. 

 

By February, the ministers will clarify the National Child 

Benefit plan, and by July 1, 1998, to the credit of the Prime 

Minister of this country, to the credit of all the premiers and the 

territorial leaders, we shall have the first phase of our attack on  



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

the problem of children in poverty. By July 1, 1998, the first 

new social program in Canada in over 25 years. Canada works 

without one constitutional amendment or one change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And a collateral piece of work, of 

course, is the National Children’s Agenda. This is something 

different, working to build up programs related to child care, 

nutrition, recreation, the problems of kids living in the 

inner-core cities and other areas. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have 

made my point I think, on the first issue of poverty and 

children. 

 

We are going to work together to improve the lives of Canadian 

children and that’s what good government is all about. And 

that’s what unity is all about because it demonstrates this nation 

works. 

 

Secondly, youth unemployment. What another great challenge. 

Mr. Speaker, two times — it’s double, youth unemployment — 

the rate of the unemployment level for the rest of the 

population. Double. Our future, young men and women without 

opportunities. This has got to be put on the national agenda, and 

we agreed to put it on the national agenda. 

 

And now, two years after we put kids in poverty on the agenda, 

at least the youth unemployment one is on this radar scope. And 

I’m confident — I hope it doesn’t take two years — we are 

going to be able to have a focused environment where young 

men and women and Canadians can get a job for the 21st 

century, again demonstrating that Canada works. Part of the 80 

per cent solution. 

 

And finally, a word about Canada’s medicare or health care 

system, something especially close to everybody in this House. 

After all, medicare is Saskatchewan’s invention to Canada, and 

I say it’s Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada, and medicare is great 

for what it is. But it’s also great because it defines Canada to 

Canadians and Canada to the world. It is now the new highway 

which unites us; it’s the new railway which unites us. 

 

And we had agreements there, encouraging words from Ottawa 

that the fiscal dividend may be now expanded to health care, the 

question of the principles of medicare to be jointly interpreted 

by governments on a cooperative basis. Again, Mr. Speaker, we 

demonstrated that we can work together to preserve health care. 

That’s good government, and again I say that proves that 

Canada works. 

 

Child poverty, youth employment or unemployment, medicare 

— governments working together because it’s the sensible thing 

to do, and that is exactly what the people of our country want us 

to do. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s 80 per cent of the solution. But 

we’re 20 per cent short — 80 and 20 per cent equals 100 per 

cent united Canada. And that is going to require constitutional 

change sometime sooner or later. 

 

Now as it happens it was 134 years ago today, on December 16, 

1863, that the philosopher and writer, Santayana, was born and 

said — not on birth, but later — those who fail to learn the 

lessons of history are doomed to repeat those lessons. 

Well I think we’ve learned the lessons of our constitutional 

history. Past efforts have failed. Amendments at Meech and 

Charlottetown failed because consultation with the public did 

not take place, and this is, after all, the country of the people not 

of the politicians. We learned. That’s what the Co-Chairs and 

the MLAs went out to hear and to consult. 

 

And we’ve learned. And this consultation and the advice has 

been very, very good. They’ve recognized, the people have I 

think, the different characteristics in our provinces. Those 

differences have not weakened us, but they’ve strengthened us. 

Our nation is graced by a diversity, a tolerance and a 

compassion, and an equality of opportunity that is outrivalled in 

this world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should add that our democratic tradition is a 

model, I think also, of the other countries of the world where, if 

we think about it, there is violence and conflict and enmity and 

suspicion — countries being ripped apart by religion, 

differences of creed, and ethnic differences as well. We don’t 

have that in Canada. We don’t babble over our differences; we 

celebrate our differences. We recognize that those differences 

are like facets of a gem: each one irreplaceable, each one 

contributing, however, to the lustre and brilliance called 

Canada. That is the reality that we are in. 

 

And what marvellous differences there are — a nation of two 

official languages, and yet dozens more languages thriving in 

our shops, our playgrounds, our homes. A nation of 

uncountable ethnic backgrounds and cultures. A nation built by 

our first nations people, the aboriginals, joined by new 

immigrants from every corner of the globe. 

 

Together we have built a great country in a spirit of tolerance 

and diversity, one which can recognize the unique character 

which is Quebec. But one which can also say, because it is 

unique because of its French-speaking majority, its culture, its 

tradition of civil law, one that says also it’s entitled to protect 

that uniqueness through its Legislative Assembly; and one 

country which recognizes at the same time that while they are 

unique, the principle of equality of people and provinces — a 

fundamental principle of democracy — must also be recognized 

and kept intact; equality of people and provinces while 

recognizing unique character. 

 

When I say equality, I don’t say that we are all the same. That’s 

not equality. But equality before the law; equal in the eyes of 

the law — that’s what the people have told us and reminded us. 

And that’s what this resolution says. 

 

And so if there’s any change to the laws conferring powers on 

any province, our resolution says those powers must be 

available to all provinces. No special deals for any one 

province, Mr. Speaker, but a fair deal for all provinces, a good 

deal for all Canadians. A new deal for a strong and unified 

Canada built on the question of respect, and I may say this, built 

on this principle which the false prophets of sovereignty and 

independence in Quebec have tried to propagate. 

 

It is not built on the notion, as they would have us believe, that 

it’s a choice between Quebec or Canada, that it’s a choice 

between Saskatchewan or Canada. But this motion and this 

exercise is based on the principle that you can be both a good  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

Canadian and a good Quebecer, a good Canadian and a good 

Saskatchewanian, a good Canadian no matter where you live, 

both, and inclusive in all of our cultures and our differences and 

our traditions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, at the same time we 

also have learned that we must not derogate from any existing 

treaty rights, respect the diversity of our first nations people and 

their cultures. We have much work to do here but Winnipeg 

was a success in this process as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, today we have come to the 

conclusion of this consultation and with the cooperation of all 

58 MLAs — and I salute each and every one of you on all sides 

— and the citizen Co-Chairs and everybody out there. We are 

now able to pass a resolution through our House to send that 

message loud and clear to the people of Quebec and to all the 

people of Canada. 

 

There can be no better time to send that message because twice 

Quebecers have voted for Canada. Let us speak out in support 

to their call that they want to remain in Canada. For though we 

assemble in an arena of difference, we can put it aside for the 

sake of a higher common cause, building that just society, that 

nobler society that Hugo talks about. With one voice we can 

speak of that united Canada and continue that race to building 

the stronger unified nation that we have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I close by saying this. I think Canadians are 

watching us today in this Legislative Assembly, and Canadians 

have watched Saskatchewan before, whether it’s medicare or 

child benefit or whether we send the top women’s curling rink 

to take on the world — as we have, and they’ll beat the rest of 

the competition there. They’re watching us. They’re seeing 

whether we’re gathered here to work in protecting and 

preserving this brilliant gem called Canada. A great nation it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are here on a very important mission and cause 

and we have begun the finish of this race with the passage of 

this motion. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure and 

pride of my years in this House to move, seconded by the 

Leader of the Official Opposition, both in French and in English 

— and with the consent of the members of the House, I will 

limit this to reading it in English; I would like to say in the 

interests of time but also because my French is not as good as it 

should be to read to this motion, which I hereby now move on 

behalf of the members of the House. 

 

Be it resolved that: 

 

All members of this legislature, working in partnership 

with citizen Co-Chairs, having consulted the people of 

Saskatchewan about a framework for discussion on 

Canadian unity, agreed by Canada’s federalist Premiers 

and territorial leaders in Calgary on September 14, 1997, 

and 

 

The people of Saskatchewan having affirmed that Canada 

is worth preserving because ours is one of the world’s  

oldest and most stable democracies which continues to 

build a prosperous economy, continues to build on well 

established social programs and continues to be built by 

citizens from all regions and backgrounds working 

together, and 

 

Nothing in the Calgary Framework for discussion being 

intended to derogate from any existing aboriginal or treaty 

right recognized by law, and 

 

The people of Saskatchewan being committed to finding 

common ground on the unity of our country because 

Canada is worth preserving and because the consequences 

of failure would be severe for all Canadians — the 

separation of a province would mean years of discord over 

vital interests like citizenship, currency, the national debt, 

borders, trade, the make-up of the federal government, and 

even the ability of the rest of the country to stay together; 

and 

 

Because unity therefore affects all of us — the people of 

Saskatchewan, Quebecers, and all Canadians — and we all 

have a direct interest in coming together to preserve it. 

 

Therefore the legislature of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the 

citizens of our province, endorses the Calgary Framework 

for Discussion as follows: 

 

All Canadians are equal and have rights preserved by law; 

 

All provinces, while diverse in their characteristics, have 

equality of status; 

 

Canada is graced by a diversity, tolerance, compassion and 

equality of opportunity that is without rival in the world; 

 

Canada’s diversity includes aboriginal peoples and 

cultures, the vitality of the English and French Languages, 

and a multicultural citizenry drawn from all parts of the 

world; 

 

In Canada’s federal system, where respect for diversity and 

equality underlies unity, the unique character of Quebec 

society, including its French-speaking majority, its culture 

and its tradition of civil law, is fundamental to the 

well-being of Canada. Consequently, the legislature and 

Government of Quebec have a role to protect and develop 

the unique character of Quebec society within Canada; 

 

If any future constitutional amendment confers powers on 

one province, these powers must be available to all 

provinces; and 

 

Canada is a federal system where federal, provincial, and 

territorial governments work in partnership while 

respecting each other’s jurisdictions. Canadians want their 

governments to work cooperatively and with flexibility to 

ensure the efficiency and the effectiveness of the 

federation. Canadians want their governments to work 

together particularly in the delivery of their social 

programs. Provinces and territories renew their 

commitment to work in partnership with the Government 

of Canada to best serve the needs of Canadians. 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

Further, the people of Saskatchewan have told this 

Assembly, and it is the view of this Assembly, that any 

future constitutional amendment requiring this Assembly’s 

consent, shall be approved by the people of Saskatchewan 

in a binding province-wide, or national referendum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to move, 

seconded by the Leader of the Official Opposition, this motion 

on national unity. 

 

Thank you very much, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to speak to this 

resolution on behalf of all of my colleagues in my caucus. I 

want to begin by taking this opportunity to belatedly welcome 

all members and legislative staff back to the House this week 

for what I am sure will continue to be full of interesting 

discussion and debate over the issues that are of concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hope this rare fall sitting is the start of a trend in 

Saskatchewan. We welcome the opportunity this week to 

discuss many of the issues facing the province. But today our 

focus is on the unity of our great nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question of unity and the question of Quebec 

has been with us for as long as I can remember. Over the years 

we’ve been witness to several initiatives regarding the Canadian 

Constitution. We saw the Victoria conference in the early 1970s 

end in failure. We saw the repatriation of the constitution 10 

years later — an effort that, in some people’s eyes, has led to 

many of the problems we face today. 

 

In the 1980s and early 1990s, we saw the Meech Lake accord, 

first hailed as a great triumph, but ultimately rejected at the 

hand of a couple of provinces. Next we saw the Charlottetown 

accord rejected outright by the people of Canada. And in 

between all those constitutional initiatives, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen the PQ (Parti Québécois) elected twice in Quebec; we’ve 

seen the rise of the Bloc in Ottawa; and we’ve lived through 

two referendums in Quebec, the last being disconcertingly close 

in outcome. 

 

Now we have the Calgary Declaration. The declaration is of 

course different than the other initiatives we’ve seen come and 

go because this is simply a statement by the rest of Canada to 

Quebec. It is not a full-fledged constitutional package. Really 

it’s simply a statement of good intentions from Canadians 

outside of Quebec to Canadians inside of Quebec — a 

statement of goodwill, a framework on which to negotiate with 

Quebec when the time comes. 

 

I think it’s important that we take this kind of tactic, Mr. 

Speaker, because, as we all know, a full constitutional package 

is absolutely impossible to achieve while the separatists are in 

power in Quebec. They’re not interested — and never will be 

interested — in coming to any sort of agreement because they 

are bound and determined to break up this country. 

But, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t mean we can bury our head in 

the sand. We have to talk directly to the people of Quebec. We 

have to recognize that Lucien Bouchard does not speak for all 

Quebecers. Most people in Quebec are like most people in 

Saskatchewan. They are tired of this constant wrangling over 

the constitution by their leaders. They are more concerned with 

the real problems in their lives — problems such as taxes and 

jobs. 

 

It is those Quebecers, the average citizens, that the Calgary 

Declaration is for. They must be shown that we care whether 

they leave or not. It is in everyone’s best interests that our 

country stay together. Those people who say we in 

Saskatchewan would be better off if Quebec were to separate 

had better think twice about such rash statements. Because if 

this country does come apart, it will have a detrimental impact 

on Saskatchewan, just as it will have a very negative impact on 

the people of Quebec. You cannot simply say losing a quarter 

of a nation’s population wouldn’t impact on us all very heavily, 

especially in today’s global economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of this House have spent a good deal 

of the last two months listening to residents in Saskatchewan 

talk about the Calgary Declaration and what should be included 

in any resolution brought before this House regarding that 

declaration. 

 

Just two short years ago we came perilously close to seeing the 

breakup of this country, which would have been the end of this 

complicated and wonderful entity we call Canada. And that 

would have been tragic. It would have been tragic for the people 

of Quebec and it would have been tragic for all Canadians 

outside of Quebec. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are to resolve this issue once and for all, this 

debate must be conducted with complete openness and honesty. 

All the facts must be laid on the table, both by federalists who 

are trying to keep the country together and by separatists who 

are trying to rip Canada apart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we may not be able to do much to ensure the 

honesty and openness of the likes of Lucien Bouchard, or Gilles 

Douceppe, or any of the other separatists. But we can do much 

in having the federalists lay out all the facts for all the people of 

Quebec and all the people of Canada. 

 

We can no longer shy away from the hard, cold realities of this 

question. We did that in 1995 and nearly lost the country. We 

cannot be afraid to tell the people of Quebec, and all Canadians, 

the harsh truth — and it is a harsh truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two years ago, our federalist leaders absolutely refused to 

discuss these realities. As a result, there were some voters in 

Quebec convinced that if they voted “yes” to separation, there 

would be no serious consequences. Many thought they would 

retain their Canadian citizenship, they would retain their 

passports, they would retain their right to elect representatives 

to the Canadian parliament, and nothing was done to dispel this 

myth. Certainly the separatists weren’t going to do it for us. 

And this decision nearly resulted in the end of Canada as we 

know it. It’s a mistake that cannot be repeated. 

 

And in the meetings we’ve held around this province, Mr.  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

Speaker, people told us that. And I can only assume that’s what 

all MLAs heard as well. The people who spoke to us said the 

consequences of separation must be clearly laid out for the 

people of Quebec and for all of Canadians. This has come to be 

known as plan B. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two reasons why my caucus insisted that 

there had to be acknowledgement of plan B in the resolution we 

have before us today. And as I’ve already stated, this is 

something that Quebecers and all Canadians have to hear. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, another reason we insisted that plan B be 

mentioned in this resolution is because a majority of 

Saskatchewan residents said it should be in there. After all, Mr. 

Speaker, what was the purpose of this consultation process if 

we as politicians were simply able to weed out those things we 

did not agree with. It would have been a meaningless PR(public 

relations) campaign and nothing more. 

 

That’s why it came as quite a surprise to us in the Saskatchewan 

Party caucus that the other parties were very hesitant to make 

any references at all to plan B. And we couldn’t figure out that 

hesitancy, since this is what many people in Saskatchewan told 

us to do. And it’s very important we listen to them if this 

process is to have legitimacy in their eyes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was glad to see the Prime Minister of Canada 

recently move toward this view as well. The federal 

government cannot be afraid to spell out the truths of separation 

to Quebec. It was afraid to do so in 1995 and we saw the result 

— near disaster. We cannot risk the country like that again. If 

you truly love this country and want to ensure it continues to 

hang together, the last thing you should do is ignore the 

consequences of separation. 

 

If you truly love this country, you will deal with this issue from 

a position of complete honesty. Until very recently, most 

politicians in English Canada were not willing to do that. Now, 

hopefully, they are. 

 

With both Meech Lake and Charlottetown, the people felt they 

weren’t consulted properly in the formulation of the packages 

and they were rejected. So now how are we supposed to tell 

them that while they wanted plan B, the politicians didn’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t and we didn’t. Though some would 

probably like to see the references to plan B and the 

consequences of separation spelled out in even stronger 

language, I believe the resolution we have before us today 

adequately expresses the viewpoints of the people of 

Saskatchewan when it comes to plan B. Like Canada itself, it is 

a compromise — a compromise between those who didn’t want 

to even acknowledge the negative consequences of a divided 

Canada and those who want to spell it out in clear, excruciating 

detail. 

 

As it now stands, this portion of the resolution states that the 

separation of any province of Canada would mean years of 

discord over vital interests such as citizenship, currency, the 

national debt, borders, trade, and the make up of the federal 

government. 

 

(1515) 

I can’t see how anyone can object to this because it’s simply the 

truth. And that’s precisely what the people of Quebec have to 

be told. They have to know that we want them to stay, but if 

they do vote to leave, it will be a legal and political struggle that 

will last for years. It won’t be simply a matter of a pen stroke. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some may consider this as a steel fist in a velvet 

glove. I think that’s a completely wrong outlook on plan B, 

because plan B is not based on threats. It’s not meant to coerce 

the people of Quebec or any province. It simply outlines what 

we fear will happen in the event of a vote for separation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, plan B is based on realities that must be 

legitimately communicated to all Canadians — in and out of 

Quebec. And it’s part of the message that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to send to the people of Quebec. 

 

Mr. Speaker, aside from plan B, the people of Saskatchewan 

told us two other things in overwhelming numbers during our 

consultations. And the first thing they told us was that they 

wanted it expressly stated that in the eyes of the federal 

government and in the eyes of the constitution, all the provinces 

are equal and all Canadians are equal. 

 

We were told that there could be no preferences, no special 

powers granted to one province. And I believe the Calgary 

framework acknowledges this. In fact this tenet is included in 

the declaration’s first two points. It states that all Canadians are 

equal and have rights protected by law and that all provinces, 

while diverse in their characteristics, have equality of status. I 

believe these two points go a long way in alleviating some of 

the concerns we heard that Quebec was going to be given 

special status over and above other provinces. 

 

The sixth point further illustrates this by stating that any 

additional powers given to a province or provinces must be 

offered to all provinces. And this is very important, Mr. 

Speaker, if we are to gain support for a future constitutional 

amendment throughout Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be acknowledged that the fifth point in 

the Calgary framework is troubling for some in our province. 

Just as was the case with the term “distinct society,” some are 

fearful that the term “unique”, as it applies to Quebec, may 

mean more down the road than it appears to today. 

 

However I’m hopeful that with the inclusion of the three points 

I’ve already spoken about, which make it clear all provinces are 

equal, fears over the term “unique” can be alleviated. Because 

let’s face it, Quebec does have characteristics within our 

federation that are unquestionably unique. It is the only 

province where the majority does not speak English. It is also 

the only province which uses the civil code instead of common 

law. 

 

And I believe the people of Saskatchewan recognize this very 

basic fact. All they are asking is for assurances that in this case 

unique simply means different. This they can accept. But they 

cannot accept unique if it means special, or even worse, if it 

means better. They need this assurance. And once again I think 

other portions of the Calgary Declaration go a long way in 

addressing these concerns. 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, the second thing the people of Saskatchewan have 

told us in overwhelming numbers is that any future 

constitutional package must be put to a vote, either in a 

provincial referendum or a nation-wide vote. They want a direct 

say on the issue. And they should have a direct say. It is their 

country, after all, and the people should decide its future. 

 

The resolution we are debating today speaks to that as well. It 

states very explicitly that such a vote will be held, and we were 

very glad to be part of the process that saw this portion 

included. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Calgary Declaration also speaks to the wide 

diversity in Canada itself. We are no longer simply the people 

of the two founding nations. Each of our backgrounds is filled 

with ancestry from many cultures and nations. That of course 

includes our aboriginal population, whose ancestors have been 

here the longest. And there are the first generation Canadians 

who have come from around the world to enjoy the freedom 

and prosperity we enjoy in Canada. For this reason we have to 

ensure future agreements also recognize this basic fact of 

Canada. 

 

I’m glad to say the Calgary Declaration does recognize this 

diversity in our country. It’s absolutely vital that everyone in 

Canada feels they are part of any future constitutional package. 

And if a deal is reached among the provinces that is based on 

the principles as outlined in the Calgary Declaration, I believe it 

will stand a very good chance of being ratified by the people of 

Saskatchewan and in all provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by passing this resolution today, hopefully we’ll 

take a small step in resolving this ongoing debate that has 

fatigued the people of Canada. But again we have to be 

realistic. It’s a very small step. 

 

Until Quebec is willing to talk, we will obviously not have a 

deal. Because of this, a final resolution of this problem is still a 

long way down the road. And in the intervening years we may 

very well be faced with another referendum in Quebec. And if 

that’s the case, Canadians who want to keep this country 

together must be able to match the separatists in the debate step 

for step. That didn’t happen last time. It must happen the next 

time. 

 

Those who are committed to Canada have to be able to match 

Lucien Bouchard’s rhetoric and passion. The Calgary 

Declaration is a good first step but there is much work left to 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m certain every member of this House, every 

guest in the gallery today, the vast majority of Saskatchewan 

people, want to see Canada stand together strongly as we head 

towards the new millennium. It’s time to take charge of our 

destiny. We can no longer let events unfold around us. Proud 

Canadians in all 10 provinces and the 2 territories must stand 

together and say no to the separatists at the same time as we say 

yes to the majority of Quebecers, who will choose Canada if 

they have all the facts before them and if the question they are 

asked to vote on in the future is clear. 

 

The Calgary Declaration is but the foundation on which to build 

Canada’s future. Now that the building has begun, let us all  

hope it continues until this uncertainty about our nation no 

longer hangs over our heads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although not the final answer, this resolution is 

one piece in the unity puzzle. Let’s now put the other pieces 

together. It is my pleasure to second the motion made by the 

Premier. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party caucus does 

support the Calgary Declaration, and with the changes we 

worked hard to get, we will be supporting this resolution. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

welcome to speak to this resolution, in support of it, on behalf 

of the Liberal caucus, and I feel honoured to be able to do so in 

this Assembly, and to speak on this very important issue of 

national unity. 

 

During the recent past, we criss-crossed this province 

consulting with grass-root people as to their feelings, their 

thoughts, and their beliefs about national unity. From 

Ile-a-la-Crosse in the North to Estevan in the South, from 

Lloydminster in the West to Hudson Bay in the East, people 

responded by phone, by fax, by mail, and by Internet. We 

crossed all constituencies — political, rural, urban, geographic, 

and cultural. And today in this legislature we will debate a topic 

that everyone agrees is so important that it is nearly beyond 

description. 

 

We must realize however, that no matter how cleverly we orate, 

no matter how well we put forth our arguments, no matter how 

eloquent the rhetoric, in the end we will only be judged by the 

impact that our deliberations have on the hearts and minds of 

our neighbours in Quebec. I only hope that our contribution will 

emphasize the advantages of a future that includes Quebec, 

rather than the negativity around what a separation might or 

might not mean for all of us here in Canada. 

 

When we consider the areas of the world that are torn apart by 

war caused by prejudice, bigotry, and sheer lack of will to 

understand, we must realize that such feelings must not be 

allowed to be part of this country. Canada should lead the world 

as a model example of how people of many varied backgrounds 

can live and work together. 

 

It may not always be easy for you or me to fully accept change, 

to fully accept that people can live and work and worship in a 

way that we believe to be different. Who told us that it was 

going to be easy? Who told us that because we grew up 

according to a certain style and custom that we were right? 

 

I believe we are starting to send an important message, not only 

to the people of Saskatchewan, but also to the people of all of 

Canada — that we can put aside our partisan political views. 

We can put aside our differences and we can show people that 

we can work together for a common goal, a common vision, 

and a common dream. That dream is for a strong, vibrant, and 

most importantly, a united Canada. 

 

You need only travel outside of our country to begin to truly 

appreciate the great wealth we have here. If you watch the news 

or travel to places like Zimbabwe or to Mozambique or to  



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

Bosnia or to Cyprus or to the Middle East, you will quickly see 

how different a life people live in those countries. Not only do 

parents worry about how they will pay their bills and put food 

on the table, but they have an all-pervading fear for their 

personal safety as well, on a daily basis. Mothers wonder 

whether their children, after they leave for school, will I see 

them home safely tonight. There is fear of terrorism, of car 

bombs, of drive-by shootings. 

 

Mozambique is the third most land-mined country in the world. 

When children out there go to play, they are not at all concerned 

over whether they are wearing Reeboks or Nikes. Instead they 

are concerned perhaps about losing a foot or a leg on a forgotten 

land-mine. 

 

We are truly blessed to live a sheltered life here in Canada. We 

have trouble even comprehending what civil war and strife 

people live with day in and day out. When people say that we 

are well off, they are not only referring to our standard of 

living. They are referring to our quality of life in terms of peace 

and the security that we enjoy. That peace and security we have 

attained here in Canada is perhaps what most people mean 

when they say Canada is a wealthy country. It is wealth not 

only of natural resources but a wealth of diversity amongst our 

cultures, a wealth of diversity within those cultures, and a 

wealth of tolerance between those cultures. Our wealth is our 

people and our ability to work in harmony with one another. 

 

Canada is highly respected by other countries around the world. 

They are impressed that we welcome 200,000 immigrants every 

year and that we remain a country of openness and acceptance. 

They are extremely impressed to hear the prediction that 

Canada will record the highest growth of all the G-7 countries 

over the next several years. They are impressed that the United 

Nations declared Canada the number one country in terms of 

the quality of life that it affords its people. 

 

To most of the world, Canada is the land of dreams. The point 

that I really want to make here, Mr. Speaker, is that it is Canada 

that people are looking at, not just Saskatchewan and not just 

British Columbia and not just Quebec or Nova Scotia. They are 

looking at all of us, the entire Canada. We have become a 

success in our great country because we have cooperatively 

drawn the best from each province, each territory, each 

population, and each culture. We understand that equality does 

not necessarily mean uniformity. Equality means that we are all 

equal. We still have the freedom to celebrate our diversity. It is 

through that diversity we have learned to respect others and 

have respect for ourselves. It has helped us to more closely 

listen to our aboriginal people, the first inhabitants of this great 

country. 

 

The learning of our tolerance has better prepared us to accept 

those who came here from every corner of the globe. Canada 

leads the world in human rights standards. We have recognized 

in our constitution the equality of all people, regardless of their 

race, colour, religion, or language. We also recognize the right 

of all people to freedom of association, freedom of speech, 

freedom of political expression. 

 

Another area where Canada leads is in freedom from arbitrary 

arrest and imprisonment. In Canada we have a right to a fair 

trial and to be judged by a jury of our peers. Here in  

Saskatchewan we have the Human Rights Commission, whose 

mandate is to protect those basic rights. It is there to help those 

who face racism and discrimination from people who are 

narrow-minded in their views. 

 

(1530) 

 

We are fortunate to live in this province and in this great 

country, because here those who would try to divide our 

population along racial lines, those who do not understand the 

damaging effects of systemic discrimination, represent only a 

small minority. We recognize the people of aboriginal descent, 

people who are physically challenged, people of visible 

minorities, and women. All these people have tremendous gifts 

and talents to offer our society. 

 

We have in this province a number of organizations who are 

looking to the future, who recognize that the demographics of 

our future workforce will be far different that they are today. 

We have people who recognize that a diverse workforce is a 

stronger workforce. It will be a workforce that builds on 

everyone’s unique strength. Those organizations can see the 

future; are acting now through fair hiring and employment 

equity programs to tap into the future of human resources of 

this province. These groups must become our next middle class, 

and in their own way contribute to our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my parents came here in the early 1920s from 

war-torn Europe to find warmth, welcome, compassion, and 

sharing. They had a dream; they had hopes. They wanted to live 

in a land that was free from war, free from racism, and free 

from intolerance. 

 

My parents spoke very little English when they arrived here, yet 

they were welcomed. People accepted them and helped them to 

assimilate. Being welcomed here brought them a feeling of 

acceptance and opportunity for who they were and who they 

represented. They made a life in this great country. They raised 

a family, helped their community to grow, and they built a 

future here for themselves and their children. They had a great 

deal of pride not only in their own culture, but in the pride of 

now being accepted and becoming Canadians. 

 

I believe it is because of so many of our immigrants, that they 

came from lands of strife and war-torn countries, that we as 

Canadians want to help those people in that kind of trouble. But 

what we need of course, is more courage and faith and love. We 

need the courage and faith of our fathers and our grandfathers. 

We need the faith and love of our mothers and our 

grandmothers, because courage and faith and love can and does 

work miracles. 

 

Ingrained in our history is the philosophy of those who were 

determined to lead by example, to show that a country can work 

as a whole; to show that people can work together and that we 

should try and share that experience throughout the world. 

 

Canada has a tremendous tradition of peacekeeping in the 

world. In fact, Mr. Speaker, our prime minister, Lester B. 

Pearson, won the Nobel Peace Prize for his accomplishments in 

helping to bring peace in the Middle East. 

 

Wherever there is conflict in the world, we see Canadian  



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

peacekeeping forces ready to step in and help. Our forces have 

distinguished themselves in many countries around the globe as 

Canadian forces. They are not the Ontario armed forces or the 

Quebec armed forces or the Alberta armed forces — they are 

the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

They have also distinguished themselves in fighting in major 

wars as well, representing our country. When Canadian forces 

take to the field and their blood is given in the fight, it is not the 

blood of any one province; it is blood given on behalf of 

Canada. 

 

Last November 10 there was a military funeral for the crew of 

Halifax LW 682, a Canadian bomber shot down over Belgium 

in the Second World War and recovered from the swamp on 

September 6, 1997. 

 

I would, just for the record, Mr. Speaker, like to share with you 

the names and the provinces of the crew who were all killed 

that fateful night. 

 

Wilbur Bentz of Penticton, British Columbia; Fred Roach, 

Leamington, Ontario; John Summerhayes of Brantford, 

Ontario; Joseph Arbour, Montreal, Quebec; Jack McIntyre, 

Biggar, Saskatchewan; Clifford Phillips, Tisdale, 

Saskatchewan; Thomas Taylor, Chisolm Mills, Alberta; and 

Roy Ellerslie, from England. 

 

From British Columbia to Quebec, those men went overseas as 

Canadians. They flew as a team, they fought as a team, and they 

died as a team. 

 

It was the Canadians who liberated Belgium in the Second 

World War. And to this day, Mr. Speaker, to this very day, 

Canadians are very highly respected by the Belgian people. 

What we did as a country will never be forgotten in many parts 

of our globe. 

 

Our caucus chief-of-staff, Richard Phillips, was fortunate 

enough to participate in these very special Remembrance Day 

ceremonies in Europe because he was related to one of these 

brave men — Clifford Phillips. 

 

Richard told me that while he was in Belgium, he learned the 

school children there are each given the responsibility for 

looking after one war grave. On November 10 at the funeral for 

the bomber crew, some of the bomber crew families, including 

Richard, had the opportunity to meet some of the children who 

will look after the graves of these men. One of the 

grandchildren said, I will look after your uncle’s grave. I will 

take good care of it because he came over from Canada and 

gave his life for us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m told that there was not a dry eye in the 

group on that particular day. They do that, Mr. Speaker. They 

do not forget their history and they do not forget the people that 

gave them the freedom. So that they will not forget it was 

Canada who as a country reached out to help them. It was not 

any one province; it was all of us. 

 

We too have a rich history in our country. As Canadians we 

have led the world in many areas of sport, recreation, of fine 

arts, science, and space technology, the Canadarm being a good  

example. We have achieved that world renown mot as 

individual provinces, but as working together and sharing our 

resources within our country. We have achieved it as 

Canadians. 

 

Throughout our history, we have a reputation of openness. 

Whether it was the slaves who came to us through the 

underground railroad, or the Irish who came to escape the 

famine, or the settlers who came to open our West, or the 

refugees who come to us to escape persecution, Canada is a 

land of acceptance, a safe haven. Our acceptance is a trait that 

sets us apart in the world, where we see so much conflict, so 

much war and devastating ethnic cleansing and intolerance. 

Believe me, we are the envy of many. 

 

If we want to take on the 21st century, if we want to take on the 

challenges of the global world where competition will be fierce, 

and if we really want the challenge of a turbulent global 

economy, then we need now more than ever before to be united. 

Stability means strength — strength for our currency, strength 

for our business, strength for our social programs, strength for 

our economy, and most importantly, strength for the Canadian 

people. 

 

There has been devolution of power from the British parliament 

to the Scottish people in recent times. The Scots have now some 

limited powers on some of their affairs, but limited powers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no country anywhere in the 

Commonwealth, and probably anywhere in the world, where a 

federal government has shared as much power with its member 

states as we have here in Canada. We are already highly 

devolved. 

 

At this point in time, we in Saskatchewan perhaps will start to 

become concerned if this trend continues. I do not believe it is 

in Saskatchewan’s interest to end national standards or to limit 

federal spending powers. What may be good for the larger 

provinces, may not be good for Saskatchewan or Manitoba or 

Newfoundland. We feel that we are getting close to the point 

where further erosion of federal responsibilities may start to 

weaken and not strengthen our entire union. 

 

I believe our best opportunity to guarantee the freedom we now 

enjoy is an inherent federal state — a state in which the powers 

of government are divided so that a nation as large and as 

complex as Canada can find a logical pattern to govern itself. 

 

The answer to these complex challenges may not be easily 

found. They may come in time through dialogue and 

understanding. But the answers will come if you and I do our 

part as citizens of this great country. We may not find all the 

answers in a complex constitution, but rather in the give and 

take of everyday political life. 

 

At the end of the day, I urge everyone to continue the dialogue 

that we have started a few months ago. You will hear different 

views from many of your friends and neighbours, and quite 

frankly, some of those will be harsh words. But history has 

repeatedly shown us that words of rejection, words of betrayal, 

words of hatred or words of denial, are not effective. They have 

the effect of further dividing people. They further entrench 

people into their own isolated camps. 



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

I do not want to win this argument with Quebec separatists if it 

means that they will have to lay down their emotional and 

intellectual arms and surrender. We must celebrate our 

Canadian union, not just tolerate it. Winning the argument for a 

Canada including Quebec, cannot mean that their ideas and 

their contributions to Canada are somehow diminished or 

demeaned or discarded. It would not be a victory if it meant 

people of Quebec were to lose their language or culture. It will 

only be a victory if they too understand the strength and value 

of being a part of this great country we call Canada. 

 

Will sharp words help them to understand? I don’t believe so. 

 

I and my colleagues urge everyone to continue to listen, to 

continue to share with others a vision of a strong and united 

Canada. Let people know that we are prepared in a very positive 

way to solidify and secure the future of our nation, a nation that 

includes Quebec. Do it not only for ourselves, but for our future 

generations. 

 

I want a society and a country where a son can choose to 

practise medicine in the belle province of Quebec, where a 

niece can teach French in the cities of northern Alberta, and 

where my neighbour can retire in Nova Scotia, and a country 

where people from Toronto can play hockey in La Pas, 

Manitoba, a country where my aunt can choose to be buried in 

her beloved Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support this resolution and I say to everyone 

today, merci, vive le Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed a privilege for me to be able to speak to this motion this 

afternoon. 

 

This year, Newfoundland celebrated its 500th birthday and I 

asked a friend the other day if he were surprised by the fact that 

Canada’s youngest province has an active history dating back 

before the time of Columbus and he gave me a blank stare. 

What do you mean? he asked. Newfoundland started to count in 

1949 when it joined Confederation. Before that, who’d ever 

heard of it? 

 

Well that’s a really very telling retort, Mr. Speaker. This man is 

a bright individual, quite well educated, has travelled abroad 

and yet had equally disconcerting lapses and views about other 

information related to his country of birth. He knew nothing of 

the challenges of the Acadians and how they came to settle in 

New Brunswick, somewhat more about the opening of the West 

and why decisions were made to divide Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan, and Alberta into three separate provinces rather 

than leave one region that could compete with Ontario and 

Quebec. He drew a blank on British Columbia altogether. 

 

And even though he had strong dogmatic comments about 

Quebec, he had no knowledge of the reasons why la belle 

province had such reservations about joining with Ontario, 

Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick to form the nation of Canada 

in the first place. He had no knowledge of what the final 

agreement included to bring it onside or how the Quiet 

Revolution came to be or what preceded the formation of the  

Parti Québécois; and had no clue who Pierre Vallières is, the 

contents of Vallières book, White Niggers of America, and the 

subsequent repercussions of this publication and the changing 

of the face of an innocent young country to one that had come 

to terms with its first time in its history with terrorism with the 

advent of the FLQ (Front de Libération du Québec). 

 

Yes, it became quite apparent in short order that my friend had 

little understanding of how this vast country of Canada, the 

second largest nation in the world, came to be, with all of her 

magnificent and glorious history, her diverse and curious 

inhabitants, and her fascinating foibles. 

 

(1545) 

 

 Unfortunately I fear, he is more representative of the average 

Canadian than not. Perhaps it is this lack of knowledge and 

awareness of how we came to be. Perhaps it is our lack of 

knowledge and awareness about what makes each region feel 

proud. Perhaps it is our lack of knowledge and awareness about 

what makes each region feel vulnerable. Perhaps it is our 

inability to truly speak to one another that has brought us to the 

confusion and the ongoing debate about Canadian unity. 

 

The time most certainly has come to discuss fundamental values 

to which we all can aspire as citizens of this great nation. The 

Calgary Declaration is one more step on a path in search of 

drawing Quebec into constitutional reconciliation. It wisely 

presents seven principles instead of suggesting changes to the 

constitution. And I say wisely because some attempts to change 

our constitution have met with failure and greater disharmony. 

 

This has been evident since 1964 and was catapulted to 

prominence in 1982 with the Constitution Act which came into 

force, agreed to by the prime minister, the premiers of the 

country, except for the Premier of Quebec. And it was because 

of these and many other historical realities that the premiers and 

territorial leaders, except Premier Bouchard, met in Calgary on 

September 14 of this year and unanimously agreed on a 

framework for public consultations on ways to strengthen our 

Canadian federation. They are to be commended for 

demonstrating true leadership — true leadership on this 

extraordinary issue — and I wish to publicly thank them for 

doing so. 

 

Having been involved in the meetings in Ottawa during the 

Charlottetown accord, this most recent undertaking is far more 

practical an approach — practical because it deals simply with 

principles; practical because the Charlottetown accord was 

everything but the kitchen sink; and practical because if we 

cannot agree to what we think we should be, in broad-reaching 

terms, how will we ever be able to address ourselves in detail? 

 

While some Canadians say that they are tired of this ongoing 

process, and some say that all of this has been too expensive. 

Well we all know that everything worthwhile takes energy and 

attention. And in response to those who feel that too much 

money has been wasted on the issue of national unity, the words 

of my very wise and highly-competent Co-Chair, Gordon 

Barnhart, are the best: how much is a country worth? 

 

At this time I’d like to thank Gordon for the eagerness of his 

acceptance to be my Co-Chair, his major contribution, and let  



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1997 

everyone know that it is indeed appropriate and reassuring at 

this moment that he’s applying his talents in assisting Russia in 

developing its democracy. 

 

Saskatchewan citizens should be very proud of the way that 

they’ve participated. One of the most enjoyable aspects of this 

process was watching how participants really learned from one 

another. When one person stated that Canadians really aren’t as 

tolerant as we should be, another told how he had lived under 

six regimes and that Canadians most certainly are tolerant. One 

only need to live abroad to learn what tolerance truly means. 

 

And children were extraordinary. They were so enthusiastic. In 

fact days following the closure of the public consultations, I had 

parents and young people calling my home and my constituency 

office wondering if they could give more input. And one child, 

the age of 10, exclaimed the following that it was about time 

that children were consulted because you grown-ups think that 

this unity issue is all about you when it’s really about us. 

 

Now this brings us to the issue of politics over patriotism. And 

there are those who would be willing to lose a country for the 

sake of political points. This does not belie that I believe for one 

moment that we should simply roll over and play dead for the 

Jacques Parizeaus of the world. 

 

However, the best people to deliver a strong message to 

Quebecers — a strong federalist message to Quebecers — are 

those whose words cannot be misconstrued. The message 

should not come from those of us who may have our words 

construed any way that a sovereigntist media chooses. 

 

Stephane Dion and other young Quebecers with thoughtful 

views provide the best means of sending the federalist message. 

And it is a fact that those who voted overwhelmingly for 

separation came from areas of Quebec that speak only French. 

 

It is a fact that a majority of French-speaking media support the 

separatist cause. It is a fact that many members of the national 

media do not understand French and provide equally skewed 

information to English-speaking Canadians. 

 

It is crucial that Canadians inside and outside Quebec have an 

opportunity to hear all sides of the unity issue. And I submit 

that the federalist message is best delivered by those who fully 

understand the nuances and have the potential of being heard. 

 

Now in closing, Canadians are often seen as lacking in passion. 

This exercise has demonstrated to me that while we are not 

boisterously patriotic, we most certainly love our home and 

native land. We stand on guard in a different way. Not with 

weapons or oppression, but with dialogue and more dialogue 

and more dialogue. And I say, good for us. 

 

We are held in high esteem throughout the world because we 

deserve to be. It is becoming apparent, however, that we must 

dedicate ourselves to learning more about each other and ensure 

that our young people get to be with one another. Then with 

glowing hearts we shall see her rise, the true North strong and 

free. 

 

It is not only God’s job to keep our land glorious and free, Mr. 

Speaker, it depends upon 10 of the most important two-letter  

words in our language — if it is to be, it is up to me. It is with 

great pride that I support the resolution before this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

one could hardly pass up the opportunity to say even a few 

words in such a special occasion as this. I will remember the 

important words that were once told to me and that is that, of 

course, the more the speakers, the more appreciated are the ones 

that speak very briefly. So I want to say that there are . . . Most 

things here that have been said today, that everyone of us can 

agree with, but there are still a couple of points I think that are 

important to be made. 

 

I want to go back to the beginning just for a second, because of 

course it’s important to remember that when we went out and 

started to discuss this program we were met with quite a 

different approach than what we saw at the end. People, quite 

frankly, were tired of hearing about division, they were tired of 

hearing about separation, and they, quite frankly, were sick and 

tired of hearing about Quebec wanting more. 

 

But of course once we gained their attention and they realized 

that we were serious and that our Premier was serious and that 

we were genuinely going to take another shot at this issue, they 

quickly said, yes, we want to save this country. We believe in it. 

We’re just tired of all of the talking. 

 

And so, Mr. Premier, I guess we could safely say, as we stand 

here, that we’ve heard all of you people speak — we’ve heard 

you speak; we’ve heard all of the other speakers — and I could 

say ditto. Ditto to all of that on behalf of my constituents and I 

think a lot of the people. 

 

But we want to point out to you that there a couple of things 

that surprised me in this process that I don’t think were 

mentioned here today. The first is that there is no urban/rural 

split. Finally, in this province, we found something that 

everybody agrees on. There are just as many people in the city 

and just as many people in the country that don’t care. But the 

most of them do, and they care quite passionately. And I was 

quite surprised at this. 

 

I was quite surprised by our veterans, and of course they’re a 

little older now, those that fought in the wars, and so they take 

no problem at all in saying exactly what they mean and what 

they think. And once they say that, of course, then the others 

fall into place along as well. 

 

And I found that our recent immigrants agreed most fully with 

those people, and of course they said straight out that if this 

country breaks up, there’ll be big trouble. The trouble will be of 

course that we will have economic chaos and economic chaos 

will lead to civil war. And instead of us having a country where 

people from around the world view this nation as a place where 

you can come to as an immigrant, where the streets are paved in 

gold, they will run in blood. 

 

And quite frankly that tells me, Mr. Premier, that this issue is so 

important that we must now go out on this adventure sending 

the very best people that we can possibly have to do whatever 

has to be done. 



December 16, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

And that, Mr. Premier, leads me to another point that I want to 

make. And that point, I believe, is very simply that the people 

from El Salvador and the people from Bosnia are right when 

they say it could happen here, it could happen here. And so we 

must send the best person to negotiate for us. 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, are very fortunate in this province in that we 

have a Premier who has already been chosen to lead this 

initiative on behalf of the nation. All of the premiers have 

decided that and agreed. We’re very fortunate that we have this 

very distinguished gentleman among us — the Premier of our 

province — a man who has distinguished himself in the eyes 

not only of the people of Saskatchewan, but in the eyes of the 

people of this nation through the precedence of the work of the 

past that he has done. And that precedence of work, of course, 

being his work on the repatriation of the constitution, on the 

repatriation of the constitution, and his work on human works, 

and his work of course recently on the dissemination of power 

through a cooperation program that he’s just set up. 

 

We’re very proud of you, Mr. Premier, and we believe that if 

anybody can do the job, you can. And quite frankly, I believe 

that if you do fail — I don’t think you will — but if you do, 

then the job couldn’t be done by anyone. You are the best 

person at this time in history to do this job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I simply want 

to say on behalf of the constituents from the Cyprus Hills and 

I’m sure of all the people of Saskatchewan, good luck, Mr. 

Premier, and Godspeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:58 p.m. until 3:59 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 56 

 

Romanow Flavel Van Mulligen 

Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 

Shillington Mitchell Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Teichrob Pringle Koenker 

Trew Renaud Lorje 

Bradley Scott Nilson 

Cline Serby Hamilton 

Stanger Sonntag Wall 

Kasperski Ward Jess 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

Krawetz Bjornerud Toth 

D’Autremont Boyd Draude 

Gantefoer Heppner Osika 

Hillson McPherson Aldridge 

Belanger McLane Haverstock 

Julé Goohsen  

 

Nays — Nil 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried unanimously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I would like to move this motion, and I hope it 

would be seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and in spirit 

by all of us, and I’ll read it and then see if I can get unanimous 

consent. 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 

the debate be transmitted to the Legislatures of the 

provinces, the territories, the House of Commons and the 

Senate on behalf of this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan, by Mr. Speaker. 

 

I seek leave for that. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I so move this motion. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the House, to 

ask for the participation of the House in singing O Canada on 

this historic occasion. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: — Hon. members, if you please stand. And I 

would also acknowledge that it is unusual and not usually 

permitted in this House that those who are visitors participate in 

the proceedings of the House, but would leave be granted to 

allow visitors to participate? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: — Please stand for the national anthem. 

 

(O Canada) 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:04 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1973 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1973 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1974 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1974 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1975 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1975 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1975 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1975 

  McLane .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1975, 1976 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Tchorzewski ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1976 

  Goulet ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1976 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Branding of Members 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

 Saskatchewan’s Booming Oil and Gas Industry 

  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1977 

 Team Schmirler’s Winning Ways 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1977 

 Probationary Driver’s Program 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1977 

 50th Wedding Anniversary 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1977 

 SARCAN Recycling 

  Lorje ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1978 

 Athabasca Road Construction 

  Johnson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1978 

 Call for Fall Session 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1978 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Consequences of Separation 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1978 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1979 

 Night Hunting 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1979 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1979 

 SaskPowers’ Investment in Guyana 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1979 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1980 

 Channel Lake Petroleum 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1980 



 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1980 

 Surgery Waiting-lists 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1981 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1981 

 Health Care for Gravelbourg Seniors 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1981 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1981 

 Crown Corporations Accountability 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1982 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1983 

SPECIAL ORDER 

GOVERNMENT MOTION 

Canadian Unity 

  Romanow ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1983, 1995 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1988 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1990 

  Haverstock ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1993 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1994 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1995 

  Wiens ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1995 

 


