




















































Hansard: March 14, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 175 

 March 14, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 

of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to young 

offenders’ crimes, I read the prayer on this petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such a task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The signatures are mostly from people in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring petitions 

forward on behalf of people in Saskatchewan today regarding 

big game problems that they’re finding. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the Saskatchewan 

big game damage compensation program so that it 

provides more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers 

and townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, 

are from the communities of Kincaid and Hazenmore, in my 

own constituency. I so present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions signed by 

citizens mostly in the city of Regina. If I may read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan 

in light of the most recent wave of property crime charges, 

including car thefts, crimes of violence, including the  

charge of attempted murder of a police officer; such task 

force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 

municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

present the following petitions on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in years 

ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the Swift Current area of our province, Mr. Speaker, I am 

happy to present these this morning. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I rise to present the following petition and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from Saskatoon, Elstow, Hague, Prince Albert. 

Treaty Indians have signed this, all sorts of thoughtful people, 

and I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I as well 

have petitions to present to this Assembly. I’d like to read the 

prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions I have are signed by 

individuals from across this province including areas like 

Saskatoon, Nipawin, Meadow Lake, Warman, and even one 

signature here from Delta, B.C. (British Columbia), Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker, 

from down on the U.S. (United States) border at Minton, and 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by two points in the 1997 provincial 

budget; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the municipal revenue-sharing reduction; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to establish a task 

force to aid the fight against youth crime. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move the first reading of a Bill, the 

employers and babysitters restriction Act. I so present, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many applications 

from Saskatchewan female farmers for the farm fuel rebate 

has the government received since female farmers were 

ruled eligible for the rebate in 1996? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly here 

today a constituent of mine seated in the east gallery — Emily 

Olm of Churchbridge. And I would ask that the members join 

with me and welcome her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and to members of the Assembly a group of 50 grade 8 

students seated in the west gallery. They’re from the St. Francis 

School and we’re going to have a little get-together in room 218 

after we get completed here. 

 

And I notice also that we’re going to have drinks — I assume 

soft drinks — and I’m going to be paying for those soft drinks. 

But the House Leader has graciously offered to help pay for the 

drinks. 

 

But seriously, I hope the students who are here today to take 

part in observing of question period enjoy their stay. And I’m 

really looking forward to meeting you after we complete 

question period. So good luck. God bless you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a very 

special guest to the legislature today. It is Anika Marcotte in 

your gallery. Anika is a student at Luther interested in the 

functioning of government; on her own initiative asked to come 

and join me today and observe what happens in the legislature 

and around the offices and how government functions. 

 

She is a student of some accomplishment in music. She is going 

to, later on today, to be joining a provincial competition, a 

French debating competition in Saskatoon. And I’m absolutely 

delighted to introduce her to the House and to recognize one of 

our wonderful young people who are willing to change the 

world. Anika Marcotte. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and to the other members of the Assembly, seated in 

your gallery, some friends of mine. We have with us, travelling 

down from Meadow Lake today, my constituency assistant, 

Susan Karpenko. 

 

And with her — if they’d just stand as I introduce them — with 

her also she brought her entire family, with the exception of her 

husband, I think: Randi and Jesse and Hedi and Jenifer, and also 

with her is her mother, Violet Kozloski. 

 

Susan has done a wonderful job of raising her four children and 

she does probably equally as good a job looking after me, so 

welcome them. Welcome all of them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Business Technology Achievements in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, it is one thing to wish for 

something; reality is quite a different matter. I’m sure that every 

city in North America has dreams of being a high-tech centre. 

My city of Saskatoon, however, has long since skipped from the 

dream to actuality. 

 

Here are a few examples to add to the already long, long list of 

Saskatoon accomplishments. Massload Technologies recently 

signed a marketing contract with a Korean manufacturing 

company. That’s 12 more solid jobs for Saskatoon. 

 

Advanced Mining and Tunnelling Systems International, a  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

brand-new Saskatoon company, has acquired patents for new 

mining equipment. 

 

SCI-TEC Instruments has developed a sophisticated 

environmental monitoring system. A major American oil 

company has purchased this system from them. 

 

Innovation Place, the high-tech showcase of Canada, has four 

new tenants who will join the rest in pushing the edges of ag 

biotech research and development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes the most effective argument is simply a 

long list of accomplishments. Once again I would like to 

congratulate all those people, starting with Allan Blakeney, who 

had the foresight to set the stage for technological advancement 

in Saskatoon through the establishment of Innovation Place. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Support for Saskatchewan Roughriders 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

time clock is running out for the Saskatchewan Green and 

White. This weekend the team is taking to the television 

airwaves in a last-ditch effort to sell 200,000 tickets to stay in 

the game. The team is trying to keep an 87-year tradition alive 

in the province. I don’t want to think what it would be like if the 

team were not around. 

 

Yes we’ve all been frustrated with the Riders, we’ve all played 

armchair quarterback and have criticized the team. But at the 

same time we must remember the high points, the times we’ve 

revelled in making it to the play-offs and the ultimate goal, the 

Grey Cup. 

 

The Riders have said they will close up shop if they can’t meet 

their ticket deadline. It will be a sad day in the province if this 

happens. It is third and long for Saskatchewan, so I am urging 

all residents of this province to throw their support behind the 

team that has given us so much economic benefits over the 

years, and pure joy. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agri-Food Innovation Fund and University of 

Saskatchewan Agreement 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news 

from Saskatoon for all of Saskatchewan, and this time it’s from 

the University of Saskatchewan, which has recently signed a 

memorandum of understanding with the ag food innovation 

fund which will have long-term benefits, not only for the 

university, but for Saskatchewan farmers as well. This 

agreement provides money for research projects totalling more 

than $10 million in biotechnology, food processing, specialized 

crops, specialized livestock, and sustainable agriculture. 

 

It is important and significant that these projects go to the 

University of Saskatchewan — significant because the 

announcement reinforces the reputation of the university’s  

research capacities; important because the commitment of funds 

will enable the university to sustain current research projects 

and undertake new ones. 

 

Finally, I want to say that the Agri-Food Innovation Fund is an 

excellent example of federal and provincial cooperation, an 

example that could be profitably imitated in some other areas as 

well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Benefit for Tyrone Parislau 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to . . . 

once again I’m pleased to illustrate how rural communities 

come together to help one another in a time of need. 

 

A shining example of this is happening in my constituency in 

the community of Grayson this evening. The Grayson Knights 

of Columbus are hosting a dinner theatre performance tonight to 

a sold-out audience of 160 people. And the show is being 

performed by Grayson’s own Polka Dot Players. 

 

The Knights have organized this fund-raising event to help 

Tyrone Parislau, a young man in his early 20’s who will be 

undergoing treatment in British Columbia for Hodgkin’s 

disease. 

 

The money raised will be added to the special fund that has 

been established to help Tyrone cover his medical and personal 

expenses when he is in Vancouver this spring for treatments. 

 

Our thoughts and our prayers go with this young man. And I 

would like to also congratulate all the organizations and all 

people who have joined together to support Tyrone. Their 

dedication and commitment in helping individuals and their 

community as a whole is something they should take great pride 

in. They are the heart of their community. 

 

I would like everyone to join me in thanking these 

organizations throughout the province for their continued hard 

work and dedication to the people of our small communities. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agricultural Diversification Opportunities 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the close of 

Agriculture and Food Week in Saskatchewan, I’d like to 

commend two areas of diversification that offer tremendous 

opportunities for our producers — specialized livestock and 

herb and spice production. Both are becoming popular topics 

within the farming community. 

 

The popularity of these two areas demonstrates Saskatchewan 

producers are examining new opportunities to diversify with ag 

and food industry. People are prepared to travel hundreds of 

miles across the province to attend information meetings 

regarding the production of these specialized areas. 

 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

There are already a large number of producers involved in herb 

and spice production, Mr. Speaker. Adding to that production is 

the establishment of 22 herb and spice marketing agencies that 

make Saskatchewan a leader in the industry. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, companies such as Bioriginal Food 

& Science Corp. of Saskatoon has provided some food 

processing in these new crops. In addition, Mr. Speaker, elk, 

bison, white-tail deer production is gaining similar interest 

among producers. Meetings this year alone have attracted over 

500 interested producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ag and food industry of this province is 

changing and it is adapting to new challenges, embracing new 

opportunities. This challenge will certainly benefit our entire 

province and maintain our leadership worldwide within 

agriculture and food in the industry. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Winning Strategy for Saskatchewan Roughriders 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we have all heard about the plight that the Roughriders are in 

and we all sympathize and we all support the Riders. But I 

believe that I have come up with a possible solution to the 

Roughriders’ problems. 

 

As you recollect, in 1966 the Roughriders won the Grey Cup 

under a Liberal regime in this province. In 1989 the 

Roughriders won the Grey Cup under a Tory regime in this 

province. If the government members, Mr. Speaker, really wish 

to help the Roughriders, they will all resign — allow the 

Roughriders to win the Grey Cup in 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Enhanced Business Training for Low Income Women 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, our province has long been 

known as the social laboratory of Canada, the reputation of 

which members on this side are quite proud. And I think I can 

safely say that Prince Albert has been at the heart of social 

innovation. One major example is the West Flat’s project which 

I have spoken about in this House. 

 

Today I want to commend another small but significant project 

taking place in Prince Albert. The project is called, enhanced 

business training for low income women. This project will offer 

10 women a business training curriculum to prepare them to 

develop and operate a micro-business. The trainees will have 

access to start-up funds through an innovative micro-loan circle 

system funded by the Prince Albert Credit Union. The training 

will also involve parenting, life management, upgrading, and 

computer skills. At the end of the project the women will have 

developed new, marketable skills that will support them in the 

job market, aiming at self-employment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this project is the kind of effort we are  

seeing more and more — a project of eight partners, only one of 

which is a government agency. This is a true example of a 

community partnership. Leading the project is the Prince Albert 

YWCA. The other partners are the local REDA (regional 

economic development authority), Prince Albert Credit Union, 

The Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce, the Community 

Service Centre, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology), the multicultural society, and the 

New Careers Corporation. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate them and 

wish the students well in their training. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

80th Anniversary of Abdication of Last Russian Czar 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week marks the 

anniversary of the March revolution when oppressed Russians 

rose up to throw off the shackles of Romanov rule. Tomorrow 

marks the 80th anniversary of the abdication of the last Russian 

czar, thus ending three centuries of Romanov misrule. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tyranny and cruelty of the Romanovs is 

legendary. The most famous member of the dynasty was Ivan 

the Terrible. Mr. Speaker, I realize there are still some 

Romanov supporters who mourn this anniversary. But I say 

today is a day to be celebrated by freedom-loving peoples 

everywhere. In the words of the anthem of the civil rights 

movement, “We shall overcome.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Proposed Regina School Closures 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, tonight parents, students, and 

staff of the Regina Public School Board will be meeting to find 

out if their school will remain open next year. It’s a sad state of 

affairs when one of the largest school divisions in 

Saskatchewan is forced to contemplate the closure of nine 

schools. 

 

As a result of chronic underfunding by this government, the 

Regina public school system has cut 87.5 teaching positions 

since 1991 and has been forced to raise the mill rate by 9.52 

mills. This shows how cuts are directly affecting the classroom 

and the people of Regina. 

 

Will the Premier stand in this House and accept responsibility 

for the underfunding of education in Regina and across 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

the member in a very similar manner to the answer that was 

given by the Minister of Education yesterday. I just want to 

point out to the member opposite and to the people in the 

gallery, people watching, that this is done for political reasons. 

 

The member had the answer yesterday. He knows full well the  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

response — that schools have closed in Saskatchewan since 

some of us were much younger back in the 1950s. I remember 

going to school when my rural school was closed that used to 

be 1 mile from our home at the farm in the RM (rural 

municipality) of Bone Creek that the member from Shaunavon 

or the individual representing Shaunavon will know. 

 

This is nothing new. It’s been going on for 50 years as the 

economy of Saskatchewan reconfigures and people move to 

urban centres. 

 

The member opposite will also know, because he has been a 

director of an education system that has closed schools. He 

knows that. Chairman of the board. Closed schools, so he 

knows full well. 

 

Now the politics; go ahead, ask your questions, but we should 

all know this has to do with politics and nothing to do with 

education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the Deputy 

Premier, I was not a director of education, even though 

someday I’d aspire to be that. I was a board member. 

 

And as I listened to the answer of the minister yesterday, I 

believe that the Deputy Premier has not listened. And indeed at 

a time when schools were closed across this province . . . 

they’ve been going on for awhile. But now we’re at the point 

where school closures are occurring because of underfunding, 

not because of enrolment. Schools of 200 students are closing. 

The minister knows full well that government’s underfunding 

of education is resulting in school closures in this city. 

 

The shutting of the doors on some Regina schools will result in 

pressure on the separate school system in Regina. This will 

happen in cases where parents will simply enrol their children 

in the nearest separate school. 

 

Will the Deputy Premier acknowledge that this government’s 

funding decisions are driving a rift between Saskatchewan 

school divisions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I find 

distasteful about the member’s question is this attempt, which 

was the previous administration, the Devine government’s 

attempt, to put barriers between different groups of people. And 

I remember welfare recipients versus non-welfare recipients, 

and non-natives against natives, and urban against rural. 

 

I just caution the Liberal Party that that, even in political terms, 

is not very successful, to try to put a wedge between Catholic 

and public school system. Because what is happening in 

Saskatchewan is many areas are working together in partnership 

to sort this out. And you know that. And so for you to come 

here and try to put that division between the different school 

boards is not only unfortunate, but I would ask the member to 

get out of that area and come back to the main point. 

And he will know that schools have closed when revenues have 

been increasing and when revenues have been stable. So that’s 

not the reason. It’s the change in demographics. You know it 

full well. You’ve made the speeches in your past to your own 

school board. So come onside, look up your old speeches, and 

give them back to the House and be honest about this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I will direct the next question to 

the Minister of Finance. The truth of the matter is that the entire 

education system in Saskatchewan is crumbling because this 

government is failing to provide the leadership and vision 

needed to develop and maintain quality education for 

Saskatchewan children. 

 

Because the Minister of Finance seems fixated on how many 

more sleeps she can get in before the budget is presented, I am 

praying that sometime during her deep sleep she will realize 

that an overall vision is needed to provide for a long-term future 

for Saskatchewan education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’d like the Finance minister to stay awake long 

enough to let everyone know exactly when she will finally 

provide leadership and a plan for improving the quality of 

education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome 

the opportunity to enter this debate. Because what the members 

opposite are not telling the people of Saskatchewan is there 

hasn’t been any cut to K to 12 funding for this year. So you’re 

saying these schools are closing because a cut in funding is 

occurring that is not occurring. 

 

I mean I know that you have a job to do here to try to criticize 

the government. You’ve taken on that job. But at least be 

upfront with people and tell them the facts. In fact K to 12 is 

getting more funding, not less funding. So please don’t say 

schools are closing because of lack of funding — there is 

increased funding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education and Industry 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

industries in Englefeld and Anaheim are willing to do for 

education what this government is not — they’re willing to put 

their money where their mouth is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Minister of Economic 

Development recently received letters from Schulte Industries 

and Doepker Industries giving notice of their offer to supply 

schools in their area with equipment to make distance education 

possible — an offer aimed at helping to save the local schools, 

because government policy certainly won’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Englefeld and Anaheim have 

requested an answer to a very simple question, and I’m asking 

you this question from them: what is the minister doing to 

recognize the fact that education and industry success go hand  



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

in hand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well the member will obviously 

know that education and training is a big part of economic 

development, and JobStart and the other programs that we have 

in place that are well recognized by the industry, particularly 

the industries in your area that affect machinery manufacturing 

and processing — that those programs have been very, very 

effective. And part of the reason that last month, year over year, 

month over month, the job numbers in Saskatchewan were up 

by 7,000 have a great deal to do with the training programs that 

the Minister of Education has put in place. 

 

As it would relate to the specific issue the member has raised, I 

have talked and met with members of the community and the 

industry to deal and talk about this issue. And the Minister of 

Education is involved and you know that there have been many 

arrangements and work is being done and consultation taking 

place. 

 

And I’m sure that the member will understand that her 

involvement should be in a positive way as opposed to an 

adversarial, political comment that tries to get her a better 

position as opposed to the students in her area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan have heard this government state on 

many occasions that jobs are the number one priority. They 

want to create jobs in industry, but on the other hand they 

continue to close rural schools and eliminate rural services. This 

can only lead to young families refusing to move into the area, 

and it makes it increasingly difficult to find employees and 

justify remaining in rural Saskatchewan. Is job creation only an 

urban issue? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier was questioned during a November 29 

CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) phone-in program 

about the present funding formula, which is based on student 

ratios and other factors. He responded by indicating that his 

government, and I quote: “may very well need to change the 

formula in terms of providing highly skilled kids, not only in 

the Englefeld area but for other areas in this province.” 

 

What commitment is the Premier willing to make today to back 

up this statement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the government’s 

commitment to the best quality public education system that we 

can possibly finance and afford in the province of 

Saskatchewan is clearly stated and without parallel. 

 

The necessity of education, more than just for the creation of 

jobs, but education in the sense of its liberating quality, the 

ability to make men and women think and to develop their 

fullest potential, is what this government is all about. 

The member opposite talks about what is the depth of our 

commitment. It is that. And we are making the transitional 

changes to a variety of educational objectives, ranging all the 

way from JobStart and Future Skills to foundation formulas, 

examinations, and the like. 

 

And this question comes from the very same member who, on 

another day, will get up and say that there are no jobs being 

created by this government. Today she says there are so many 

jobs being created by this government that we don’t have 

enough students to fill the jobs. Someday the Liberals have got 

to get their act and their position straight and clear. Face the fact 

that this government’s commitment to education in the face of 

federal cut-backs has been unparalleled and that our revamping 

of the education system to make it the best in . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Next question, next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 

order. 

 

Regina Murder Case 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

further question to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, it 

appears again, as we saw yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

another mishandled case in the province of Saskatchewan by his 

department, by the prosecutor’s office. 

 

We now have the lawyers for the three men who were released 

yesterday, and wrongly accused, suggesting that they may be 

considering suing for the 130 days their clients were 

incarcerated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard where the minister would stand 

up and say, well it’s before the courts; therefore I can’t give an 

answer. But I would like to suggest that the compensation 

lawsuit is not before the courts yet, so I’m hopeful we can get 

an answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you believe these men deserve compensation 

for the 130 days they spent in jail accused of this brutal murder? 

How much will the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have to shell out 

for the Department of Justice’s mishandling of this case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This case is 

presently before the court and as such, it is inappropriate for me 

to comment on the details of that case. However, I am able to 

speak generally about the criminal justice process. 

 

As you know, the police are responsible for investigating and 

gathering evidence concerning a crime. In the course of 

gathering this evidence, they exercise their discretion in 

determining whether charges should or should not be laid 

against any particular individual. This is often done in 

consultation with the Crown prosecutor’s office. 

 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

When the Crown prosecutor receives the information from the 

police, it is the Crown prosecutor’s responsibility to assess this 

information and exercise discretion about whether those charges 

should proceed. Even after charges have been laid, the 

investigation process often continues and new information may 

come to light. 

 

If the Crown prosecutor determines that the evidence is 

insufficient or it is not in the best interest of justice to sustain or 

to continue with the charges as laid, it’s within their discretion 

to amend the charges or enter a stay. At any point in the 

process, the Crown prosecutor may determine that the charges 

against the accused cannot proceed. This is because . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister is correct. However, the reasons and the ability to lay 

charges lay at the prosecutor’s feet and it’s imperative that the 

prosecutor’s office in this province, or in any jurisdiction, make 

sure that beyond a shadow of a doubt they have the correct 

evidence before that final decision to lay charges is made. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if there isn’t a check, balance, innocent 

people will continually be forced to defend their innocence. 

And I disagree with that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as well, we’re aware of the fact that the 

minister had implemented a review of his office by Mr. Martin 

from Calgary, and I understand that Mr. Martin has sent his 

report to the minister. I’m asking the minister today if he will 

release his report, give us an idea of what Mr. Martin has said 

about the office. And, Mr. Minister, will you be implementing 

these recommendations immediately after the report is released? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have said 

on a number of occasions, the report will be released in 

approximately 10 or 12 days. And at that time, the member will 

have a chance to review the report along with all parts of the 

public. We will be looking at all the recommendations that are 

made very carefully and we will be implementing the ones that 

we think are totally appropriate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, you 

should really read your mail a little more thoroughly and 

carefully. Read all the pages, read both sides of every page, or 

have someone read it to you. You keep missing the part that 

says, cut the PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

Madam Minister, business leaders are now accusing you of 

deliberately ignoring their call to cut the PST. The CFIB 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business) says so. The 

Regina chamber says so. When are you going to start listening? 

When are you going get the whole message from business and 

cut the PST? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, 

thank you very much for that question. What I have been 

talking about is the record of this government. I have said again 

and again and again I’m not making any comments about the 

budget. And I’m not hypothesizing about what different groups 

have said and will say about the budget. I’m talking about the 

record of this government. But what is so amazing is these 

members opposite here telling us how to manage the finances of 

the province and how to cut taxes. 

 

When they were government what they did was raise just about 

every tax that exists. They put in place the flat tax. They tried to 

harmonize. They increased the debt of the province at the same 

time so that we’re here to clean up their mess. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, we are listening. You will see 

the results of the budget when the budget comes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Environmental Handling Charges 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

also for the Minister of Finance, who is all talk, and the only 

action she takes is to raise every tax and fee in this province and 

collect over a billion dollars a year more than previously was 

done in taxation. 

 

Yesterday the Minister for Environment admitted that the 

8-cent recycling fee collected on every juice box sold in 

Saskatchewan actually goes into the general revenue. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Did you say juice box? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Juice box. Because they don’t actually 

have a recycling program. Madam Minister, that’s extremely 

deceptive. The people of Saskatchewan are being led to believe 

that they’re paying for recycling when it’s really just another 

NDP (New Democratic Party) tax. And worst of all, Madam 

Minister, it’s a tax on groceries, a tax that hits the poorest 

people in this province — the people, the families with young 

children. 

 

Madam Minister, will you admit your so-called recycling fee is 

nothing more than a tax? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for that question. First of all, a couple of facts to respond to 

what the member is saying. The tax covers not just the costs of 

recycling, it also covers the costs of handling. And we’ve also 

been talking to the groups involved, the Tetra-Pak people, 

saying that the money will be dedicated to recycling when they 

put recycling in place. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about what these members 

have on the record here. They go on about, they would reduce 

taxes, they would do this or that. And they’ve also told the 

people of Saskatchewan what they would be prepared to do on 

the other side of the ledger. Shocked — I was shocked the other  



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

day. These people are going back to the future. They’re 

prepared once again for a holus-bolus, mindless sale of Crown 

corporations — a fire sale of Crown corporations, which their 

party did in the ‘80s, which helped get us into this mess. 

 

This government will go toward the future, not like those 

people — back to the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The handling 

of the Tetra-Paks are done by the stores and the consumers and 

the government doesn’t have a hand in it other than collecting 

taxes on it. 

 

Madam Minister, you can call this whatever kind of a tax you 

want, but a fee that goes into general revenue is a tax, especially 

when you don’t even have a recycling program in place to deal 

with it. 

 

We put the recycling program in place for cans and bottles, and 

you have done nothing. 

 

Madam Minister, we all know that our tax dollars go to a lot of 

questionable government programs, but this is the first time I’ve 

heard of an imaginary government program. 

 

The minister likes to talk about targeted tax cuts. Will you 

provide a targeted tax cut and remove the 8-cent tax on juice 

containers at least until Saskatchewan has a Tetra-Pak recycling 

program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I must 

confess I didn’t hear the whole question. But let me say this to 

the member opposite. As the Minister of Environment has said 

on that issue, we are talking with the Tetra-Pak people about 

putting in place the appropriate recycling program. 

 

But you know, the members opposite, when they say money 

goes into the General Revenue Fund, it’s as if it goes poof! — 

off somewhere else. Money that goes into the General Revenue 

Fund goes to health, education, roads. 

 

Now I’m sure I understand why the Tory Party . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I understand why the Tory Party 

isn’t concerned about the money that’s going into health, 

education, roads, because I notice in the paper as well, what 

they’ve said is that they support a 5 per cent cut to government 

funding, a 5 per cent cut — 1,000 teachers’ jobs lost; a 5 per 

cent cut to health — the end of the home care program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have across here are Mike Harris Tories. 

And voters of Saskatchewan, beware. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

Dialysis Treatment in East-Central Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to bring to the attention of this House an issue that is of 

great concern to many people who live in Yorkton, and in fact 

the entire east-central region of the province. 

 

Gordon Olm, a retired farmer from Churchbridge, is one of 

many people from this region who requires dialysis treatment 

for a kidney problem. Mr. Speaker, the Yorkton Regional 

Health Centre has a dialysis machine. Unfortunately, the facility 

does not have the funding for a specially trained nurse or 

medical supplies which are necessary to run this unit. As a 

result, Mr. Olm and his wife are forced to travel to Regina twice 

each week, 480-kilometre trip, for treatment. In spite of the fact 

they live on a fixed income, they have rented an apartment in 

this city to cut costs. 

 

Will the minister explain how he, as the Minister of Health, can 

justify this situation, and will he admit that this is another 

symptom of his government’s failure to properly fund our 

health care system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, last year a new renal dialysis 

unit was opened at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. I want to 

inform the member that dialysis is available in four locations in 

the province of Saskatchewan — Regina, Saskatoon, 

Lloydminster, and Prince Albert, I believe. 

 

And dialysis requires, Mr. Speaker, a tremendous amount of 

courage on the part of people who need renal dialysis. And they 

live with a very difficult situation, Mr. Speaker. But the reality 

is, when you give dialysis to people, you also have to provide 

them with a range of professionals, a range of equipment, 

necessary for dialysis to take place. 

 

And if the member . . . And we will look, Mr. Speaker, at 

whether there should be more locations for kidney dialysis. But 

if the member is suggesting that there can be dialysis clinics in 

every centre of Saskatchewan where somebody needs it, the 

member is misleading the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I have a list of names from 

communities that are out near our constituency: from 

Moosomin, Yorkton, Canora, Churchbridge, Wapella, 

Kamsack, Punnichy, Whitewood, Grayson, Goodeve, Leross, 

Kamsack, Bangor, Foam Lake — the list goes on, Mr. Minister. 

They’re not very happy with that answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am told that qualified nurses who provide 

dialysis treatments on Mr. Olm find the job of conducting this 

procedure very difficult. Yet he has been told by his local 

district board that perhaps a solution might be to have a member 

of his family take a course so he can be treated with a portable 

dialysis unit at home. 

 

Mr. Minister, if qualified nurses say they have problems  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

carrying out a dialysis procedure on Mr. Olm, is it reasonable to 

suggest that a member of his family can do the same? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, there are some people for 

whom home dialysis is an appropriate course of treatment and 

they are receiving home dialysis. And that is what they want 

because they do not then have to go to another centre to get 

dialysis, which is what the member says he wants. 

 

If the member is suggesting that people in this province should 

be denied home dialysis, I have to say I disagree with the 

member. If people can have dialysis at home, they should have 

dialysis at home, Mr. Speaker. And if they need the regimen 

that is required to give dialysis properly in a renal dialysis 

centre, Mr. Speaker, they should have that too. 

 

But if the member is going to mislead people by saying that that 

can be done in every centre where somebody who needs 

dialysis lives, Mr. Speaker, the member is quite, is quite wrong. 

 

And while the member is saying that, Mr. Speaker, the member 

should explain why the leader of the member’s party says that 

we should take hundreds of millions of dollars out of our 

provincial health care budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11  The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 

The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 12, 

The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read for the very first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 13, The 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 1997 be now introduced and read at the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Water Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

14, The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Department of Health 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, The 

Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m asking leave of the 

House, which I think has been arranged by the House leaders, to 

introduce a special resolution. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Roughriders 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I shall be very brief in 

some preliminary remarks, at the end of which I will move, by 

leave of the Assembly and seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition, a motion pertaining to the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. 

 

As we all know, March 15 is, I guess, tomorrow where the 

Roughriders and their efforts to obtain 200,000 tickets is going 

to be — how shall I describe it? — at least, judged. I want to 

use the words carefully in the context. 

 

And what we want to say very briefly in introducing this motion 

is that 87 years of tradition, the great players who have given 

the fans and the people of Saskatchewan so much entertainment 

— people like Frank Tripucka, Bobby Marlow, George Reed, 

Hugh Lancaster, Ron Lancaster, Hughie Campbell, George 

Reed, Ron Atchison from the Saskatoon Hilltops, these are the 

great football players. Bill Clarke, yes. You can name . . . you 

just go on for ever. 

 

Eighty seven years of community involvement, community 

pride, joy, distinguishing Saskatchewan in a way to the rest of 

Canada — this is really is what the Roughriders are all about. I 

can’t imagine actually the CFL (Canadian Football League) 

without the Saskatchewan Roughriders. And I’m very confident 

that the people of Saskatchewan will come forward with their 

support at the community level for the Roughriders. 

 

I would just simply like to close by saying with those few  



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

remarks, that I hope I express the sentiments of all the members 

of the House by moving, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition, by leave of the Assembly, the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly endorse and encourage the efforts of 

the Saskatchewan Roughriders Football Club as it 

continues with its ticket sales drive; and that this Assembly 

congratulate the team organizers, the volunteers, the 

players, for the work that they have done, and extend best 

wishes for the upcoming weekend’s telethon; and that this 

Assembly urge all people in Saskatchewan to support the 

Roughriders because of the team’s long-standing tradition 

in our province, and the jobs and economic revenues it 

generates throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

By leave of the Assembly, I so move, seconded by the Leader 

of the Opposition, member from Canora. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to second that motion. As I indicated in 

a member’s statement this morning, we as the official 

opposition caucus recognize the importance of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders to not only the city of Regina, as 

indicated yesterday by comments made by Mayor Archer, but 

throughout all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The economic spin-off for other parts of Saskatchewan, of 

course, is not as large as here in Regina or on highways that 

lead to Regina on game day. All you have to do is stop in 

communities like Fort Qu’Appelle and Chamberlain and 

Davidson and you’ll see the economic spin-offs for businesses 

in those communities. 

 

There has been a pride in Saskatchewan, a pride in this football 

team, that it is our football team. It is not a government team. It 

is not a Regina team. It is the team of Saskatchewan. And the 

Premier has indicated so many names of so many individuals — 

I recall just two nights ago when we listened to Bob Poley as a 

Master of Ceremonies of the function that we attended. And 

there are so many other people that have done a tremendous 

amount to bring about good quality football to Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe that the Canadian Football League as well is going 

through a very tough time. And it indeed has to look at how it 

has functioned to ensure that the quality of football is there, yes, 

but indeed that we are working within our means as a football 

league. 

 

If the league succeeds, there’s no question, as indicated by Mr. 

Baker, the important role that Saskatchewan plays. I believe 

Mr. Lancaster this morning is quoted as saying that the CFL 

will not exist if the Saskatchewan Roughriders don’t exist. And 

that is a very good compliment for our football team, and 

indeed the province of Saskatchewan that has the greatest fans 

in all of Canada. 

 

So I again take great pride in seconding the motion and 

encouraging all people in Saskatchewan to get behind the drive 

as individuals. Get that ticket sales up over the 200,000 mark.  

It’s not unheard of. Yesterday I asked an official of the 

Roughriders the number of people that attended last year — and 

it wasn’t a great year for attendance — that number was 

227,000 people. And all they’re asking for right now, upfront, is 

a sale of 200,000. 

 

I know we can do it. I know the people of Saskatchewan will do 

it. And I urge all residents to support that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 

many qualities that separate Saskatchewan people from other 

provinces. We take great pride in our small communities and 

our rural way of life, our agricultural industry, our western 

values. But, Mr. Speaker, adding to that list is our never-ending 

support of our Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

Fans, in general, are fickle. They support their team when they 

are on a winning streak or playing the championship game. But 

when their team is having a bit of a rough time, fan numbers 

and their support dwindle. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are an anomaly in this 

regard. It doesn’t matter if the Riders are winning or losing, it 

doesn’t matter if it’s 40 below or 25 above, Saskatchewan 

people are at Taylor Field cheering for their favourite team. 

That’s dedication. 

 

It’s easy to be a fan, Mr. Speaker, in southern California, where 

the weather is always nice and you get a tan while you’re at the 

park. But it’s a different story when you have to brave the 

elements in Saskatchewan — be it thunderstorms in July or 

blizzards in October. 

 

(1100) 

 

I guess it separates the wimpy fans from the hard-core fans, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s what we are in Saskatchewan — hard-core, 

dedicated fans. Of course we get a little bit more excited if 

we’re winning, Mr. Speaker, but the bottom line is 

Saskatchewan people love their football. We love football and 

we love the Riders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would estimate that for every quarterback on the 

field there are thousands in the stands, in their tractors, or in 

their easy chairs. And it’s pretty easy to sit on top with a 

bird’s-eye view and coach the Riders all the way to a Grey Cup 

win, but it’s a lot harder to be out in the field giving 110 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would really be a shame if after so many years 

of wonderful tradition, the Riders were no longer packing the 

stands in Taylor Field. For 87 years Saskatchewan families 

have supported our Riders through the good times and the bad. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I remember going to 4-H events in the back 

of my neighbour’s car, Percy Cowan, and we would listen to the 

Rider games either going or coming from those events. And 

while we all hated it when Ron Lancaster waited until the last 

minute to win the game, we always found the games exciting. 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, in our caucus, my colleague 

from Cypress Hills, his wife taught Roger Aldag. Now we all 

know how large Roger Aldag is, and the member from Cypress 

Hills wife, Jeanette, is very small. There was always a great 

deal of respect there and there still is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a great tradition in Saskatchewan with 

the Roughriders, and that is a tradition that needs to be kept and 

it needs to be renewed. So right now we need to shore up that 

support so that future generations can enjoy the Roughriders for 

another 87 years, and this morning my colleagues and I did our 

part and purchased our Roughrider tickets. 

 

But perhaps there is another thing that needs to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. The question of David Archer comes up. If we had 

David Archer, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that we would easily sell 

out that 200,000 tickets. 

 

Now in the past, Mr. Speaker, and some of the names that the 

Premier has mentioned, I know had jobs off the field in Regina. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we believe this would perhaps be an 

opportunity for one of our corporations to provide some 

assistance to the Saskatchewan Roughriders. And we have a 

particular position in mind that would certainly help with David 

Archer, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the position that Jack Messer 

holds today would be a suitable position for someone who we 

believe can resurrect and revive the fortunes of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, Mr. Speaker. And we would like to 

place that as a recommendation to the government for their 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we won the Grey Cup in ’86, we won the Grey 

Cup in ’89, and if we support the Roughriders today, if the 

people of Saskatchewan support the Roughriders today, we will 

have an opportunity in ’97 and beyond to again win the Grey 

Cup. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Wall, seconded by Ms. Lorje, 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

continue my reply to the throne speech. Yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, I had the opportunity to tell about my constituency and 

what an honour it is to be elected by the constituents of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy to represent their views and their 

concerns to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I spoke of what I heard from the people of Weyburn-Big  

Muddy through consultation, that jobs . . . and through that 

consultation I found that their concerns were very similar to the 

concerns that are being addressed by our throne speech. 

 

Through consultation, I heard that jobs and the economy are a 

priority; that health, education, and social programs must be 

protected; that highways and transportation issues were 

important, especially as they pertain to the agriculture 

community; that my constituents are supportive of the Crown 

corporations; that the communities of Gladmar, Minton, 

Ceylon, Ogema, and Bengough hope to have cellular service 

expanded to include their areas. 

 

My constituents told me that they wanted to have continued 

balanced budgets, with no new taxes. They wanted government 

to be effective, efficient, and accountable. And they wanted a 

government that consulted and listened to their concerns. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the throne speech addresses the priorities of 

my constituents. Our throne speech is about hope and about 

optimism. 

 

Today through cooperation, community, and shared efforts, 

Saskatchewan is back on its feet. Five years of hard work and 

sacrifice by the people of Saskatchewan has paid off. We are 

building a stronger Saskatchewan together by investing in our 

province, our people, and our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I spoke of the government’s top priority 

— jobs. And how our economic strategy has been working in 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan economy is doing well. We have 

the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. And more people are 

moving to Saskatchewan than are moving away. 

 

And as I said yesterday, the feeling of economic optimism is 

being felt throughout Saskatchewan and throughout Weyburn 

and area, with a booming gas and oil industry, with recent 

announcements in Weyburn of business expansions, of the 

Wheat Pool, the Weyburn Inland Terminal, and the Co-op, with 

real estate sales increasing. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, our top priority is jobs and our throne speech 

addresses this important priority. It addresses it through where 

it’s encouraging the expansion of trade, promoting expansion 

and diversification of our rural economy, renewing 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations, promoting tourism and 

hospitality industry, and by participating in an extended 

national infrastructure plan. 

 

Yes we have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada. But 

that’s not enough. We want full employment for our province. 

Yes we are investing in people. Jobs is a top priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke yesterday of our second priority — 

education and training, as it serves as a bridge to employment. I 

spoke of the extensive K to 12 consultation that took place and 

how our government listened to the people of Saskatchewan. I 

spoke of visiting schools throughout my constituency and how I 

was so impressed with the quality of programs and the 

enthusiasm of the teachers and the students. We have much to 

be proud of in our youth and in our education system. 

 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased when we have the throne speech 

that we always have a youth choir here participating. During the 

Commonwealth Day that we honoured we had youth 

participating. It is so great to have that quality of youth right 

here in our legislature, Mr. Speaker, who are a very valuable 

resource for our province, for today and for tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education though, still must continue to evolve to 

meet the challenge of tomorrow and the 21st century. We must 

all become lifelong learners. Education does not end with grade 

12. We all know that we must have a post-secondary system 

which is responsive to the challenges we face in an 

ever-changing world. And I believe the regional colleges, 

SIAST, and the universities have all played a very major role in 

the training and education of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m very impressed with the number of programs that the 

Southeast Regional College delivers to the south-east part of 

Saskatchewan. This regional college must be commended for 

how responsive they are to the needs of the communities and 

the people in our area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, learning is a lifelong experience if we are to meet 

the challenges of tomorrow. So I am pleased that the throne 

speech of the second session of the twenty-third legislature has 

set this as a priority: to provide the best public education and 

training at every level; to make sure our teachers are the best 

they can be; to make sure our people are the best educated that 

they can be; and to make sure that our province and our workers 

are the most motivated that they can be; and to make sure that 

we build on the successes like JobStart and Future Skills, and to 

implement a made-in-Saskatchewan training strategy. To make 

sure, in short, that lifelong learning is a reality for the whole 

workforce. Now this is investing in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do this in spite of the Liberals and the Tories. 

What has been their contribution? Well the outstanding Liberal 

contribution to education is a $7 billion cutback to education 

and health to all the provinces. Seven billion dollars less from 

Ottawa to the provinces. 

 

And the outstanding Tory contribution, as we know in 

Saskatchewan, is to saddle us with the largest public debt per 

capita of any province in the country — $850 million a year in 

interest costs on the debt. Eight hundred and fifty million 

dollars. That interest cost charge is about the size of what we 

spend yearly on the entire education in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we do this in spite of the obstacles — this waste, this lack of 

direction by the Liberals and the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, 

our government believes in investing in people through 

education and training. 

 

A third priority, and a most important priority, is reducing child 

poverty and social program redesigning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that our Premier and our government 

is leading the nation in bringing this issue to a national focus. 

Our Premier and our government has called on the federal 

government and legislatures across Canada to take action and to 

take action now, not in 1998 as the federal government budget  

suggests. Children in poverty, children who are hungry, cannot 

be asked to wait until 1998. This is unconscionable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know, jobs are the best way to address 

child poverty and to enable people to escape welfare. We must 

train youth and people for the workforce. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud that our Premier and our 

government will work energetically to implement a national 

child benefit. And if and when we succeed, this will be the first 

national social program in 30 years — a new child benefit plan 

designed to give a break to the working poor so that they can 

feed, clothe, house, educate, and care for their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will also strengthen our action plan for 

children, enhancing support and prevention services. We’ve 

already made great strides with the action plan for children, 

with increased support for early intervention preschool, for 

increased support for community schools, for increased support 

to students in schools with special needs, enhanced measles 

immunity programs, child care initiatives — and this is to name 

only a few. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right across this province, Saskatchewan people 

are hard at work helping their fellow citizens. In Weyburn-Big 

Muddy there is tremendous caring for children and families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased that the people who work in 

the Souris Valley Child Care centre in Weyburn were 

commended in the throne speech. They were commended for 

providing innovative and accessible child care for rural and 

working families during harvest, for night-shift workers, and all 

year round. 

 

I also want to commend The Family Place for the valuable work 

they do in Weyburn and area in support of children and 

families. The child abuse council, the violence intervention 

program, are two other very important programs offered in 

Weyburn, and are protecting our children and our families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, child poverty is a priority. We must attack child 

poverty with all our ability, and it must be now. And it is my 

hope that the federal government will also make it their priority. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we are investing in children, in our families. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, our fourth priority, a stable, secure health system. 

We are investing in health care. We are investing in people. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is years ahead of other jurisdictions in 

health care renewal. And we can now focus on stabilizing and 

securing our health system, which is solid on its new 

foundations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by the changes we have made in health care 

delivery we are protecting medicare for the people of 

Saskatchewan for today and for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Health care changes have not been easy. It has  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

been difficult and some mistakes have been made. But we have 

learned from our mistakes and we are securing the best health 

care system possible for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Health care means providing the best institutional care we can 

when it is needed. But health care is much broader than that. It 

is home care services, it’s immunization programs, it’s good 

nutrition for children and pregnant mothers, it’s good water, it’s 

addiction services, it’s prevention, and it’s education. It’s a 

holistic approach; it’s the well-being of the physical, the mental, 

and the spiritual being of our citizens. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, last year what did the federal government do? 

The federal government cut funding for health care and 

education by $110 million to Saskatchewan. And what did the 

province of Saskatchewan do? We back-filled it, we funded it, a 

hundred per cent. We were the only province in Canada to 

back-fill that loss. 

 

Yes, investing in health care is a priority. And just last summer 

because of the strong provincial economy, good fiscal 

management of the government, we were able to inject an 

additional $40 million into health care. Mr. Speaker, this extra 

funding provided South Central Health District an additional 

$619,000. 

 

This money was well used in our district to deal with salaries, 

with enhancement to community care, for capital purchases of 

medical equipment, for enhanced physiotherapy, for capital 

equipment and program priorities for the rural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday in my speech, the Minister of 

Health and other members of our government visited my 

constituency in November and we toured the South Central 

Health District. And you know, we saw health care renewal 

working. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just over the last few days I’ve had the 

chance to read over a document the South Central Health 

District has put out outlining the health services and the 

initiatives for our area, and I was impressed with what I read. 

The document sets out some of their accomplishment and sets 

out goals as well. And I’d like to review just some of things that 

I found in this document. 

 

Under one section, called health public policy and 

empowerment of Saskatchewan residents . . . empowerment of 

Saskatchewan residents — I think that’s very, very important to 

note. What we have is a health care district that’s 

communicating with the residents in that district, as they are 

right across this province, finding out what the real needs are 

and how to meet those needs. 

 

There are . . . They have addressed that there’s advisory 

committees in every community of our health care district, and 

they undergo consultation with each of those advisory 

committees. They also meet with the local governments. They 

meet with the Weyburn & Area Council on Child Abuse. They 

meet with the communities of our areas to provide the best 

services, the most coordinated services, that there ever has been 

in health care. 

Another heading that was in this document is about improving 

health and reducing inequities. And under this they have several 

initiatives that they’re trying to address: provision of low 

income housing, provision of space to The Family Place in 

Weyburn, pregnant adolescents support program. 

 

They talk about immunization programs, alcohol and drug 

services, full- and part-time mental health clinics throughout 

our constituency which were never there before, speech 

language pathologists — that service for adults, rural 

counselling programs, wellness clinics expanded, stroke 

prevention program, acquired brain injury program, 

alternatives-to-violence training, hired a youth addictions 

worker, added physiotherapists to rural counselling programs, 

funding provided to an apartment living program to reduce 

readmissions of mental health clients. This is health care 

working in our district throughout our communities. 

 

Another area in which they address . . . the heading in this is on 

maintaining essential and appropriate services delivered 

effectively and affordably, and they talk about the health centres 

and their expanded roles. These health services or health centres 

are now providing emergency out-patient care, short-term 

observation, diagnostic services, home care services, long-term 

care services, respite care, rehabilitation therapies, dietician and 

nutrition counselling, and it goes on and on and on. The list 

goes on. 

 

They’ve expanded the emergency response training for health 

care providers. There are currently 100 volunteers in 20 

communities. This is health care and wellness working in our 

area. 

 

They have recruited physicians. We have physicians in 

Pangman, in Bengough, in Radville, and there are new 

physicians also in Weyburn. Respite care has been expanded to 

all of the facilities. 

 

Acute services in Weyburn has also expanded some of their 

services. They have specialist programs that they’d never had 

before. They’ve increased the use of day surgery. They’ve 

improved the palliative care services. They’ve improved 

planning and coordination systems to enhance follow-up after 

discharge. Again, this is health care working in our area. 

 

And I could go on and on through this document about 

supportive care services and some of the programs that are 

happening in our long-term care facilities; how adult day 

wellness programs are coordinated with the long-term care 

facilities; about an acquired brain injury program that’s being 

instituted. This is in partnership with SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance). There is a lot of good news, good 

services happening in health care in our area. 

 

Home-based services have also expanded. There are so many 

health improvement initiatives that it . . . I know that the time 

doesn’t allow me to tell you all about them. 

 

But there are good things happening in health care. Our first 

responder program has a total of 100 responders now available 

in 20 communities. First responders have responded to 95 calls 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

since their inception. There’s funding to support a summer day 

camp for handicapped children. There is good news. 

 

And one of the most interesting things I felt, is that the youth 

addictions worker that has just been recently hired was at . . . 

had George Chuvalo in Weyburn at a recent . . . the community 

brought him in. He spoke to the school groups. He addressed a 

number of the concerns that youth are facing. And the youth 

addictions worker was there. They’re meeting with the children. 

We’re seeing the whole community and the community of 

Weyburn and area all being involved in tackling some of these 

extreme problems and challenges that are facing our young 

people. 

 

Like I said, this document is just full of so much good news — 

good news about health care; good news about wellness. And 

this is just in South Central, but I know that this is happening 

right across our province in all of the districts. 

 

Another issue that is happening in South Central — that is 

taking on public consultation. We have consultation that has 

never, ever occurred before because there’s a capital 

management plan being discussed in Weyburn on a facilities 

study. And they’re meeting with the community and trying to 

decide what’s the best way to deliver health care services in 

Weyburn. And I have confidence in the South Central Health 

Board, the community of Weyburn, and working with the 

provincial government, that we will come with the best solution 

for the future of health care in Weyburn. 

 

Just in the last week or two I’ve had two experiences of meeting 

people that they said they want to talk about health care with 

me. And they had good examples to tell me. One was about an 

older man that had had a hip that had been bothering and he’d 

left it and left his hip and hadn’t gone in to see the doctor. And 

finally his family said, you’ve got to get in and see about this. 

He went in on a Tuesday to see his doctor, he was referred to a 

specialist on a Wednesday, he got a call on the Sunday, he had 

his hip replacement done the next Monday. Within a week he 

was diagnosed and his hip was replaced. 

 

Another senior was telling me how he’d had some problem with 

his heart. He saw the doctor in Weyburn, was referred to a 

specialist, had treatment done, and was back playing pool in the 

seniors’ centre within a week. 

 

These are good news stories. Health care is working. 

 

I just want to commend the work that South Central Health 

District has done in delivering excellent health care services. I 

believe health boards, as I’ve said, right across this province are 

doing exceptionally good work. And it’s with the people. 

 

But what do the Liberals have to say about health care? Their 

leader says he can find hundreds of millions of dollars in 

savings from the health budget. Their leader says that Liberals 

would allow two-tier, for profit, private clinics with the 

taxpayer picking up the tab. And their leader says community 

health care is too complicated to discuss through the democratic 

process. So out go the elected health boards. So maybe instead 

of 30 elected health boards, he wants to go back to over 400 

health boards. Or maybe he doesn’t think the public should 

really know how health care is running. Maybe he wants to go 

to a system maybe just in which doctors run the system. 

 

It doesn’t sound like he’s defending health care — at least to 

most people in Saskatchewan. No, Mr. Speaker, this is not 

protecting medicare, that is not defending health care. Mr. 

Speaker, our government, our party, we built medicare, we 

saved it, and we’re taking it forward to the 21st century. We’re 

investing in health, in our people, as a top priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Our fifth priority is an integrated 

transportation strategy. As the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, highways and transportation is a crucial issue. Our 

transportation system faces unprecedented pressures from the 

elimination of the Crow benefit, rail line deregulation and 

abandonment. 

 

So now we’re got a real fine mess in transportation thanks to 

the Liberal government in Ottawa and their withdrawal from 

transportation. Railroads now have farmers and shippers by the 

throat. They can charge whatever they want. And in the 

meantime, our roads are taking a beating as shippers and 

farmers look for cheaper alternatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to support the motion last Friday in 

the emergency debate which demanded that the federal 

government take steps to address the current backlog by 

immediately passing legislation to hold the railways and others 

responsible for the delay — monetarily responsible, including 

the demurrage charges — so that all the costs incurred by 

prairie farmers will be reimbursed in full. 

 

Now this motion was sent on to the Prime Minister of Canada 

and to our federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale. And so 

what has been the response? Well just this week the response is 

more money for the railroads, higher rates, not money for the 

farmers as their demurrage charges are increasing. 

 

I have been getting desperate phone calls from farmers in my 

area that are frustrated because they cannot move their grain to 

market, especially those farmers who are on branch lines, which 

are experiencing the hardest hit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they know who’s accountable for this. They 

know who’s accountable. It’s not the farmers. It’s the federal 

government and it’s the railways — not the farmers of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy and not the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are 63,750 reasons why the grain isn’t 

moving. That’s the amount of money CP (Canadian Pacific) rail 

gave to the Liberal Party. Mr. Speaker, the farmers in my 

constituency cannot afford that political contribution and they 

should not be penalized by it. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals have turned their back on 

farmers. They’ve abandoned farmers; they’ve abandoned 

transportation. 

 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 189 

But what do the provincial Liberals say? Oh, they say they 

support their federal cousins. They actually have also said that 

we should take all $400 million from the gas tax and put it to 

highways. Well that’s a $200 million increase in spending. 

 

Now let’s just remember what else the provincial Liberals have 

said. They’ve also said there should be tax cuts. Now how does 

this work? Spend more with less revenue. Now I think that adds 

up to deficit budgeting. And the people of Saskatchewan never 

want to see a deficit budget in this province again, because we 

all know, we all know that a deficit is a deferred tax and that 

you pay it with interest. 

 

(1130) 

 

But isn’t it interesting that the provincial Liberals never asked 

the federal Liberals for their share of the gas tax to go to the 

potholes in our roads. And isn’t it interesting that the member 

from Wood River, who sets up a hot line, doesn’t remind his 

federal counterparts that if the federal government put in their 

share, or even matched the share that the provincial government 

puts in, we wouldn’t have any potholes. 

 

And just yesterday we heard from an hon. Tory member 

complaining also about the roads. And I just want to remind 

members, especially those Tories, about a little bit of history. 

 

In 1982 Mr. Devine and the Tories made a great pledge during 

that campaign. Elect me and we will abolish the gas tax. Well, 

they were elected. And they did away with it. And when they 

did away with the gas tax, they gave up $130 million a year 

each and every year in public revenue for more than five years 

as they ran deficits. In total they reduced gas tax revenues by 

about $750 million. That was added directly to the provincial 

debt. Worse still, then they racked up $1.9 billion in compound 

interest on that debt, adding further to the provincial debt. 

 

So the Tories put us $2.6 billion in the hole through their tax 

gas break. And that 2.6 billion is now costing you and me and 

the people of Saskatchewan more than $200 million on ongoing 

interest costs — $200 million a year in interest costs by doing 

away with the gas tax. That is more than our entire budget for 

highways. 

 

And now the Tories say, well you know the highways need 

some repair. Well it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out 

that if you give away the money, you won’t be able to keep the 

highways in proper shape. 

 

So where we are is a federal Liberal government privatizing the 

ports, privatizing the airports, eliminating the Crow rate, 

deregulating and privatizing the railways, abandoning the Port 

of Churchill, abandoning the farmers of Saskatchewan. They’re 

right out of the game. And Canada is the only federal country in 

the western world without a national, cost-shared highway 

program. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have no federal support. We have 

privatization. We have deregulation. And we have give-away of 

the gas tax. And we know we must have good highways and an 

efficient, effective transportation system in our province. 

Therefore we need to have a comprehensive, integrated 

transportation strategy. When the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation met with communities in my constituency, we 

discussed the importance of working together in a partnership 

approach, that area transportation planning committees should 

be set up to define the needs of the region and ensure that all 

partners are working together — the local governments, the 

communities, the farmers, the industry — working together to 

provide the best options we can in transportation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we must introduce a comprehensive, 

integrated transportation strategy. It must be carefully thought 

out for the 21st century. And we are doing that, Mr. Speaker. 

We are investing in transportation for the 21st century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are our priorities. First, to create jobs and 

build the economy. Secondly, to strengthen education and 

training at every level. Thirdly, to reduce child poverty and 

redesign social programs; to build a stable, secure, high quality 

health care system. And to implement a comprehensive 

transportation strategy. And we must achieve these priorities 

with a commitment to efficient government, responsible public 

finance, and orderly reduction of the public debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our agenda is one of hope; it’s one of optimism. 

We are investing in people, in jobs, in our communities. We are 

preparing for the 21st century with compassion and with 

cooperation and with the communities and the people of this 

fine province. 

 

As the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, it is my honour to 

support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed a privilege to stand in this Assembly and to just make a 

few comments regarding the Speech from the Throne that was 

presented about a week ago today to this Assembly and drawing 

us as members back into the Assembly for the spring sitting of 

the Legislative Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also be remiss if I did not extend a few thank you’s. 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the time that you and 

I had of visiting communities in my riding — and I know some 

of the other members have already mentioned it — going to 

communities like Whitewood and meeting with students in the 

community of Whitewood, the press; and then in the 

community of Moosomin. 

 

And as well, as I stand here this morning, Mr. Speaker, there 

are people in . . . the constituents in the community of 

Moosomin and surrounding area that are going to have the 

privilege, if they have cable available, of watching this 

proceeding. Which, Mr. Speaker, actually brings a bit of a sober 

thought to us as members as we conduct our business in this 

Assembly. 

 

But I trust that through the medium of television certainly more 

people across this province will become more informed about  



190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

how the process of the Assembly works, how laws come into 

being, and how each one of us as members conduct ourselves 

and represent our constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the throne speech the other 

day, unfortunately . . . I was listening very carefully, and I came 

to the conclusion that this was maybe one speech that . . . one of 

the first throne speeches, if you will, that one would have to 

take serious consideration as to whether or not this was a proper 

format in the province of Saskatchewan; whether it’s a 

productive process. 

 

Because I didn’t really find a lot in this throne speech that 

would give the residents or the taxpayers of this province 

something to really be pleased about or something to really be 

joyous in. 

 

As the member of Weyburn-Big Muddy has just gone through 

and basically told us why we should be so pleased to have this 

throne speech presented and what it is offering to the people of 

Saskatchewan, I think of my communities and I think of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. I think of people in the riding and 

I’m quite positive that . . . And just listening to and talking to 

individuals at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), talking to individuals at the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 

that’s taking place this week and talking to other residents, I’m 

quite positive most people, as they were listening, would have 

thought: is that really what a throne speech is? 

 

It seemed to me that was one of the most hollow delivered 

speeches that we’ve really had. It really didn’t have anything. 

The government made some indications that it was going to 

give us some real . . . provide some direction through this 

throne speech. But there really wasn’t any. 

 

What direction . . . The minister of Weyburn-Big Muddy is 

trying to tell us that there was some real direction given in the 

areas of highways and transportation. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

listened very carefully. Now the Minister of Finance is saying, 

well wait till the budget speech next week and maybe we’ll 

have something. 

 

I guess, as the SARM delegates indicated the other day, they’re 

certainly waiting. We waited through the throne speech; there 

was really nothing other than a commitment to a transportation 

policy. Well, Mr. Speaker, what that tells me, is it just another 

area of government fluff and government hype just telling us, 

well we’re going to put in place a committee now to design a 

policy. 

 

And the unfortunate part is when you have another policy or 

another group of individuals sitting together to design a policy, 

when will you finally come up with something constructive? 

Probably not until after the next provincial election. It’s a way 

of basically . . . a way for the government to say to the residents 

of Saskatchewan, we’re going to address this concern; we’ve 

heard your concerns; we understand the problems; however, we 

don’t have any answers. We still don’t have any answers. We’ll 

put a commission together. Maybe we’ll have some answers in 

the future. And I can see us, just as the Minister of Justice  

indicated today, it’ll be, well it’s two weeks down the road or 

maybe that’s another year down the road or whatever. There’s 

no real, no real commitment. 

 

And I can see that happening, that it’s going to take us awhile to 

get to a place of putting together a transportation program and 

policy, something that, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, the 

taxpayers of this province can’t really wait for. 

 

The road system in this province, and especially with the 

weather conditions we’ve had this past winter, will not survive 

the ongoing destruction and abuse that the road system is taking 

and survive to even meet the year 1999 when we expect there 

will probably be another provincial election. 

 

So it’s imperative that the government give some serious 

thought. And if the government wants to design a policy, I don’t 

think they have to wait one or . . . let’s say six months or a year 

or two years. Talk to delegates at SARM. Talk to this rural 

body of individuals who are out there on an ongoing basis, who 

run their individual RMs efficiently, effectively, and with 

balanced budgets; who put money into road programs that 

enhance the infrastructure across this province. 

 

And I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Highways 

would listen to these individuals, if the Minister of Finance 

would listen, they would be able to give some solid and sound 

ideas that really in the long run would not be that expensive but 

would certainly bring a positive influence and create a positive 

impact in transportation and highway maintenance and repair in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  So, Mr. Speaker, we do have means; we do have 

individuals and we do have organizations that certainly can be 

consulted with. 

 

Now I find it very interesting that the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy would suggest that by removing the gas 

tax in 1982 it would create such a severe economic fiscal 

problem for the province of Saskatchewan. It’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that 5 per cent, I believe, at that time on . . . actually it 

was more; tax on gas was much higher than that. 

 

But it’s interesting that would create such a negative economic 

impact. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it, there 

was actually more tax dollars in people’s pockets whereby they 

were able to put it in, and through the economy, that dollar 

came back into the economy, into the coffers of the province. 

 

But if you want to look at areas that even in 1982 the 

government elected of that day had to deal with, they had to 

deal with massive portions of land that were purchased by the 

former government, money borrowed outside of this province. 

Money that the premier of the day likes to talk about as having 

to pay interest to corporations and companies and lending 

institutions that don’t even reside in this province. Well it was 

money that was invested and money that was borrowed by the 

then government of Mr. Blakeney, and then of course had to be 

dealt with by the elected government through the ‘80s. 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

It was the Potash Corporation that was set up — a corporation 

that was losing money on a . . . not only on an annual basis, but 

massive dollars on a daily basis. It was the Prince Albert pulp 

and paper company. 

 

So for the sake of viewers who may be watching today, Mr. 

Speaker, the debt and the deficit we’re dealing with today — 

which the Premier seems to always like to make smaller than it 

really is compared to what he used to do when he used to sit on 

this side of the Assembly — is as a result of not just the ‘80s 

period, Mr. Speaker. I think we all have to recognize the fact 

that it started back, possibly started back in the Liberal years of 

Mr. Pearson nationally. That’s when it started. 

 

It started certainly before the Conservatives were elected in ’82, 

and it continues to grow through the NDP governments of the 

1990s. And while we all recognize we need to address the 

problems of debt, Mr. Speaker, at the same time I think, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes down to it, we need to realize what 

areas of responsibility governments should have. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to health care 

in the province of Saskatchewan, there are a lot of residents 

across this province, not just in the rural areas like a lot of 

people like to portray but even in our two large urban centres, 

who would not agree with the minister . . . or the member from 

Weyburn Big-Muddy, or even the Health minister about the fact 

that health care has been saved. Saved from what, one has to 

ask? What has health care been saved from? 

 

But my colleagues and I had the privilege yesterday of meeting 

with a group of people from the cooperative movement across 

this province. And I would suggest to you that there is a 

cooperative element working in this province through 

cooperative health clinics that could offer some very good ideas 

to this Health minister and to this government as to ways of 

providing efficient and effective primary health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in fact when I was talking to a couple of the individuals, I 

had suggested to them that they need to take the time to let 

residents across this province know what they’re doing in 

Saskatoon, in Regina, in . . . I believe it’s Prince Albert there’s 

a clinic, and a couple of other clinics. And I just don’t 

remember what the other two were. But just point out what they 

are doing and the services they are offering to individuals 

through their cooperative health clinic program. 

 

(1145) 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, if residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan and other areas really became aware of it, we 

might find even more innovative ideas and ways of which we 

can preserve and maintain health services in communities that 

may have even lost them today without a significant cost 

increase to the province of Saskatchewan or to the Department 

of Health. So there are some good ideas out there. We do have 

people with good ideas. 

 

The minister and the Lieutenant Governor in the Speech from 

the Throne and the government via the Speech from the Throne  

told us they’re doing more for education. Well I would suggest 

to you that communities like Windthorst, Glenavon, Francis, 

and Sedley in the area I represent would have to question what 

is the government doing to enhance education as they grapple 

with the fact that their schools may face closure in the near 

future. And it’s a question that has come up in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why are they facing this fact? What are some of 

the problems that they are facing that they have to deal with? 

 

Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker. One of the problems that 

they have to deal with is the fact that this government, while 

they were in opposition, suggested that when there was 

basically a 60/40 split, in provincial funding of 60 per cent and 

local funding of 40 per cent back in the late ‘80s, the current 

Minister of Education suggested that wasn’t enough, we had to 

put more into education. We had to make more of a 

commitment to education. 

 

What do we see today, Mr. Speaker? We see that since 1991 

that actually the 60/40 split provincial/local has turned and it’s 

now 40 per cent provincial, 60 per cent local. So more of the 

funding of education has been put on the backs of the local 

taxpayers. And that’s another area of concern to SARM 

delegates — the fact that they have to put up more. And yet it 

appears that they have even less of an opportunity and less of an 

ability to determine how their tax dollars are spent, and to have 

some input as to whether that educational facility remains in 

their community. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are many innovative 

ways that we as Saskatchewan people and residents can use to 

provide educational services. And I don’t believe that closing 

schools is the real answer at the end of the day. I don’t believe 

that bus rides that increased from maybe a 20- or 30-minute ride 

by an extra 45 minutes are the answer. That’s once a day. That 

would be basically an hour and a half a day of an increase. For 

some students that may even be a minimal amount. Some other 

students may be facing more. 

 

We have distance education available. We have . . . The Scenic 

Valley School Division has put forward a proposal and we’re 

looking forward to the study, as they complete this school year, 

as to what the four-day school week has done in their 

educational division, and how it’s . . . whether or not it’s 

enhanced. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as I talk to individuals across the Scenic 

Valley school area, most people are very pleased with what has 

taken place. Many people are pleased with how the students 

have responded to that program. And I know there are other 

educational districts that are looking at Scenic Valley and are 

consulting with them and are taking a positive approach and 

view as to possibly implementing that program in their 

divisions, and thereby looking at the ways in which they can 

enhance educational opportunities as well as protecting the 

schools that exist in those communities today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education, while the 

government made some indications they were going to do more 

— they’re investing in the quality of education and training —  



192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

the facts are today we have yet to see that. I guess the proof will 

be in the pudding as to what really transpires and what really 

comes about as a result of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also listened with interest when the government 

talked about ag diversification in the throne speech debate — 

agricultural diversification. It almost seemed like that’s a new 

word, a new concept, like it hadn’t been thought of before; this 

province hasn’t moved in that direction. 

 

I guess maybe we need a history lesson going back to the 1980s 

when the former premier talked about diversifying this province 

because he could see, as an envisionary he could see the demise 

of the Crow benefit and the transportation system. And the fact 

that, if we’re looking at real jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, take a look at where the real jobs 

have come in. 

 

The real jobs in this province have come from diversification, 

specifically in the areas of agriculture, small business, small 

manufacturing that has grown up in this province. We have 

agricultural companies in this province today, Mr. Speaker, that 

are known worldwide, that are trading worldwide as a result of 

positive policies. And I have to, I have to actually boast a little 

bit, Mr. Speaker, by saying a lot of those policies came as a 

result of policies and directives and decisions, made during 

some very difficult times in the 1980s, to encourage 

diversification. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government is right to recognize . . . in 

recognizing that this is something that we need to continue to 

encourage, and I give the government credit for that. And the 

fact that they acknowledge that and that they are certainly 

willing to work with communities and local people and 

investing in this province, because that’s where the jobs will 

come in the future. And that’s where the jobs will continue to 

be made available so that young people across this province can 

look at Saskatchewan as a place to call home. A place, as the 

government continues to brag about, the best place to live in all 

of Canada, while Canada is recognized as one of the best places 

in the world. And I truly agree with that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite thankful for the fact that I had . . . 

My forefathers looked at coming to this country. Although as I 

make my way through the snow and the cold in the middle of 

March, sometimes I begin to wonder, but you know, it still 

beats the floods they’ve had in the States, or it still beats the 

earthquakes they’ve had in other parts of the world. We still 

have a lot to be thankful for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the business community of this province 

asks for a tax roll-back in the E&H (education and health) tax, 

they do it not because they are saying to the government, forget 

about the deficit. They do it because they are looking at the 

economic impact, not only in their businesses but in this 

province, of a high taxation policy. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it’s very imperative that the Minister of Finance listen very 

closely to the concerns that are being raised. 

 

And while the government would say they can’t reduce taxes 

because that’s revenue lost, Mr. Speaker, by creating more jobs  

you have revenue generated rather than revenue lost. And if a 

reduction of 1 or 2 per cent in the provincial sales tax creates an 

avenue whereby businesses can be more competitive and create 

jobs, then I think that has to be viewed and that has to be looked 

at very strongly. 

 

Because certainly in my area of the province, even though 

we’re along the Manitoba border and there isn’t a big 

difference, there’s enough of a difference, Mr. Speaker, 

whereby residents will look at going to Manitoba and they’ll 

come back with purchases because they saved a few cents on 

their education tax. And certainly the Alberta model is one that 

we would all hope to achieve at the end of the day, whereby 

there’s no tax on the E&H system. 

 

And the Minister of Highways talks about health care fees. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I talked to residents . . . I was just in Alberta 

not that long ago, and they’re still more than prepared to pay 

health care fees and maintain and have access to the service 

they have, than what we have by our taxation policy in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that I want to talk about is the fact 

this government seems to be hung up with the fact that they’ve 

always got to blame somebody else. Why don’t they start 

looking at the fingers that are pointing back at them every time 

they point the finger at somebody else? They like to point it at 

the federal government — and rightly so. There are areas where 

the federal government must be held accountable for their 

policies. But also, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got to look at the fact 

that maybe it’s time they pointed at themselves a little bit. 

 

Local governments, taxpayers of this province — while the 

Minister of Finance has continually told us we haven’t 

increased your taxes, people don’t believe it any more, because 

every time they turn around, there’s less in a hip pocket. 

There’s less money available for the services that they would 

like to purchase. 

 

This government has, if you will, Mr. Speaker, this government 

has led the way in offloading taxes and offloading services on 

local governments and thereby forcing taxpayers through the 

property tax system to pay more, or pay more through the E&H 

tax system. They may not have increased the personal income 

tax that much, Mr. Speaker. You don’t have to increase it that 

much when you’re taking major increases and people see their 

increases in power bills, increases in their energy bills, and 

increases in their telephone bills to the tune of millions of 

dollars that come back into the coffers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a problem with Crown corporations if 

they’re providing a service at cost; but they have become a 

revenue-generator in the province of Saskatchewan. They’re a 

tax burden on the province of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Saskatchewan. The only area that has maybe given up some of 

that tax burden is the telephone system, as private companies 

have been allowed to operate in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a lot of initiatives that the 

people of Saskatchewan have worked with and have come up  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

with to address concerns. And I would like to commend the 

SADD (Students Against Drinking and Driving) group, or 

students against drunk driving, for the suggestions that they 

have put forward over the past number of years, and for the 

educational program that they have formulated to educate 

people across this province as to the problems associated with 

drinking and driving. 

 

And I think as a result of that, just via the media the other day, 

if I’m not mistaken, we’ve seen a major decrease in the number 

of charges for drinking and driving. And I think and I believe 

that is very positive, and I believe young people involved in this 

program should take some heart in knowing that because 

they’ve taken a stand, because they’ve provided an avenue 

whereby they can inform even their peers, that we have had a 

reduction in the number of fatalities and the number of drinking 

and driving charges. 

 

And we must compliment people for that. I think many times 

we forget to give compliments where they are due and 

compliment people for the work they have done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but there is one area when it comes to SGI that I 

have a major concern and I have to raise that — and I’m 

pleased the minister is available right now to hear this — and 

that’s regarding the no-fault insurance program. And the 

minister is quite well aware of the fact of the problems being 

faced by a family who tragically lost a daughter in our 

constituency on their way as they went to watch their son in a 

major curling competition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing that we as MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) and legislators in this 

province do — and I hope the government really takes a serious 

look at this as well — if there’s one thing that we do, I trust we 

will seriously look at the no-fault insurance program. There are 

aspects of the no-fault insurance program that are positive; but 

there’s one area . . . and it doesn’t affect a lot of people, but for 

the people it affects, it affects them immensely. 

 

And the Markwart family are facing that tragedy. They are 

facing the tragedy of unfortunately putting their house up for 

sale and looking at moving into a lower neighbourhood because 

they’ve been caught in that limbo area of the no-fault insurance 

program that doesn’t give them the ability to get compensation 

for the loss that they have incurred as a result of that accident 

and also the trauma in dealing with the problems. 

 

And I trust that the minister and his colleagues are looking at 

this and maybe by working together, we can come up with 

something that helps people who fall between the cracks, 

because I think that’s what happened here. I think in many areas 

no-fault insurance has worked well. But there’s one area of that 

program that it is not working and I would like to see us as 

legislators deal with that so we don’t leave a handful of people 

out on the limb. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just lately we’ve had a lot of criticisms levelled at 

young people. And while I complimented the group involved in 

the SADD program, this past week we had the thefts of vehicles 

— and certainly in the city of Regina — rose to a new level of  

. . . a new high. And I guess what we have suggested, Mr. 

Speaker, as an opposition, it’s time that there was some, 

actually some real penalties made available and some ways of 

addressing this problem that held people accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder . . . And just the other day or 

just yesterday as I was having coffee with an individual, this 

person told me that his fiancée had come down to meet him and 

they’d been in the mall having coffee and she went out while he 

went to do some business in the mall. She had gone out to get 

into her car to go back to her job or place of employment and 

she come running right back in. Her car was gone. Her car had 

been stolen while just . . . in the 15 minutes. This is the middle 

of the afternoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’m trying to bring out here is the fact 

that many of the incidents of car thefts have been conducted by 

minors. Now one would ask, why is a young offender on the 

streets when it’s school on? Why are they not in school? 

Shouldn’t they be getting their education? Or the 2 and the 3 

and the 4 o’clock in the morning, shouldn’t they be at home in 

bed? 

 

(1200) 

 

Where does the responsibility lie? Does the responsibility lie 

with the law enforcement officers of the city to try and bring 

some order to this problem? Is it their responsibility? 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, have we taken away the responsibility from 

parents to administer discipline? Have we taken that 

responsibility away from schools to try and encourage and put 

forward an education and make sure the students are in school 

getting their education? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. But it would seem to me that what I 

have seen over the past number of years, we basically, Mr. 

Speaker, have taken away more and more of the responsibility 

of parents to be accountable and to be responsible for their 

children’s actions. 

 

And as a result, our law enforcement officers are . . . their hands 

are tied when they have to deal with the circumstances. And I 

guess I was really made aware of it when the headline in the 

paper was about the mother decrying the fact that an officer’s 

gun had gone off while he was trying to apprehend a suspect in 

one of these car thefts. 

 

Now I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, if that parent would have had as 

much concern for the child and made sure that they were either 

at home doing something, if it was after school or in school, 

that officer would not have been put in that situation. 

 

So I think it is imperative, number one, that the Minister of 

Justice not just say it isn’t his responsibility for the Young 

Offenders Act, which I realize it’s a responsibility of the federal 

government. But I think it’s imperative that this legislature and 

this minister and this government really make it very clear to 

the federal minister, Mr. Rock, although I suspect he doesn’t 

really want to listen — he hasn’t listened very well in the past, 

and I’m not sure he’ll want to listen in the future — but make it  



194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

very clear to the federal government that something has to be 

done about the Young Offenders Act. 

 

And number two, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that there 

be appropriate penalties put in place, especially when we have 

repeat offenders. It’s almost like they are snubbing authority by 

their actions. I think we need some real penalties put in place. 

 

I also think, Mr. Speaker, and believe that it’s time parents took 

responsibility for their young people as well. I think I have that 

responsibility to make sure that I train my children in a 

reasonable way and give them some direction that will cause 

them to grow up as model citizens. I believe that for all parents 

as well. And I believe a lot of parents really feel that way. 

 

But you know, one thing I found out. We had that related to us 

the day of the throne speech by a parent who feels . . . who 

brought the point up that the fear out there is you don’t dare 

administer discipline, you don’t use the strap if you have to if a 

child is not paying attention, because that child may go to the 

phone, call 911 and accuse you of child abuse. And something 

has to be done to address this problem. 

 

There is nothing wrong, Mr. Speaker, with applying rules and 

having some guidelines and some disciplinary actions available 

if those rules are broken. If you break the laws of the land, there 

are rules that say that if you break that law you’re held 

accountable. 

 

Well I think in homes, parents need to set some guidelines. But 

they also need the tools. And if we as legislators take away 

those tools, how are they going to help build the generation of 

tomorrow? And what are we going to have tomorrow? 

 

So it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that while this throne 

speech and the government would suggest it offered a lot of 

alternatives, there was a lot missing in the throne speech. 

 

It really didn’t have, as I indicated earlier, it didn’t have a lot to 

offer in the area of transportation. It didn’t have a lot to offer in 

the area of education so that educators and the taxpayers, the 

taxpaying public of this province, could really feel comfortable 

that we have a handle in the province, in education. Or that 

communities such as the Windthorsts and Glenavons can feel 

comfortable that they will have a school facility to continue to 

operate. 

 

It didn’t really offer a lot in the area of health care and access to 

services. While the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy did talk 

about one or two individuals that gained immediate access, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you of numerous individuals who are still 

waiting for specific services like hip replacement. 

 

And for the individual out in my area who’s been on the 

waiting-list for nine months, they’re going to say, well how did 

that person get in? I’ve been waiting for a bed and all of a 

sudden I find somebody else is in within a week; what’s going 

on? Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of things missing out of this 

throne speech. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the next few weeks it  

will be the responsibility of my colleagues and I to bring these 

points forward to remind the public of what the government as 

even opposition members promise them and what they voted for 

in 1991 and 1995; to hold the government accountable but to 

also provide and bring forward some positive, responsible 

attitudes and ideas that we can work with to provide a better 

Saskatchewan in which to live. I thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

certainly is a pleasure to be able to enter into the debate on the 

throne speech. And I’d like to begin first of all of course by 

complimenting the mover of the throne speech, the member 

from Swift Current, and certainly the seconder, the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast, for their thoughtful insight and 

comments. 

 

And I again want to welcome you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

certainly the Speaker to the Assembly. And if I could, I want to 

take just a minute and offer a bit of praise and compliments to 

the Speaker who did a tour through the province, and most 

specifically through our constituency. 

 

I think it certainly helps to dissipate some of the cynicism about 

politicking and the political process and all of us as politicians, 

whether we’re provincial or federal. Other than now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, etching in the minds for ever of the young 

children in grade 1 and 2 from my home town of Goodsoil, that 

Mr. Speaker really is not a politician but rather a pirate. I think 

that we may well have accomplished something. 

 

May I also take this opportunity to welcome the member from 

North Battleford. I don’t believe that the correct party was 

elected in that constituency, but I know that he will do his very 

best to represent one of the nicer regions of Saskatchewan. And 

I know that he will do his best, as I said, to commit to the 

people of Saskatchewan to represent them with honour and 

dignity. 

 

I certainly want to welcome and greet the new pages this year. I 

think that we tend to take too often for granted the people 

around us and all of the things that they do. And I would be 

remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I didn’t — especially since she’s 

here — acknowledge and thank the work that my constituency 

assistants do for me while I’m gone when the session is on: 

Susan Karpenko, and certainly Judy Eisel who is looking after 

the office back in Meadow Lake today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  And may I begin by saying also that I would 

like to say hello to the people of Meadow Lake. This is the first 

time that the legislature . . . the proceedings in the legislature 

are being covered live in the constituency of Meadow Lake. I 

think it’s wonderful that this process is now in place and that it 

allows for the democratic process to be brought just a little bit 

closure to the people back at home, not only to those who live 

in close proximity to Regina. 

 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  You know it really quite astounds me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that it is nearly five and a half years since I’ve 

taken my spot in this Assembly, and how time flies. A lot has 

been accomplished in five and a half years. 

 

We now have a balanced budget. We have debt reduction. We 

have health reform. We’ve got job creation. We’ve got 

population growth. We’ve got unprecedented gas and oil 

exploration. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a wife. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Now to the good people of Saskatchewan, I 

want to say that balanced budgets and health reform are a 

priority of mine. To my wife, I want to say that if it hadn’t been 

for balanced budgets and health reform not being a priority of 

mine, I may not have run, and we would never have met and 

we’d have never married. So I hope she accepts that logic. 

 

But believe me, Mr. Speaker, our government is prepared for 

the 21st century as we continue to invest in people. I believe 

that it truly is a time for hope and optimism in this province, 

and I think that nowhere is that hope and optimism more 

apparent than in the constituency that I represent, the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. 

 

I’d like to talk briefly if I could, Mr. Speaker, about my 

constituency. Members will know that I probably represent one 

of the most spectacularly beautiful parts of the province, and as 

a result, we have many visitors to that area. Recent statistics, 

Mr. Speaker, will show that over 500 residents of the Meadow 

Lake constituency are employed directly in tourism-related 

industries. This is 7.5 per cent of the total employed residents of 

the Meadow Lake area. 

 

There are 95 tourism businesses and events operating in the 

Meadow Lake constituency, and that’s not including 

restaurants, gas stations, or the majority of retail operations. 

Visitors to the area spend an estimated $25.3 million directly in 

our constituency, and the future looks even brighter. 

 

When our government sets jobs as a priority, we deliver, and 

that certainly is reflected in the Meadow Lake constituency. 

 

As many members have said before me and as many will say 

for years to come, and they’ll all be right, Mr. Speaker, this 

truly is an honour to be standing here in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan representing our respective constituencies. It is 

my regret that everyone in the province doesn’t get this 

opportunity so that they could have some sense of what it’s like. 

It certainly is a learning experience beyond comparison, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to the good people of the constituency of Meadow Lake, 

thank you once again for having the confidence in me to allow 

me to represent you here, and for the wonderful educational 

opportunity that you’ve afforded me. 

 

I have learned as much about myself, Mr. Speaker, as I have 

about others. And I have met some of the finest people in the 

country here in Saskatchewan. And I certainly have established 

many friendships, both on this side and on the other side of the 

Assembly. 

 

I alluded earlier, Mr. Speaker, to the amount of change in our 

world. It is not like I’m going to talk about the good old days 

back when I was young not so very many years ago, but let me 

reflect just a little bit. 

 

When I was younger there were no compact discs, there were 

no remote controls for TVs, computers took up nearly an entire 

office. You physically had to go down to your bank or credit 

union to access your account. Kids wore their baseball hats with 

the bill frontwards. Come to think of it, as I look across at the 

third party, that may well be where backward bills first started. I 

digress. 

 

For the most part, Mr. Speaker, people had the same jobs for an 

entire lifetime. And believe it or not, there were even some 

Liberals who believed in medicare. My goodness, how things 

have changed. 

 

It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to compare the way our 

government faces changes, opposed to both the opposition 

parties. Our response has been to meet and to consult with the 

people of Saskatchewan and work together towards the year 

2000. Their idea is for government to disappear, for elected 

people to get out of the way — all of this veiled in bringing 

democracy closer to the people. 

 

I’ll tell you what I think it means, Mr. Speaker, what their 

agenda really is. They want government out of the way so that 

big business and the corporate elite and their corporate friends 

can run the province. That’s their philosophy in life. 

 

We however, Mr. Speaker, believe that government has to 

reform itself, restructure itself to meet the current realities, both 

structural and financial. And we believe that we are doing that, 

and we are going to do it in consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We are not going to follow, Mr. Speaker, and in some ways, 

Mr. Speaker, I would argue we’re not even going to lead. But 

we are going to work hand in hand with the people of 

Saskatchewan. In health care, in social services, in education, 

and in all areas of government, we are heading towards the 

millennium together. 

 

The Premier has asked the opposition members many times to 

come and join us — work with us as we work with the people 

of Saskatchewan for the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Help us go forward, he says. 

 

The third party has been very predictable . . . the third party, I 

should say, has been very predictable, but at least consistent. 

Take us back to 1929 they say, back to the days of child labour, 

of sweatshops, of no women’s rights. Take us to Alabama and 

to Arkansas and even to Alberta, some of them say. I say, Mr. 

Speaker, take us anywhere but there. Let me say to the Leader 

of the Third Party, 1929 wasn’t a good year in 1929 and it’s  



196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

certainly not going to be a good year in the year 2001. 

 

The official opposition, I want to talk about them for a minute, 

Mr. Speaker. Where do they stand on anything? They, like the 

Tories, are opposed to almost anything that we do. They think 

being opposition, Mr. Speaker, means to offer no alternatives 

and to oppose everything. Anything the federal government 

does, Mr. Speaker, they say is okay, especially if the federal 

government is attacking our province, the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

How, Mr. Speaker, can those members say that they represent 

Saskatchewan constituencies? Their buddies in Ottawa cut 

health care, and what do they say? Nothing. They stand up and 

cheer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1215) 

 

Paul Martin and his colleagues say that we need jobs, but no job 

training programs are there. And they applaud. 

 

The federal Liberals abandon any responsibility for 

transportation in the West, and they say, right on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The federal government throws several thousand non-treaty 

welfare recipients off their rolls and onto ours, and they say 

that’s the way to balance budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is proud to be a province in the 

country of Canada. Saskatchewan people believe very strong in 

our federal system. We are grateful that we can contribute to the 

founding of those institutions which have made Canada the best 

country in the world in which to live and which have made 

Saskatchewan the best province in that country. 

 

This is where medicare began in the face of fierce Liberal and 

Tory resistance, and it is now accepted worldwide. 

 

We believe in national standards, Mr. Speaker, in health care, in 

education, and in social services, and we believe in a system 

that we have developed to preserve those standards. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, that we object to the federal government 

refusing to act like a federal government. And that’s why we are 

constantly amazed that the official opposition can say that we 

should stop mentioning federal cut-backs. What’s a hundred 

million dollars here or a hundred million dollars there, they say. 

Yet what do they do? They blame the province when the 

province has to make difficult choices. 

 

Our commitment, Mr. Speaker, is to the people of 

Saskatchewan. In 1991 we promised fiscal sanity. That remains 

our commitment and it is through this measure that we’ll be 

able to invest in people. We have made jobs a top priority, and 

we are encouraging the expansion of trade, we are promoting 

expansion and diversification of our rural economy, we are 

certainly renewing Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations, and I 

find that to be a very interesting and exciting process. 

 

In education we will work to provide educators in our schools 

with better tools to support learning in the classroom, and we 

will encourage school division restructuring as the needs are  

locally determined to improve the efficiency and the quality of 

our educational system. We will work with business, educators, 

and communities to implement a made in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, training strategy, building on the strength of SIAST 

and the regional colleges and our highly successful JobStart and 

Future Skills programs. In my area, Mr. Speaker, I see evidence 

of this with training being offered to students working out of the 

pulp and forest industry — training tailored to their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed also to reducing 

child poverty and helping people escape from welfare. Our 

Premier has worked tirelessly on the national scene to 

implement a new, integrated national child benefit this year. It 

is disappointing now to see the federal Liberals backing away 

from their original commitment. None the less, our government 

is committed in this session, Mr. Speaker, to further strengthen 

Saskatchewan’s nationally and internationally recognized 

Action Plan for Children which is targeting child poverty and 

invests in child care in the inner-city neighbourhoods, rural 

communities, and most important for me, in the North. 

 

On this issue I want to take the opportunity to compliment the 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council for the tremendous work that they 

have done in this area. They, like us, could do much more, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think what they have done so far is very exciting. 

It is all about local communities taking ownership and assuming 

responsibilities for resolving problems, and I think that the 

tribal council has been very progressive in that regard. The 

tribal council has adopted a holistic approach to improving the 

wellness of their communities, and to a large degree they have 

taken the direction that our province is attempting to take. 

 

About 35 per cent of the constituency that I represent, Mr. 

Speaker, are of aboriginal background, either first nations or 

Metis. And I want to describe, through a short story, many of 

the problems that I think that they have and puts in some 

perspective and helped me understand where the aboriginal 

people are coming from when they talk about the problems that 

they have. 

 

There was some number of years ago a gentleman from 

Patuanak visiting with me and he was . . . By the way, who is 

only very slightly older than I am. He would be about a year or 

two older than I am, so the story that I’m going to tell you 

doesn’t take place several hundreds of years ago. 

 

An Hon. Member:  He’s not an elder then? 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  He was from . . . In actual fact he is an elder 

which, to learn about the first nations background, you don’t 

have to be an old person to be an elder. So he’s a leader in his 

community. 

 

He told me that he lived in the small community of Patuanak 

most recently. But anyway, he was telling me that he grew up 

down the Churchill River, about 50 or 60 miles down the 

Churchill River, and when he was six years old, one August 

morning an Indian agent came into the community by boat — 

the only access was by boat — picked him up and took him 

away, a hundred miles away, when he was six years old. 

 



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

I had the opportunity to canoe down the Churchill River about, 

I think it was about five or six years ago with some friends of 

mine. And on my way down I realized . . . It suddenly reminded 

me, as we were going through here, that we were in fact going 

to canoe through the very community that Louis had told me 

about, and in fact we had a very detailed map. And as we got 

closer, I could see the little community on the river-bank and 

there would have been about 15 or 20 older houses there. There 

was nobody living there. I think occasionally during the 

summer they used it for fishing camps. 

 

But we stopped and pulled up onto the river-bank and got out 

and walked around this community. And the other three people 

that were with me walked away and I stopped and stood there 

— and it was almost like a religious experience for me, Mr. 

Speaker — but as I stopped and stood there, it suddenly all . . . 

It put things in perspective for me. 

 

It struck me suddenly that in this little community of 10 houses, 

this young boy, his whole existence was this community and his 

family and probably a radius of 10 miles around this 

community. He knew nothing more than that. And to realize 

that this little boy stood in the very spot that I stood and to have 

an Indian agent to come in, when you’re six years old, to be 

removed from your entire world and to pulled away from your 

family at that young age would have an impact on him that it 

would be unbelievable. And his line to me — although he 

wasn’t even horribly bitter, which I didn’t understand — but 

what he said to me was “and they wonder why we have 

problems sometimes.” 

 

Well, it put the whole thing in perspective for me. Here’s a 

gentleman, who’s virtually the same age as I am, who had been 

pulled out of his community. And it made me understand just a 

little bit better what life for a first nations person, especially in 

the far North, must be like. I mean I have no true understanding, 

but to be able to stand in that environment and understand what 

happened to this young fellow made it just a little bit easier for 

me to understand. 

 

And now when I hear the criticisms and the complaints coming 

from the aboriginal community and from the white community, 

it just puts into perspective a little bit better what life really 

must be like for some of them. And I think that it went a long 

ways for me to help understand what some of the problems that 

they face are all about. 

 

Anyway I want to carry on and talk a bit more about the throne 

speech. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that Saskatchewan is 

years ahead, is years ahead of other jurisdictions, I should say, 

in renewal, and we can therefore now focus on stabilizing and 

securing the health system which is solid on its new 

foundations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to commend and 

compliment the boards and staff now, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly the doctors of the Twin Rivers and the Northwest 

Health Districts. I may be biased but I believe that they most 

often have led the province in health renewal. 

 

In the Northwest Health District, for instance, they’ve just  

completed a three-year accreditation award. Very recently our 

Minister of Health was in Meadow Lake and I don’t think I’d 

be putting words in his mouth by saying that he was very 

impressed by the dedication of the board and the health care 

providers of our community. 

 

In St. Walburg, Mr. Speaker, in the Twin Rivers District, the 

community has gone through some very difficult times and it 

has been hard on them. But now they are pulling together in the 

potential construction of an integrated facility. The community 

is looking at adding a wing to their long-term care facility in an 

effort to provide a community clinic that will better serve the 

community of St. Walburg. This has not been very easy for any 

of them, but as I talk to many of them now, they feel that they 

are now much better off than they were before. 

 

On a related issue, Mr. Speaker, because this affects our health 

care system, and of course our health, I was so pleased with 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, to be able to attend yesterday the SADD 

luncheon. That’s the Students Against Drinking and Driving. 

They certainly are a wonderful bunch of folks and deserve a lot 

of credit from all of us here. And they were, I won’t say 

instrumental, but they were very, very key in helping us 

articulate and put in place the legislation that we have today. 

 

And to see the number of alcohol-related traffic fatalities down 

in the first five months by over 30 per cent is truly remarkable, 

and if we could maintain that level of improvement, it will be 

nothing short of a miracle, I believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to thank the minister responsible for SGI who helped 

to pilot this legislation through the Assembly. And I want to 

thank you again, Mr. Speaker, who led the all-party committee 

around the province taking briefs and hearing the presentations 

and representations from hundreds of people. And most of all, I 

want to thank the people, many of whom who have suffered far 

too much. 

 

I would like to switch gears if I could very briefly to talk about 

agriculture, but most specifically the issue of transportation. 

While the elimination of the Crow benefit is outrageous and the 

loss of those funds to the province is unacceptable, what is most 

unacceptable is a federal government with a complete lack of 

vision of any sort for a national transportation policy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

On an issue like this that is clearly a national issue — that is, 

the movement of goods and services across our country — they 

simply wipe their hands. They say, here provinces, you look 

after it. This is, in my estimation, Mr. Speaker, unforgivable. 

Even in the United States, which the federal and provincial 

Liberals seem determined to copy, even they pay for 80 per cent 

of the national road system, and they do have a strategy in 

place. But here in Canada, Mr. Speaker, even on the national 

highways, the federal government now provides virtually no 

funding. 

 

In a province with more roads than Alberta and Manitoba 

combined and with barely a quarter of the population, what do 

they do? They do absolutely nothing. And what’s the provincial 

Liberals’ response? They say 1 800 Bump. That’s their  



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Look, we know the roads need repair, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

it’s a waste of taxpayers’ dollar to put in a toll free number. My 

suggestion, Mr. Speaker, would be for the Liberals to put in a 

few dollars into a phone call and phone their federal cousins in 

Ottawa and ask them to put some money back into a national 

transportation system and national transportation strategy. 

 

A friend of mine suggested that we should be filling the holes 

with Liberals, Mr. Speaker. But first of all, he thought there 

might not be enough Liberals to fill the holes; and secondly, he 

said that even if there were, they’d be fighting over who would 

be on top. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I may not be fair. Maybe I’m not 

being fair about this but if the truth be known, there really are a 

number of Liberals over there who actually do have . . . actually 

have hearts of gold, Mr. Speaker. However, their logic on issues 

would suggest to me that their minds on occasion may also be 

made of some precious metal. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, on that note, I want to say that I look 

forward to working with all of my colleagues in the legislature 

during this upcoming session. Our government has put into the 

throne speech its key priorities for the session: action to create 

jobs and build the economy; strengthening education and 

training at every level; certainly reducing child poverty is a 

priority; we’re looking at a radical reform within the social 

services and within the welfare system; we want to continue to 

build a stable, secure, high-quality health care system; we want 

to implement a comprehensive transportation strategy; and most 

of all, to maintain our commitment — fiscal responsibility. 

 

Our province is truly on the move again. We are investing in 

people, jobs, and communities and we are building 

Saskatchewan together. 

 

I will certainly be supporting the vote on the throne speech and 

be voting against the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

once again join in debate in this House on this occasion of the 

reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before beginning my remarks though, I’d just like 

to add my welcome to my new colleague, the member from 

North Battleford. I’m sure the members of this House will find 

the new member an able debater, an intelligent thinker, and an 

individual whose commitment to public service is beyond 

question. 

 

I’m also pleased to welcome the community of Gravelbourg in 

my constituency today. As you well know, Mr. Speaker, 

Gravelbourg has joined the list of many communities across this 

province who can now watch the proceedings of this Assembly 

live in their own homes. For those with cable, it’s my  

hope that this service will be well used and that from time to 

time they’ll flick to channel 13 and see how MLAs are dealing 

with public affairs. 

 

This service is important, Mr. Speaker, for all too often we rely 

on the media to tell us what’s going on in an increasingly 

complex world. We’ve seen the media suffer tremendous cuts 

in recent times, making the job of conveying matters of public 

concern a more difficult one. 

 

With the introduction of television service to many 

communities and access to the legislative, government, and 

caucus sites on the web, those wishing to acquire a direct view 

of the public issues have a greater opportunity to do so. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe these advancements will serve the public 

well. 

 

As members of this House we must always remember the debt 

of gratitude we owe to the many people who take the time to 

voice their opinions, to write, or to call us. Whether it be 

criticism, a helpful suggestion, or positive feedback, Mr. 

Speaker, we must acknowledge the care and concern which 

these numerous members of the public demonstrate for the 

public good. They’ve taken a great deal of time to inform 

themselves of public issues and more often than not they end up 

informing us. Thousands of individuals spend countless hours 

of their own time thinking and questioning ways of making this 

province a better place in which to live. By taking the time to 

phone us, many of these people are taking action to give effect 

to their ideas. We should always remember to be thankful for 

their participation because it’s such participation which makes 

democracy in Saskatchewan work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the members on the government side have 

and will continue to congratulate themselves and their 

government for this throne speech, many important concerns 

remain unaddressed. Since we last sat in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, I have had many opportunities to meet and correspond 

with my constituents. Many of their concerns were completely 

ignored in the fuzzy text of this throne speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents are concerned about 

what this government intends to do with respect to the 

municipal grants. Many continue to deal with the difficulties of 

reassessment. They remain very worried that this government 

will carry through on its plan to introduce the promised $20 

million cut to municipal grants. Such a cut represents a 

significant attack on the funding base of many municipalities in 

the constituency of Thunder Creek. One RM council told me 

earlier that if the cut goes through they’ll be left to find some 

13,000 extra dollars from their ratepayers as there are no further 

areas in which they are able to cut. 

 

These same municipalities also remain worried about the 

possibility of municipal amalgamations. Some, Mr. Speaker, are 

worried that they will be forced to absorb hamlets within their 

borders. The south-west area of the province is one of the most 

hard hit by population loss, Mr. Speaker, so such hamlets are 

significant in number. That would not be so much of a problem 

for many of these people except for the fact that some of these 

hamlets have abandoned gas stations with buried fuel  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

tanks which no longer meet environmental standards. And these 

municipalities are already under enough financial pressure and 

they can’t afford to pay any more to help dig up these 

hazardous tanks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue which was not dealt with in the 

throne speech is the matter of the upcoming spring run-off. 

While the Tories are excited that spring might fill the 

multimillion dollar boondoggles that they created in Rafferty 

and Alameda, many of the constituents are very concerned 

about what the upcoming thaw might bring. Three of the 

waterways which threaten to have the highest run-off in the 

province are in my constituency, Mr. Speaker: Long Creek, the 

Moose Jaw River, and Wood River all threaten to overrun their 

banks. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities in areas like 

Morse and Moose Jaw face the problem of having roads washed 

out. Still other communities, like Pense, face the problem of 

rising waters around their village limits. Last year, Mr. Speaker, 

water came dangerously close to flooding many buildings in the 

village of Pense. Many sloughs are full and many drainage 

ditches continue to be clogged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my concern here is whether or not enough is being 

done to prepare for this problem. Is Sask Water prepared for the 

flood and is this government prepared to offer municipalities 

the help they need to deal with the aftermath after destructive 

events? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll refer any calls I get after the floods hit 

to the Deputy Premier across, because it sounds like he’s quite 

prepared for the upcoming floods; so I’m sure he’ll be 

appreciative of hearing these calls and he’ll direct them on to 

the appropriate authorities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are also concerned about 

health care. Over the last year many people took the opportunity 

to write or phone me to express their concerns over the future of 

their health system. In many cases people are worried for their 

own families. My constituencies have seen friends and 

neighbours fall through the cracks of the health system, and 

they are deeply concerned that someday it could be them. 

 

Last year in this House we raised some of these concerns, only 

to receive a less than understanding response from the minister. 

One of the minister’s officials even suggested, Mr. Speaker, and 

I quote, that: “Every fallen sparrow will be laid at the feet of 

health reform.” 

 

Well I’m sure that the friends and families of people who have 

had to wait for treatment for extended periods or people who 

have received poor treatment thanks to health reform are less 

than pleased to hear that their loved ones are no more important 

than a fallen sparrow. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this government must do more to show 

that it’s truly caring of the sick and the elderly. The goal of our 

health system should be to have no one fall through the cracks. 

Quality health care is not too high a goal. It should be expected. 

Aside from their concerns about seeing their loved ones fall 

through the cracks, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are also 

concerned about the funding of their local health districts. Last 

year this government kicked in some small additional monies. 

The money, however, went to pay off debt or to non-operational 

programs, and it won’t be forthcoming in future years. 

 

My constituents have watched while government services were 

taken out of their communities, and they’re concerned that the 

trend will continue. South-west Saskatchewan’s population will 

include more seniors per capita than any other region in the 

province. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, people are deeply 

worried that the present funding system will cost them some of 

the few facilities they still have left. 

 

Needs-based funding remains in place, Mr. Speaker. Under this 

system, a district whose residents travel to the cities like Regina 

and Saskatoon for care will see its funding cut in future years. 

In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the health districts of Rolling 

Hills, Moose Jaw, Thunder Creek, and the South Country are all 

facing this very problem. The system of cutting grants that are 

based on the number of patients that travel out of the district to 

access services is unfair. Rural people need to be guaranteed 

that there will be a certain level of local services available. This 

system is nothing more than a means of ridding Saskatchewan 

of small but desperately needed rural hospitals and care homes. 

 

The short-sighted aspect of this policy is that it fails to 

recognize that farming is one of the most hazardous occupations 

in the province, Mr. Speaker. Little time is often available to 

deal with the victim of a farm accident. While first responders 

help, the presence of a hospital provides a sense of security to 

many rural people which is essential to the stability of those 

agricultural communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are also deeply concerned about 

highways and transportation. My colleague from Wood River 

recently has launched the pothole patrol program to bring 

attention to the plight of our rural highways. While he asked 

people to count potholes, the program really does bring 

attention to the overall crumbling state of our highways. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would like to blame 

the problem — like many others — on the federal government. 

And while they blame this on the feds they have to recognize 

that their government has made sure . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order, order. The hon. 

member has obviously a number of other members who’d like 

to join him in a debate, and as good luck will have it, we still 

have some time available. And I’ll ask hon. members to put 

their remarks on the record and not shout them across the floor. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess there is 

some truth to that adage that the truth does hurt, from the howls 

across the floor. 

 

While they continue to blame the feds on . . . They have to 

recognize that their government has made choices over the 

years to spend money on other less important priorities and it’s  



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

more often than not ones that were in the Crown sector. They 

must also realize that since Ottawa passed responsibility for 

dominion lands to the prairie provinces, at the request of the 

provinces, Saskatchewan has sole responsibility over its own 

roads. 

 

It’s always nice when someone else pays for something, but in 

our personal lives we realize that when a payment is due we 

have to pay it ourselves. We don’t wait for some generous 

relative to come by and foot the bill. If it means spending more 

effectively elsewhere and getting rid of risky investments and 

lower priority spending in the Crown sector, then so be it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The bill for our highways, Mr. Speaker, has certainly come due. 

In my own constituency, many highways are in a sad state of 

repair. Worse yet, they were poorly maintained during yet 

another difficult Saskatchewan winter. 

 

A woman from Chaplin phoned me recently and said that she 

knows of some 20 people who have crashed or rolled their cars 

during the winter season, thanks to the weather. She was 

appalled to discover the other day just how few clearing 

operations this government allows its highway crews to 

complete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she had left for a hockey tournament in 

Kindersley at about 3 in the afternoon and the No. 1 was icy 

and covered with finger drifts and quite dangerous. And when 

she returned home at 2 a.m. from the tournament, she was 

alarmed to discover that really nothing had been done to rectify 

the situation. 

 

If the minister of SGI wants to do something constructive to 

preventing rising automobile insurance rates, get the Minister of 

Highways to clear the highways more often. In addition his 

colleagues, the ministers responsible for Municipal Government 

and Finance, could reconsider their cuts to the local government 

grants. If the municipalities have funds needed to clear roads, 

then we just might have a few less accidents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost every highway in my constituency is a 

source of problems. Highways 363, No. 2, No. 19, are often 

very dangerous. The highways which lead to tourist attractions 

at Claybank and Avonlea are in a shameful state. Apparently 

the government wants tourism, but it doesn’t want to make it 

possible for tourists to travel to the attractions. 

 

Other people have often called me and they say they remain 

deeply disappointed that the No. 1 remains a single lane on 

either end of the province. With increasing truck traffic, they 

are worried that travelling to destinations like Winnipeg and 

Calgary is often a gamble with one’s life. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, a province which relies on its 

transportation system for its survival should consider reviewing 

its priorities to give highways the attention that they deserve. 

 

Other issues remain unaddressed in the throne speech, Mr. 

Speaker. But before I allude to any more, Mr. Speaker, the 

coyote population in Thunder Creek wants to wish the Minister  

of Environment a hardy thank you for feeding them this winter. 

Thanks to the minister’s additional fee on hunting licences, 

there were plenty more deer available this winter. All they had 

to do to get a good meal was chase a deer down in that deep 

snow and they were very pleased with the meal available. 

 

On that note, Mr. Speaker, a number of my constituents remain 

very upset about this charge and ranchers remain less than 

pleased with the compensation program. Add to this the fact 

that this government recently closed down a waterfowl feeding 

station in the RM of Rodgers. My constituents are disappointed 

with these decisions, and they would like to see the government 

deal with wildlife damage and wildlife management in a more 

equitable manner. 

 

The final concern which I’d like to touch upon today deals with 

our Crown corporations. The throne speech suggested the 

government was going to get down to the job of reforming the 

Crowns for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Part of the proposed course of action appears 

to involve the government allowing the Crowns more freedoms, 

including freedom to operate beyond Canada’s borders. Apart 

from my concerns with the lack of accountability, Mr. Speaker, 

this whole approach ignores the original role of our Crowns and 

what our Crowns were really, truly designed for. While SaskTel 

builds a cable network in Chicago and Detroit, Mr. Speaker, the 

communities of Ardill and Parkbeg will still face hurdles and 

difficulties in acquiring basic phone services in the form of a 

public pay phone, in a phone for their community hall. 

 

(1245) 

 

In Ardill, SaskTel officials took away the public pay phone — 

the only pay phone in between Moose Jaw and Mossbank, 

which, Mr. Speaker, you’ll know it as a long and lonely stretch 

of highway. It’s the only one that was available in that whole 

area. Mr. Speaker, the owner of the Ardill Hotel had to take the 

unusual step of paying for this line herself — a public pay 

phone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when individuals have to pay for a phone line 

when our phone company is adventuring in faraway lands, it’s 

obvious that the Crowns have forgotten their role of providing 

essential services on a universal basis to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are also concerned about 

SaskPower. They hear of many raises to less-than-deserving 

SaskPower executives, while they pay more for power. They’re 

annoyed to learn that this government is considering investing 

in South American power systems while at the same time 

saying they don’t have enough money to replace above-ground 

power lines back home. While SaskPower considers providing 

power in South America, ageing above-ground power lines are 

snapping back home and putting farmers’ and home-owners’ 

safety in jeopardy. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are concerned how Crown 

utilities and other government agencies are driving up farm  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

input costs. And I know the Minister of Agriculture has 

mentioned that he has some concerns for this. I question his 

genuine nature in that regard. But while the ministers of 

Agriculture and Highways have expressed concern for the issue, 

I really don’t see them doing that much to really, truly deal with 

it. For countless years they have been raising utility rates and 

investing in companies that hold farmers at their mercy for key 

inputs. Mr. Speaker, any reforms to our Crown sector must deal 

with the problem of rising farm input costs, among other issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I close . . . I’ll close by seeing the 

vagarities in this Speech from the Throne have failed to deal 

with many problems facing my constituents. And you have my 

assurances that over the coming weeks, I’ll continue to raise 

these issues and encourage the government to act on their 

behalf. And thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to support the throne speech, which has been called by 

many the best throne speech that they’ve ever heard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  And that’s because it’s a speech that’s 

in touch with the pulse of today. I want to talk for a moment 

about the new member. Congratulations to the member from 

North Battleford. But I thought it was very revealing that one of 

his first comments in his maiden speech was to invite all the 

disaffected Tories to move over and join the Liberal Party. 

 

This is not new to us. However because there are some new 

members, there may be some in the legislature who have never 

heard the story that likens the Liberal and Tory parties to a 

chicken standing in the snow. One leg is the Liberals and one 

leg is the Tories. And when the Tory leg gets too cold standing 

in the snow, it lifts its leg and it stands on its Liberal leg. And 

then after a while the Liberal leg gets cold and it puts its Tory 

leg back down and it lifts its Liberal leg. And the moral of the 

story is: different legs, same old chicken. The fact is that in 

between snowstorms, the chicken hops on one leg across to the 

other hen-house. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, for a minute, 

look at the Liberal record. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. Order. I think all 

hon. members on government side and on opposition side will 

recognize that the minister has the floor. And members can put 

their remarks on the record; they don’t need to be shouting them 

across the floor. And I’ll ask all hon. members to let the hon. 

member be heard. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, you’d think, Mr. Speaker, that 

after this party had received one turncoat who’s caused them a 

lot of grief, that they would think twice before they invite other 

people to the party. But I guess that’s a judgement that they’ll  

have to make. 

 

But I want to look at this Liberal record for a moment — this 

one that they’re so proud of. In the February 8 Globe and Mail, 

Mr. Speaker, unemployment has now hovered above 9 per cent 

for 76 consecutive months. This is the worst stretch since the 

Depression — since the Depression — the absolute worst 

performance by any government since the Depression. The 

Liberal provinces have the worst unemployment record in 

Canada, ranging from 14 per cent to 21 per cent. 

 

Where is unemployment the lowest? Does anybody know? In 

Saskatchewan, under an NDP government, and we’re not even 

finished yet. 

 

I want to mention that, following the recent federal budget, the 

after-tax income for Canadians is 1,100 less per average 

Canadian, with Ontario recording the greatest decline. Debt is 

up 1,300 per person in Canada after all the federal 

government’s deficit and debt reduction efforts. Economist 

Lester Thurow has said this, “Today the share of wealth held by 

the top 1 per cent of the population, more than 40 per cent, is 

essentially double what is was in the mid-1970s.” 

 

And this is back to where it was in the 1920s before the 

introduction of progressive taxation. So what I’d like to ask you 

folks is, what is this progress under Liberal and Tory 

governments? This is the federal Liberal government that gives 

a little and takes a lot, and it’s returned Canada to the 1920s. I 

don’t know about my colleagues, but if I want nostalgia I rent 

an old movie. I don’t try to return the whole country to the past 

in order to enjoy myself. 

 

And what’s the response of the Saskatchewan Liberals to this 

dismal job creation record? I have a guessing question for you 

here. The member from the Liberal caucus opposite gave this 

quote, and maybe you can guess who it is. I’ll tell you the 

answer after. This is the quote, “If the NDP government is truly 

serious about this issue it will have to rethink its present tax 

policies, cumbersome regulation, and intrusive labour 

legislation,” said Liberal economic development critic, the 

member from Melfort-Tisdale. This was in the February 8 

Leader-Post. 

 

Now when I read this, I wondered which cumbersome 

regulations he has in mind. Would he like to eliminate 

occupational health and safety? Maybe the provisions against 

sexual and racial harassment. Or maybe it would be Workers’ 

Compensation to provide for workers injured on the job. Maybe 

he’d get rid of parental and maternity leaves, minimum wage, 

labour standards, pension benefits. Perhaps he’s not in favour of 

equal pay for work of equal value. Or maybe he would just 

eliminate The Trade Union Act. I’m very curious to know 

which of these important pieces of legislation and policies that 

he finds so onerous. 

 

I’d like to remind the member from Melfort-Tisdale that it’s 

workers who produce the products and services and buy the 

houses and spend the money that supports a consumer society. 

They’re not disposable. And when they lose confidence and 

quit spending, the economy suffers. 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1997 

In our Premier’s six-point plan for Canada, he refers to the need 

to level up and not down. And I’ll quote: 

 

Nobody wins when jurisdictions compete to provide 

greater tax breaks to business or to force concessions in the 

wages and working conditions of Canadian families. 

Nobody wins in a race to the bottom. 

 

So maybe it’s time the member opposite quit working on 

reducing the well-being of working people and instead joined 

with us to seek more regional and national solutions to these 

issues — solutions for improving the standards and benefits for 

working families, rather than levelling them down. What we 

need is a national debate on this issue if the dynamism of 

capitalism is to be harnessed for the common good. 

 

The record of Liberals and Tories does not give us much hope 

on these issues as incomes decline, wealth inequity increases, 

and joblessness dogs them. 

 

And what is the member from Arm River and the Leader of the 

Liberal Party recommending we do to preserve national 

standards? I think we know, but I’ll remind you in case you’ve 

forgotten your positions on these things. They want us to set up 

privatized health services — one service for the rich and 

another for the poor. Our objective as a government is to have 

the best universally accessible system of health care we can 

afford for all of our citizens. 

 

In the recent budget, the federal government would’ve had to 

put 1.5 billion back into health care to meet what our 

government has already done in Saskatchewan. Their own 

health commission recommended that their target for 11 billion 

for Canada is not enough and that it should be 12.5 billion. 

Perhaps the member should concentrate less on privatizing 

health care and creating a two-tier system and more on ensuring 

that federal Liberals maintain their commitment to a strong 

public system. 

 

I like the quote of my friend and colleague from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow who recently during question period said, the 

Liberals never did understand medicare. 

 

We need to build a society where everyone is fairly included in 

the benefits of economic growth. 

 

I have a friend who’s taking her doctoral degree in history right 

now. And the subject she’s writing on is the social responses to 

economic upheaval in the 1930s. And I asked her what she’s 

found out so far. And she said that where governments were 

unable to respond, the community came up with many of the 

solutions for that time. At that time those solutions led to credit 

unions, to cooperatives, and to church-organized social aid. 

 

But today as we look towards a future that’s unpredictable and 

face the reality of many of the economic rules and social 

supports changing, it’s again important to look to the 

community for innovations that can be extended to the larger 

society. 

 

And I believe that many of the solutions are coming out of our  

communities today, Mr. Speaker. The Premier recently 

dedicated an award to all of the people of Saskatchewan that 

our province received from the Child Welfare League of 

Canada and the Ontario Association of Children’s Aid Societies 

— the Champion for Children Award that honours many 

thousands of Saskatchewan residents who contribute so much 

time and energy to the well-being of our children, and through a 

program unique to our province, the Saskatchewan’s Action 

Plan for Children. 

 

Now with community groups, agencies, individuals, and 

governments working together, and a fresh approach within 

government, we’re making great progress on this particular 

area. 

 

But I want to, just for a minute, as Minister responsible for the 

Status of Women, talk about the strong role that women play in 

the delivery of these services in the community. Despite the 

advances that we’ve made in equity, there’s no question that 

women are still the primary care-givers in the community. And 

they’re ensuring that children, the victims of abuse and 

violence, and those without resources, the children on the street, 

the families in need of support, the children in need of early 

childhood attention, have the necessary services in the 

community. 

 

And I consider it a great honour that I have, in the opposition, a 

critic who also understands the importance of women and 

women’s voices in the work that’s done in the province. 

 

Recently Marilyn Waring, who’s an economist — who actually 

was one of the youngest women ever elected to the New 

Zealand legislature — likened governments creating policy 

without the perspectives of women like walking through the 

world with one eye closed. And I thought it was a particularly 

apt expression. 

 

She also added another humorous part, that developing 

women’s policy in government is kind of like herding sheep — 

you move a few on one side forward, and you move a few on 

the other side forward, and you hope that while you’re slowly 

moving them forward that no one retreats on you. And I thought 

it was a particularly apt description. 

 

But there’s no question that the women who are providing these 

services in our communities are dealing with the dynamics of a 

modern society where there’s more two-income parents, there’s 

more single parents, and there’s large elements of the 

community who are still dealing with early childhood abuse and 

violence issues. So it’s really important that we ensure that the 

resources are there for these people that are doing this important 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I’ll have to save the balance of my 

comments, I believe, for Monday and ask that we now do 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  I would simply ask all hon. members to make 

sure this weekend to, if they can, get home and enjoy some time  



March 14, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

with their family and their constituents and to take a little time 

to relax, and return with new vigour next week. 

 

The House adjourned at 12:59 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 175 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 175 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 175 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 175 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 175 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 175 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 176 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 176 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Business Technology Achievements in Saskatoon 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 176 

 Support for Saskatchewan Roughriders 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 177 

 Agri-Food Innovation Fund and University of Saskatchewan Agreement 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 177 

 Benefit for Tyrone Parislau 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 177 

 Agricultural Diversification Opportunities 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................... 177 

 Winning Strategy for Saskatchewan Roughriders 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 178 

 Enhanced Business Training for Low Income Women 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 178 

 80th Anniversary of Abdication of Last Russian Czar 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 178 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Proposed Regina School Closures 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 178 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 178 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 179 

 Education and Industry 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 179 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 180 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 180 

 Regina Murder Case 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 180 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 180 

 Provincial Sales Tax 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 181 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 181 

 Environmental Handling Charges 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 181 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 181 

 Dialysis Treatment in East-Central Saskatchewan 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 182 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 182 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 11  The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 1997 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

 

 Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 



 

 Bill No. 13 — The Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

 Bill No. 14 — The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

 Bill No. 15 — The Department of Health Amendment Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

MOTIONS 

 Saskatchewan Roughriders 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 183 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 184 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 184 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 185 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 189 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 

  Crofford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 201 

 




