



















































Hansard: April 04, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 577 

 April 4, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am presenting a 

petition from concerned citizens of Regina and Balgonie. I’ll 

read the prayer for relief: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present petitions 

on behalf of people of Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Balgonie, Yorkton, Melville, Whitewood. 

 

Thank you. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Petitions asking to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing-reduction;

To establish a task force to aid the fight against youth 

crime; 

 

To change the Saskatchewan big game damage 

compensation program; and 

 

To urge the government to commission an independent 

study to review the social impact of gambling. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, titled the 

naming of the northern municipalities airports Act. And I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next, move first reading of a Bill, the 

government whistle blowers Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise this morning on behalf of the hon. member for Regina 

Northeast and introduce some special guests here this morning, 

who are seated on the floor of the Assembly. 

 

On your left, Mr. Speaker, are six . . . sorry. On your left are 

seven members of the life skills program, of the life skills 

program of the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. And on your 

right are six members of the life enrichment program of the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council. Mr. Speaker, these students 

are here today for a tour of the legislature. They’re here in the 

Assembly till after question period, at which time they’ll be 

taking a tour and be joined by myself or one of my colleagues at 

11 o’clock this morning to answer some questions. I would like 

on behalf of all the Assembly that we welcome these special 

guests here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you . . . through you to the rest of the members here, I’d like to 

introduce in your gallery, Kim Schneider and her two sons, 

Michael and Derrick, from Cedoux. Kim is a home care worker 

in the province and she’s active in the provincial home care 

bargaining and dispute resolutions. I’d just like everyone here 

to acknowledge her work in this area, and to welcome her and 

her sons here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the member from Regina Sherwood in welcoming our 

special guests here today. In particular I would like to welcome 

a friend of mine, Kirby Silcox, sitting on the end there. I’d ask 

all members to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



578  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Get Well Wishes to Member from Regina Northeast 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a familiar 

face missing around the legislature this week, Mr. Speaker. And 

my colleagues and I would like to bring to the attention of the 

Assembly that we do miss this face. 

 

The hon. member from Regina Northeast’s presence in this 

Assembly was the one thing that those of us who knew . . . 

could count on as we tried to make a familiar routine out of a 

place that never seems routine. When we came into the House 

last year we could never be certain of which of the seats in the 

front row would be filled on any day except that of the 

Government House Leader. He represented to us your rock and 

your stability, and we counted on his presence, as I’m sure all 

of your members do also. 

 

As new members we strive to become part of this Assembly and 

we look to the old-timers for guidance; their ease of dealing 

with rules, regulations, and nuances in the House. Their 

unflappability in, a lot of times appears to be, very tense 

situations and their laughter which keeps life in perspective. 

 

The member’s presence in this Assembly started in 1975. From 

my research I understand that he holds the record for being 

elected the longest without a defeat. This record is one that all 

of us as elected people should hold in high esteem. 

 

The first time I wandered through the gallery downstairs to 

check out the picture of those who represented citizens in this 

province over the last years, I couldn’t help but notice this 

member as one who only got better looking with age. 

 

We’re all delighted to hear that the member from Regina 

Northeast’s operation was successful and he’ll be gracing our 

hallways before long. I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join me in wishing him a very speedy return. I’m very afraid 

that without his constant vigilance this whole Assembly may 

become unglued from its foundation and be washed away by 

the waters of the Wascana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

University of Saskatchewan 

90th Anniversary Celebrations 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday a very important birthday party was held in Saskatoon 

– the 90th birthday of the University of Saskatchewan to be 

exact. 

 

A special convocation ceremony awarded honourary degrees to 

nine extraordinary people associated with the university and 

began a year-long celebration of an institution that makes a big 

difference in the life of our province. 

 

Recipients of the honourary degrees include Guy Vanderhaege, 

Elvie Smith, Freda Ahenakew, G.W. Cameron, Stepan 

Kostyshyn, Walter Kupsch, Marketa Newman, David Olson, 

Herbert Pinder Sr. The achievements of these nine individuals 

show that Saskatchewan people enjoy the quality of 

post-secondary education that is second to none, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The official ground breaking for the Nobel Plaza, a new 

speaker’s corner, was also held yesterday, Mr. Speaker. The 

open-air plaza is a gift of the Meewasin Valley Authority and 

honours the two Nobel prize recipients associated with the 

university. Both Dr. Gerhard Herzberg and Henry Taube won 

the prize for chemistry. 

 

Yesterday’s celebrations concluded with cultural programing 

including the performance of an historic drama that charts the 

history of the university, a play written by the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) drama professor, J.D. Fry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and the Assembly to join me today in 

thanking the students, faculty, and staff of the university, past 

and present, for helping making Saskatchewan the envy of 

Canada. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battleford News 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this past week has been a 

great week in the Battlefords. First the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool announced construction of an $11 million grain-handling 

facility at Brada, just outside of North Battleford. It will have a 

capacity of 35,000 tonnes and a 52-car spot. Congratulations to 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and its Battlefords’ members. 

 

Also Wednesday evening in the Battlefords, the North 

Battleford North Stars won the northern division of the 

Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League. First the North Stars 

swept Melfort in four games straight. Nipawin was a little bit 

more of a challenge. It took six games, double overtime, before 

the Nipawin Hawks were also defeated. We are now confidently 

predicting disaster for Weyburn in the SJHL (Saskatchewan 

Junior Hockey League) championships to commence Saturday. 

 

Congratulations to both the Wheat Pool and the North 

Battleford North Stars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Powwow 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, Canada has been created 

by many diverse and unique cultures. Saskatchewan’s cultures 

are also very distinctive and make important contributions to 

our diverse society. The native population of Canada, and 

indeed that of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, strengthen our 

diversity and add important elements to our cultural make-up. 

 

This upcoming weekend will be highlighted by an annual event 

that not only raises public awareness to the culture of first 

nations, it celebrates, promotes, and preserves its many 

traditions. The event, Mr. Speaker, is the 19th annual 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College powwow that will take   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

place here in Regina. 

 

The powwow includes over 600 participants and 25 drum 

groups from across North America. The event is sure to be 

filled with excitement, with many different types of traditional 

dancing such as grass and jingle dancing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations are in order for the many 

organizers and participants of this extraordinary event. I would 

like all members to join me in welcoming the many participants 

and applauding the SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College) for its efforts in arranging the powwow. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tartan Day 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 6, 

this Sunday, is Tartan Day across Canada. And I am pleased to 

extend the best wishes of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

caucus to the people of Scottish descent across the province. 

 

In the 1992 legislative session, our caucus had the privilege of 

introducing the legislation that allowed for a day of appreciation 

for the Scottish clans in Canada. We are pleased to have the 

cooperation of all members of the Assembly on the passage of 

that Bill — as you know, a very rare occurrence for Bills 

presented by the opposition. 

 

Tartan Day allows those of Scottish descent an opportunity to 

acknowledge their heritage and the role it played in the building 

of our province and our country. On behalf of the PC caucus, I 

wish all those of Scottish descent a memorable day on April 6. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dairy Youth Ambassador 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

always a pleasure for me to recognize the achievements of 

individuals from my constituency, individuals who demonstrate 

leadership and community spirit. I am therefore very pleased to 

acknowledge the achievements of Miss Aretha Parkin of Bulyea 

for being named 1997 Dairy Youth Ambassador. 

 

Growing up on a mixed farm that included a dairy operation, 

Aretha is aware of the importance of the dairy industry to our 

province and the benefits that dairy products have in ensuring a 

healthy diet. Today, Mr. Speaker, Aretha is attending the 

University of Saskatchewan’s College of Agriculture in the 

animal science program, part of her desire to continue her 

education into agriculture. 

 

As Dairy Youth Ambassador, Miss Parkin will represent the 

dairy industry in numerous public relations activities ranging 

from parades to speaking engagements. As part of her 

commitments, Miss Parkin will represent all dairy producers in 

promoting the benefits of milk and other dairy products. 

 

Working with the Saskatchewan Dairy Foundation, a non-profit 

organization working on behalf of all dairy producers, Aretha 

will help to coordinate the efforts of the dairy industry in 

providing consumers with reliable information in order to aid 

the public in developing and maintaining healthy and balanced 

lifestyles. 

 

Aretha is a person who has never shied away from a challenge 

and I’m sure will be a great ambassador for the dairy industry. I 

would like to ask all members to join me in congratulating Miss 

Aretha Parkin for being chosen 1997 Dairy Youth Ambassador, 

and congratulations, Aretha. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Repair of Moose Jaw Bridges 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Residents of Moose 

Jaw are now tallying up the bill from heavy flooding. As the 

river surged its banks, ice jams damaged two bridges and 

destroyed another. The cost of the damage is estimated at a 

million dollars. 

 

Regrettably, Mr. Speaker, the city will find it more difficult to 

rebuild damaged and destroyed public works due to cuts to 

municipal grants in this government’s latest budget. In addition, 

the deductible under provincial disaster assistance is simply too 

high and too expensive. 

 

While raging rivers inflict economic damage to Moose Jaw, a 

river of money continues to flow out of that city to this 

government in VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues. This 

government collects some $4.94 million from that city, far in 

excess of the $2 million it gives back in municipal grants. 

 

Before Moose Jaw taxpayers are forced to pay large repair bills, 

I urge the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow to remember his 

moral opposition to gambling. Do the honourable thing and 

urge your cabinet colleagues to put some of those revenues to 

good use, helping your constituents rebuild damaged bridges. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wildlife Columnist Doug Gilroy 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, in 1954 Doug Gilroy wrote 

his first “Prairie Wildlife” column in The Western Producer. 

Last month Doug completed his 1,500th column, a record 

achieved by very few if any columnists. 

 

Doug and his wife Mary farmed for many years along Boggy 

Creek north-west of Regina. Doug acquired one of his first 

colour film cameras available on the market in the late 1940s 

and utilizes his wide assortment of photographs to illustrate his 

columns. 

 

With his educational writings on prairie wildlife, Doug reaches 

upwards of 160,000 readers regularly. His informative columns 

contributed greatly towards instilling in his readers a knowledge 

and an appreciation of our natural world. In addition to his 

involvement with conservation organizations and   



580  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

schools, where he provided illustrated talks on prairie wildlife, 

Doug has had four books published by Western Producer 

Prairie Books. A fifth book containing some of his columns will 

be published later this year. 

 

It is impossible to know how many thousands of people have 

been touched and inspired by Doug’s knowledge and 

appreciation of nature. I do know that my interest in wildlife 

was certainly influenced by this dedicated man when he visited 

our farm 30 years ago. Doug’s column no. 1,501 shows a 

mountain bluebird that he photographed at one of my nest 

boxes during that visit 30 years ago. 

 

Doug and Mary retired to Regina Beach in the mid-1970s 

where they continue to pursue their lifelong interest in the great 

outdoors. Congratulations on a job well done, Doug. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mister Speaker, when the former head of 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company resigned his post two 

months ago, it was suggested that Peter Glendinning and STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) parted company by 

mutual agreement. Many of us thought otherwise and of course 

now it appears that is the fact. 

 

An article in today’s Regina Leader-Post quotes a letter that 

Mr. Glendinning wrote to the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation four days before he resigned. In this 

correspondence, the former STC president outlines his fears that 

the Crown Investments Corporation is moving to privatize the 

bus company: 

 

“It is sale, not termination, that they . . . have seized as the 

solution,” . . . 

 

he says. 

 

Can the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) today explain if privatization is what is in store 

for STC? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would be pleased to answer on behalf of the minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. As 

the member has indicated, there is a new president that has been 

appointed to head the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 

It was felt by the board and by members of this government that 

a fresh set of eyes to have a look at the problems facing that 

corporation would be appropriate. As the member will know, 

the transportation company has served a very positive public 

policy for many, many years. The problem being the amount of 

money that that corporation has been losing in the recent past 

has been what we believe to be not sustainable.

The corporation is looking and the management of the 

corporation is looking at all options with respect to the future of 

the corporation, keeping in mind the number of people who are 

employed, the service that is delivered to rural Saskatchewan. I 

think the approach that the new president will take will 

recommend options to the board that in the long term will 

ensure a very positive situation for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, as you are aware and members 

of this House are aware, that there is a review of 

Saskatchewan’s family of Crown corporations taking place. 

Therefore it comes as something as a surprise, if one uses Mr. 

Glendinning’s letter as a basis, that this government appears to 

have already made a decision to privatize STC. 

 

And we find particularly offensive suggestions in Mr. 

Glendinning’s letter that CIC is attempting to paint STC’s 

financial picture worse than it is so that it would be much more 

palatable to the public to buy into the privatization. 

 

The minister should explain why his government is not being 

honest with the people of Saskatchewan, who after all are the 

shareholders of this Crown corporation, and they deserve to 

know how it works and what’s going to happen to it. They also 

would want to know and deserve to know why you are 

distorting the true financial situation, as Mr. Glendinning 

suggests. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you hiding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

respond to this in this fashion. This government has been very 

open with respect to the Crown review, indicating that all of the 

options are on the table with respect to the future of the Crown 

corporations. What I want to know is what position the Leader 

of the Liberal Party, the Leader of the Opposition, or that 

member, or any other members of the Liberal Party have with 

respect to the Crown corporations and their future. Do you 

support privatization? Do you support public ownership? I 

don’t know, Mr. Speaker; the people of Saskatchewan don’t 

know. 

 

I want to say to that member that this government has and will 

continue to take, a very pragmatic approach to the $8 billion of 

assets that the people of this province own. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we would like the support 

of members of that side in this review. I think it’s a very 

positive initiative. The future of these corporations and the 

assets are a very important part of the future of this province. 

 

I wish that member would stand up and publicly indicate what 

the Liberal caucus position is with respect to these Crowns. We 

don’t know where they are in gaming; we don’t know where 

they are on taxes; we don’t know where they are on this budget. 

 

All I say, Mr. Speaker, is you’ve got a political party in disarray   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

who stands in this House every day and no one knows what 

they’re talking about, including themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what the 

people of this province want to know and have a right to know 

is what does this government have in plan . . . have in store for 

the Crown corporations, in particular in this case, STC. It’s their 

right; they’re the people that own the company. 

 

I must stress, however, that the official opposition has said, and 

I’ll respond to the minister, is that we’re not against 

privatization of STC. If you would open up your books and be 

upfront . . . And what are you trying to hide with CIC 

interfering into STC, Mr. Speaker? What are they trying to 

hide? That’s what the people want to know. 

 

Also I must stress that privatization does not have to mean a 

loss of service to rural Saskatchewan and the northern areas of 

this province. We are committed to ensuring that the service 

continues to be appropriate for both passenger and parcel 

service for both rural and northern Saskatchewan. If this 

government moves to privatize — and they should tell the 

people of the province what their plan is – there must be a 

commitment made to ensure that this valuable component of the 

bus company is maintained. 

 

What commitment will the minister make in this House today to 

ensure the people of rural Saskatchewan they’re going to have 

the service, whether it’s in privatization or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, there he is, 

there he is, solidly on the fence — solidly on the fence — the 

position taken by that member one more time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to share from the annual reports, the track 

record and the cost to the people of Saskatchewan to deliver this 

service — and I agree, a much-needed service for rural 

Saskatchewan — 1995, a loss of $5.472 million; ’94, a loss of 

3.531; and it goes on, Mr. Speaker. This corporation has been 

facing difficulties with respect to changes in people’s attitude 

towards public transportation and it’s something that needs to 

be dealt with. 

 

For the member to suggest that Crown Investments Corporation 

not have an eye on all of these Crown assets, he has a lack of 

understanding of the process and the governance structure. The 

holding corporation of all the Crown assets is Crown 

Investments Corporation, who is ultimately responsible to the 

shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the leader of his party, Mr. 

Melenchuk, supports — the other day I note in the newspaper 

— the privatization of every one of the Crown corporations. I 

want . . . I know what his position is. At least that day I know 

what his position is. What’s your position today and what’s the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Next question.

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Pornography on the Internet 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

protection of our children is of great concern to me as you well 

know, and I’m sure other members of this Assembly share my 

sentiments. We all have a responsibility to protect their welfare. 

 

I have introduced a private members’ Bill in the hopes of 

helping young children victimized by johns. But, Mr. Speaker, 

street prostitution isn’t the only area where children are being 

abused and exploited. 

 

An Ontario police officer was in Saskatoon yesterday talking to 

about 250 police and social workers about the explosion of 

child pornography on the Internet. The officer says the Internet 

is the most perfect tool for pedophiles to distribute their child 

pornography and they do this virtually undetected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is this province’s largest Internet 

provider. It has indicated it monitors home pages to try to crack 

down on pedophiles, but what about the millions of other sites 

spewing out this garbage. 

 

Will the government today agree that the problem deserves 

some scrutiny? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

is very concerned about this issue and we are examining all of 

the options that we have to deal with this. It’s an international 

problem that has been reviewed by various organizations, 

including the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission), but also we know in the 

United States and around the world. And also we know, 

working with the police, that they are extremely concerned. 

 

We think that the conference in Saskatoon was a very good step 

towards raising this issue in the public. We are going to be 

working with all of the various actors in this whole situation to 

obtain the best information we can to provide protection for 

Saskatchewan people. This is a very serious problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we too 

recognize that this problem is being scrutinized nationally; 

however the province does have the responsibility to its 

residents in this regard until 1998. So a media report quotes a 

SaskTel spokesperson indicating that the company would 

require some sort of court order or authorization from police to 

intercept or monitor communications. This procedure, Mr. 

Speaker, can — and appears to — complicate the hunt for 

pedophiles on the Net and it leaves more and more children 

open to the monsters who prey on them. 

 

Will this government look at both legislation and policy tools 

necessary to make sure that the fight against child pornography 

on the Internet does not become mired in red tape?  



582  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The type of 

information that the hon. member is talking about is clearly 

against the Criminal Code and there are provisions in the 

Criminal Code to deal with these matters. And that is the kind 

of comment I think, that the official of SaskTel was talking 

about, is that when the information is provided or given to the 

police, the police will investigate and lay charges. 

 

One of the great difficulties with the whole Internet system is 

trying to find out where the source is around the world. And 

that's why it takes a coordinated effort of all of us to develop 

some international standards, some international controls. But 

here in Canada we do have the Criminal Code, and we do have 

the ability to use some of those provisions at this point. 

 

I am also agreeing though that there are many more things that 

we need to look at. And we will be looking at those things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the CIC minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you now have 9 more million reasons why you 

would want to scrap the union tendering . . . union-preference 

tendering policy. Construction contractors are getting ready to 

yank as much as $9 million of business away from SaskTel if 

you continue to cling to this unfair agreement. And that’s on top 

of the already $30 million that this policy is costing in the first 

place. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about the boycott that’s 

being proposed by the Saskatchewan Construction Association? 

Will you do the right thing and simply scrap this union 

tendering policy of yours? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question because it gives me an opportunity to stand on my feet 

today, which I was anxious to do. 

 

I want to say to the member that we do not, we most definitely 

do not, share his view that there is anything unfair about the 

Crown Tendering Agreement. We certainly do not agree either 

that the cost is anything like $30 million. As far as we can 

figure, there is no cost element to this thing at all. But we just, 

we just completely disagree with the premisses for the question. 

 

Now as to whether the SCA (Saskatchewan Construction 

Association) have any plans with respect to SaskTel and a 

boycott, they will do what they will do. But that will not lead us 

to reconsider our views with respect to the Crown Tendering 

Agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, this is a rational response to an 

irrational policy. SaskTel won’t do business with non-union 

contractors. It only makes sense that the contractors are refusing 

to do business with SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Minister, Crown corporations simply cannot continue to 

follow stupid policies in an increasingly competitive world 

which we live in. SaskTel isn’t the monopoly any more. If you 

make people mad, they’re not going to take it; they take their 

business elsewhere, no matter how much taxpayers’ money 

SaskTel pumps into advertising. 

 

Mr. Minister, $9 million is a huge blow to the revenues of 

SaskTel, and can you really afford it, to pay another $9 million 

on top of the 30 million you’re already paying for the policy? 

 

We have legislation before the House to repeal the 

union-preference tendering policy. Will you work with us, Mr. 

Minister, to pass that legislation and cut off this unneeded 

expense and unneeded loss of revenue to SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the premiss is stupid — 

the premiss that the agreement cost the government $30 million 

is stupid and unfounded and cannot form the basis for any 

rational question. 

 

I say again to the member, the fact of the matter is that the 

CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) has been 

working very well; that we’re quite satisfied with the way in 

which it’s performed. 

 

We tried, at the urging of that same party last year, to initiate a 

mediation process which would try and satisfy some of the 

concerns about the agreement including . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the Chair is having 

difficulty being able to hear the answer being provided by the 

minister. Order. The question was easy to be able to hear and I 

ask that the House extend the same privilege to the minister for 

the response. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I was saying that last June 

we agreed to the request of that same party to set up a mediation 

process. When the process got up and running, the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association refused to participate 

in it. So how can we deal with their concerns when they refuse 

to go to work with an independent third party in order to meet 

some of their concerns? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as to the boycott, it is the right of any organization 

to take any position they like. This is a free country. We don’t 

think there’s any basis for the boycott and we don’t think their 

members will support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

it looks like the government may be about to adopt another PC 

policy and privatize the STC.  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

Now of course, Mr. Speaker, it depends on who you talk to over 

there. We used to know where you people stood over there. 

We’ve always known where we stand. We’ve never known 

where the opposition stands. 

 

But today we’re confused about the government as well because 

they seem to be on both sides. Because it depends on who you 

talk to, Mr. Speaker, over there. CIC wants to privatize. The 

president of STC represented by the minister over there, they 

and Gordon Nystuen, the new president, of course they don’t 

want to privatize. 

 

But I guess it’s not too surprising that the head of the new bus 

company there would not want to privatize because of course it 

means a one-way bus ticket for poor old Gord right out of 

government. 

 

Now I hope, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not just doing this 

because the Nystuen family has married into my family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my question to both the 

ministers of STC and CIC, and I would like them to both 

answer this question, Mr. Speaker: will you support our concept 

of privatizing STC? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how 

things change when you get in opposition. Now it’s true that 

they do believe in privatizing. It’s true they do believe in 

privatizing. Let’s go through the list of what they privatized, or 

gave away if you look at the price they sold it for. 

 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Potash Corporation, 

empty holes in the ground. They sold the coal mines. The coal 

mines. They kept the power plant but sold the coal mines. They 

sold off the highway equipment so they couldn’t fix the roads. 

 

What did they keep? What did they keep? They kept STC and 

bought buses from Texas. You remember that one. I remember 

that. 

 

You had nine years to privatize STC. You kept it. You sold off 

all the good properties we had for next to nothing to your 

buddies and kept STC and bought the buses in Brownsville. 

Some of you should have stayed down in Brownsville because 

there’s another little plant near Brownsville, that is better 

known than a bus company, where some of you might have 

ended up over that deal. 

 

But you kept the bus company and sold off the coal mines, you 

sold the oil wells, you sold the potash mines, and increased the 

debt to $15 billion while you were doing it. You’ve had your 

chance to privatize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a supplement 

for the minister. Well, Mr. Speaker, Peter Glendinning’s letters 

seem to provide proof that the government shouldn’t be running 

business. We’ve always said . . .  

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the Chair is having great 

difficulty being able to hear the question being put. Order, 

order. Order. Order. All members will recognize it would 

facilitate the process of question period if the questioners would 

ask the questions and the ministers would provide the answers 

and everybody would stick to their roles. 

 

Order, order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It definitely must be 

Friday. 

 

Now STC management has said, through Mr. Glendinning’s 

letter, that things have been so badly screwed up, that the 

present and future finances of this company are in such bad 

shape, that there’s only one option, Mr. Speaker, and that is — 

according to Mr. Glendinning — to privatize the whole 

operation. 

 

Mr. Minister, as long as it is run by government, STC will be a 

money loser. There is no question about whether the past was 

good or bad. The question is how are we going to handle it 

today because today, Mr. Glendinning, who is trying to deflect 

the problems that he has had to you folks, is definitely out of 

the job and he should have been. It’s time to cut your losses 

though and to privatize the enterprise and to get rid of STC and 

turn it around. Let the private sector do that, Mr. Minister. Will 

you take our recommendation and privatize it while this session 

is still on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, round two 

coming up here on the bus issue. But I want to tell the member 

opposite in a serious way that when we’re looking at the Crown 

review and whether or not our Crowns are doing well or not 

doing well, one of the issues is, is whether the customers — the 

people of Saskatchewan — are using the buses to the extent that 

at least they would break even. And the mileage is down, the 

number of ridership. We have questions in some areas whether 

the people are using the bus as much as they need to in order to 

keep the bus. These are obvious questions that we have to ask. 

 

But I want to go back to your issue of privatizing and why one 

of the problems . . . STC is having trouble. And in a serious 

way it goes back to the purchase of buses from a U.S. (United 

States) company — Eagle buses from down in Brownsville, 

Texas. It got so bad at one point when we were in opposition, 

we designed a song that became our theme song in the 1991 

election. It’s called “The Eagle Bus of Texas.” And if I had time 

I’d give you a rendition of it but I’m not going to here today. 

 

But I want to tell you that you’re on very tricky ground when 

you talk about STC and buses and these buses you bought from 

Brownsville. The bus drivers’ feet froze while they were 

driving in rural Saskatchewan because there is no insulation in 

those buses . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



584  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

SaskPower Guyana Project 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gather we 

just got an explanation of why the NDP (New Democratic 

Party) only won eight seats in 1982 — it was their singing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month when I raised the issue of whether the 

President of Guyana’s death would affect, and whether the 

political instability of that country would affect SaskPower 

investment in that country, the minister scoffed at the notion. 

Today we learned the entire project has been put on hold 

because of the president’s death and political instability. It also 

now appears that the Guyana electrical is looking for more than 

$70 million, not the 31 first reported, and it’s promised a much 

lower rate of return than first expected. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of these new developments, will you now 

admit it’s just a bad deal? Will you now stop risking 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money and pull out before it’s too 

late? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s Friday 

morning and I understand the nature of some of these questions 

because Friday is a very difficult day in this legislature. But I 

want to say what is not difficult, Mr. Speaker, is the explanation 

with respect to the discussions that are going on in Guyana with 

respect to the purchase of that corporation. 

 

Number one, they have not been completed. Number two, the 

officials from the Guyanese Electric Company are in 

discussions with SaskPower Commercial. Number three, no 

decision has been made because number four, Mr. Speaker, no 

recommendation has come from SaskPower Commercial to the 

SaskPower board of directors. 

 

I want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, when that recommendation does 

come, it will not be based on decisions as the members opposite 

were part of in the 1980s that resulted in the purchase of Eagle 

buses and other silly deals. We don’t do government that way. 

We don’t run our businesses that way, and this deal will be 

based on sound economic basis. Due diligence will be done 

before any decision is made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Districts’ Labour Standards Violations 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

come to our attention that the majority of health districts in this 

province have been found to be in violation of the call-out 

provisions in The Labour Standards Act. As a result, the 

province’s chief bargaining agent, SAHO (Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations), is trying to reach a 

settlement with close to a thousand claimants. 

 

Will the Minister of Health confirm if that’s the case and 

explain what is the anticipated cost of settling those complaints? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the question 

because of its implications for labour standards. I’m not aware 

that these complaints have been filed. If they’ve been filed with 

the department they’ll be handled in the normal way. And that’s 

about all that we can . . . that’s about all we can say in this 

Assembly. 

 

The matter is dealt with in legislation which has been passed by 

this Assembly and any complaints that are filed will be handled 

pursuant to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Mr. Speaker, that might be all that the 

minister can say about it, but I think we have a few more things 

to say because conservative estimates indicate that claims filed 

by close to a thousand employees may total at least a half a 

million dollars. And I might add, small “c” conservative, small 

“c” conservative. 

 

This is a cost that clearly should not be borne by the health 

districts but rather by this government. As we know, these 

complaints are expensive and cost substantial time and money 

to resolve. In fact the costs related to each of these complaints 

will far exceed the cost of just settling them. 

 

Will the minister admit that his government’s bungling is going 

to cost health districts far more money than if the NDP 

government had followed its own Labour Standards Act in the 

first place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Now it really is Friday, Mr. Speaker, 

when you get a question like that. Practically the whole of the 

health industry, practically the whole of the health industry is 

under collective agreements which have been in existence for 

many, many years. 

 

The provisions of those agreements are well known to all of the 

employers and all of the trade unions and through the trade 

unions all of the employees. 

 

Why the member would even suggest for a moment that it was 

a result of government policy, I can’t imagine. The provisions 

of The Labour Standards Act with respect to call-out pay have 

been in existence for many, many years — decades — and are 

certainly no news as far as the employers and the trade unions 

and the employees in the health industry are concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 44  The Wakamow Valley Authority 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 44, 

The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997, be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Occupational Therapists Act, 

1997. For the past two years, we’ve been consulting with the 

Saskatchewan Society of Occupational Therapists to develop 

this new Act. I’m pleased to say that it contains some very 

positive changes for both the profession and the people they 

serve. 

 

Not only does the statute update the profession’s legislation, but 

it will improve public access to occupational therapy services. 

As a result of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, the public will be 

able to directly access the services of occupational therapists 

without getting a physician’s referral first. 

 

In 1994, Mr. Speaker, our government made similar changes to 

the legislation governing physiotherapists to give people direct 

access to their services. This has been well received. In many 

cases, this means greater convenience for people and fewer 

barriers or delays to receiving care. 

 

This legislation will provide the same benefits for occupational 

therapists and their clients. It is consistent with our renewed 

health system and its emphasis on increasing the public’s access 

to health services in community settings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government agrees with the Saskatchewan 

college of occupational therapists that in many cases a referral 

is an unnecessary expense and duplication and denies the public 

access to primary health services that they need. 

 

For example, sometimes a person who is seeing a therapist 

might need to resume therapy after some time away. It makes 

sense for that person to go directly to their therapist without 

being reassessed by a physician. That being said, in many cases 

residents will continue to seek a physician’s opinion before 

beginning therapy – and they have the right to do so. If 

required, occupational therapists, or the health districts who 

employ them, can request that a client see a physician before 

undergoing therapy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the college of occupational 

therapists, this Act also has the support of the Saskatchewan 

College of Physical Therapists, the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations. As well, similar changes have been 

made, or are under consideration, in a number of other 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new Act will also ensure that occupational 

therapists are accountable to the people they serve. The Act 

contains a number of updated public accountability measures 

that are standard in today’s professional legislation. 

 

For example, representatives of the public will be included on 

the society’s council and disciplinary committee. Disciplinary 

hearings will be open to the public and the entire discipline 

process will be open and transparent. This will enable the 

society to more effectively respond to public concerns, should 

they arise. 

 

This Act will also require the association to file an annual 

report. As well, bylaws which may impact the public will 

require the government’s approval. The approval process will 

allow for consultation with key stakeholders, such as 

physicians, therapists, educators, and health districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are some very positive changes developed in 

close consultation with the profession and in a spirit of 

cooperation. I believe this Act will serve occupational 

therapists, their clients, and the province well into the future by 

improving accountability and access to rehabilitation services. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading 

of The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to spend a few moments today, before moving for adjournment 

of Bill 16, to address some of the concerns that we’ve heard 

regarding this Bill. We’re still in the process of reviewing the 

details of the entire Bill before we decide whether or not to 

support it. However, some reservations have been brought to 

our attention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously at any time that we want to move 

towards making health care delivery more accessible to the 

people of Saskatchewan, that’s positive. According to the 

minister, this change to the Act will provide people in need of 

the services of occupational therapists easier access since they’ll 

no longer need a referral by a physician. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, any good that this change does is muted 

by the fact that health districts themselves may continue to 

require a doctor’s consultation before a resident can obtain the 

services of an occupational therapist. 

 

A major concern as well is that, since it is the health districts 

that employ occupational therapists, the ongoing budget crunch 

faced by every health district in Saskatchewan may in fact 

impede the public’s access to these services. We all know that 

many very vital health care services have been disappearing in 

many parts of our province in the last few years as health 

districts attempt to stay within their budgets and the funding 

formula set out for them by the provincial government. And I 

can’t see how occupational therapy is any different. 

 

And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, does not address who has adequate 

access to this type of therapy and who does not; where 

therapists are needed, and where they’re not available. So while 

the minister can stand in the House and claim that this Bill will 

improve access for the people who need occupational therapy, 

the main problem faced by our health care system remains. 

 

  



586  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

Just as in the case with many other services, this government’s 

policies has resulted in a rationing of services. And this is just 

the opposite of improving access; it restrains access. And that is 

a concern when we’re dealing with any type of health care 

service in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have concerns similar to those expressed 

by our member from North Battleford yesterday in this House 

over the proposed Dental Disciplines Act. Those concerns deal 

with the process that people have at their disposal when they 

have a complaint against an occupational therapist. 

 

Just as in the case with The Dental Disciplines Act, a person 

unhappy with service he or she has received from a therapist 

has the option of taking those complaints to the occupational 

therapist society’s professional conduct committee. 

 

However, if the professional conduct committee decides no 

further action is necessary, that’s the end of the matter, period. 

There is no appeal mechanism for the complainant. The matter 

is decided once and for all. 

 

I compare this to the process that’s in place for The Legal 

Profession Act, which has an extensive review process. If a 

complainant doesn’t receive a satisfactory result at one stage of 

the process, they have the process of appealing to another level. 

This would seem to offer patients more protection from 

problems they might encounter. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, just as in the case with The Dental 

Disciplines Act, this Bill does not offer immunity from 

prosecution for the Saskatchewan Society of Occupational 

Therapists if the society decides disciplinary action is necessary 

against one of its own members. There is nothing stopping the 

person targeted by the disciplinary action from turning around 

and launching a suit against the society itself; though 

individuals are protected. 

 

We do have concerns that this could create a chill against 

complaints from the public. If the society no longer is afforded 

such protection, it may be more unwilling to launch disciplinary 

action against one of its members. 

 

This will not be to the benefit of the people using the services of 

occupational therapists. If something goes wrong, they may not 

have any recourse at all if the society is uneasy or unwilling to 

take action simply because it no longer has this immunity from 

legal action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the concerns that have been 

brought to our attention regarding Bill 16, and we’ll want to 

take a little while longer to discuss the proposed Bill with 

affected parties to ensure that what is contained in this Bill is 

right for the people of Saskatchewan who need these services. 

 

Therefore, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of the family maintenance Act, 1997. This Bill 

authorizes child support guidelines to be enacted in provincial 

legislation. It proposes the following specific amendments: 

 

The court will be instructed to order maintenance in accordance 

with the child support guidelines. The guidelines will apply 

unless special provisions have otherwise been made for the 

benefit of the child and the application of the guidelines would 

as a result be inequitable. 

 

The section providing for maintenance to continue past a child’s 

18th birthday is amended to specifically provide that the 

maintenance may continue if the child is pursuing reasonable 

education. Where the court is considering the appropriate 

amount of maintenance to be paid by the parent of a person who 

is over the age of 18, it is not required to apply the guidelines. 

 

Child support guidelines are given priority over spousal support 

orders, with the proviso that a reduction or termination of child 

support gives a spouse an opportunity to ask the court to review 

the amount of spousal support. 

 

Also there will be regulation-making power added to the Act to 

allow for guidelines to be established or adopted. Regulations 

can also be made respecting how the court calculates a parent’s 

income. For example, the court will be allowed to attribute 

income to parents in cases where parents are deliberately 

unemployed or under-employed or where they refuse to provide 

information to the court about their income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, determining the cost of raising a child has always 

been a difficult task for the courts. Rather than having a judge 

try to decide what level of support should be paid based on a 

family’s income and expenses and the child’s estimated needs, 

this Bill implements the use of standardized tables. 

 

These tables, the child support guidelines, will be easy for the 

public and for the legal profession to use. They make the law 

more accessible. They represent what Canadians at various 

income levels actually spend on average to support a child. 

 

The availability of standardized tables is a welcome 

improvement in the law. This is borne out by the fact that the 

tables have been used since 1995 in Saskatchewan by a number 

of judges and lawyers to assist them in determining an 

appropriate amount of maintenance. 

 

The approach used in the guidelines is based on a report 

prepared by the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Family Law 

Committee after extensive consultation over many years. The 

purpose of adopting guidelines is to encourage child support 

awards that are adequate for the child’s needs, as well as more 

consistent, predictable, and equitable. Child support guidelines 

are currently in place in Sweden, all of the United States, 

Australia, United Kingdom, and Germany. 

 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

The amendments I am introducing today maintain consistency 

with provisions in the Divorce Act. This federal legislation 

ensures that the rights and responsibilities of parents are 

consistent under both federal and provincial legislation. 

Amending this Act to maintain consistency with the federal 

Divorce Act, ensures that children of unmarried parents will be 

treated equally with children of married parents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adopting child support guidelines will improve the 

adequacy, consistency and predictability of child support 

awards in this province. Experience in Saskatchewan and in 

other jurisdictions indicates that guidelines reduce the number 

of cases for which an application is made to the court to set the 

amount of child support. This is beneficial for the court system, 

but more importantly, it is beneficial for families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Family Maintenance Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to thank the 

Minister of Justice for his comments this morning. 

 

It seems to me that one of the hallmarks of any good justice 

system is predictability. Indeed it might well be argued that 

without predictability there is no justice. 

 

In criminal matters, we all accept that while our courts require 

some latitude to deal with each factual situation and each 

accused as an individual situation and an individual person, 

nonetheless, basically the same offence ought to receive the 

same treatment by the courts and the same punishment. 

 

Likewise in civil cases, we all accept that while there will be 

variation from case to case and party to party, there again it is 

very important for a society that similar cases are dealt with in a 

similar fashion. 

 

(1100) 

 

Unfortunately this has been all too often missing from child 

support. Child maintenance awards have been all over the map, 

and this has led to unnecessary litigation, unnecessary time 

spent in trying to resolve these difficult and often emotional 

matters. It has resulted in money going to the legal system 

which might better have been spent on the children. And it has 

resulted in aggrieved and bitter parents who then find it more 

difficult to deal with the other emotional issues of separation 

and divorce, such as child access. 

 

I think it is important that issues of child support be dealt with 

quickly and fairly, and that the parties involved understand that 

they are being treated in a similar fashion to other people in the 

same situation. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, all too often a non-custodial parent, 

usually the father, is aware of other men in a similar financial 

situation as himself paying far less. This obviously leaves him 

bitter and angry. 

 

Likewise the custodial parent, often the mother, is aware of 

situations where a former husband is paying far more child 

support on basically the same income. Again, this leads to 

unnecessary bitterness and anger, and it makes the problem of 

dealing with issues of child access far more difficult than they 

ought to be. 

 

If we can settle quickly the issue of child support and the other 

financial issues which arise out of separation, I am confident 

that then the other non-financial issues will often be much 

easier to settle. 

 

About 20 years ago this House adopted The Matrimonial 

Property Act which of course, Mr. Speaker, provides for an 

almost automatic division of matrimonial assets on separation. 

There was some concern at that time that having an automatic 

50/50 division didn’t take sufficient account of individual 

circumstances. 

 

I think we now understand that the automatic division has had a 

number of advantages and benefits. Not only lawyers, but the 

general public is now quite familiar with what their respective 

rights and obligations are. And clients coming to a law office 

generally do not have to be told what they can expect to have 

happen in division of matrimonial property on separation. 

 

Far fewer cases are going before the courts simply because of 

that fact. Lawyers and their clients know in advance what the 

judge is likely to do, and consequently it makes good sense to 

settle the matter quickly and expeditiously as opposed to 

wasting unnecessary time and money on a court case. 

 

Hopefully, the adoption of child maintenance guidelines will 

have the same effect. Lawyers, and hence their clients, will 

know in advance what the courts are likely to do, and hence it 

only makes good sense to settle the issue quickly. 

 

The other advantage I see in having standardized child support 

guidelines is that it brings to a close something like 20 years in 

this country of a rather thorough — a rather silly — 

investigation into how much it costs to raise children in Canada. 

 

For a long time, we were conducting various studies trying to 

decide what the cost of raising a child is, which of course 

necessitated trying to decide how much a child should eat, how 

much a child should be clothed, how much recreation and sports 

a child is entitled to do and whether or not these costs are 

significantly different in Toronto than, say, in Regina. 

 

At the end of 20 years of these studies we have hit on a very 

basic and very simple conclusion. Namely, it costs to raise 

children what the parents have available to do the job. If parents 

are wealthy, then the cost of raising a child will no doubt 

include a big home, a fancy car, trips, lessons, and other such 

amenities. For a single mother on welfare, the cost of raising a 

child will unfortunately, of necessity, be seriously scaled back. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, we now accept and I think the guidelines 

accept that the children ought to have the right to participate in 

the financial circumstances of their parents. Indeed they do for   



588  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

an intact family. In an intact family, if the parents’ income rises, 

the children can anticipate an improved standard of living. They 

can anticipate the family being able to do more than previously. 

So why should the child of a separated family not have the 

same rights? 

 

Indeed if there is a financial downturn, of necessity the child is 

going to have to accept lower child support payments. 

Therefore if there is an improvement in the circumstances of the 

parents, the child surely has a right to participate in that 

improvement as well. 

 

I mentioned The Matrimonial Property Act and its almost 

automatic division of property on divorce. I think that child 

support guidelines are even more important, not only because 

they are directed at the children rather than at the adult parties, 

but what’s more, in the case of child support, the parties to that 

agreement or to that litigation are of necessity going to have to 

have further, ongoing contact because of their children. 

 

As lawyers, Mr. Speaker, we are always fond of saying to our 

clients that we should not mix up the issue of child support with 

the issue of child access. Reality is quite different. If child 

support is a bitter and emotional and divisive issue it is almost 

inevitable that visits by the non-custodial parent will be a time 

of turmoil and fighting. 

 

I am hopeful that with the adoption of child support guidelines, 

we will accomplish being able to allow the non-custodial parent 

the chance of having a good, warm and harmonious relationship 

with his or her children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is also important to note that the 

adoption of child support guidelines is something coming in all 

across Canada; it is something that has been initiated by the 

federal Minister of Justice; it is something now accepted by all 

jurisdictions in Canada as an advance in family law. 

 

Again, I congratulate the government on following the lead of 

Ottawa and accepting the benefits of our federal system in 

positive and forward-thinking legislation from the federal 

government. 

 

There are certainly specific issues to be . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  That would be novel, wouldn’t it? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Well I think it’s far from novel, Mr. Speaker, 

although members opposite may be slow to give credit where 

credit is due. Nonetheless if they follow the lead and follow the 

example, whether they give credit or not, I suppose that is the 

important matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are certainly specific matters to be discussed 

and to be decided in this matter. There are many issues before 

us. But nonetheless, I would like to say that bringing some 

standardization into the thorny issue of child support is indeed a 

very hopeful development in family law, and one I am pleased 

to see. And I am very hopeful that it will take some of the 

bitterness and anger out of the difficult process of families 

separating. And I’m hoping that the children of Saskatchewan 

will be the winners in this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are however still some issues on this Bill 

that our members are anxious to consider and to discuss with 

stakeholders and with groups representing separating parents. 

And for this reason there are many people we still wish to 

consult and consider as to some of the details on this Bill. For 

that reason I now move adjournment of second reading. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 

1997. 

 

This Act is being amended to give the Public Trustee the 

opportunity to be heard, or consent, before receiving an 

appointment under any other Act to provide for administrative 

changes, and to authorize the Public Trustee to invest funds 

from the victim’s fund and other sources as part of the Public 

Trustee common fund. 

 

In addition, the powers and the responsibilities of the Public 

Trustee are being clarified in several important ways. For 

example, the amendments will ensure that the Public Trustee 

can act as a committee under The Absentee Act, a trustee under 

The Trustee Act, and in exceptional cases, as a power of 

attorney for property. 

 

In the future the Public Trustee will only actively monitor those 

estates where children are involved in cases where this is 

appropriate. If the Public Trustee intends to monitor an estate 

involving children, the executor or trustee will be advised 

expressly. In this way, the Public Trustee will continue to focus 

resources on files requiring attention. 

 

The Public Trustee requires a will in order to administer an 

estate. Most often, wills are willingly surrendered. However, in 

at least one instance this has not been the case. Another 

amendment will ensure that the Public Trustee has the authority 

to request and receive a will. 

 

In some instances, even though there is an order for an executor 

or administrator to provide an accounting of the estate, this is 

not done. An amendment will allow the Public Trustee to take 

further steps or proceedings to protect an infant or dependent 

adult when the executor or administrator of the estate is 

uncooperative or unscrupulous. Steps to protect the interests of 

the dependent adult or infant could include obtaining a court 

order discharging the executor or administrator and replacing 

him or her with a judicial trustee. 

 

The courts have the authority to appoint the Public Trustee to 

act in certain capacities such as a trustee. As a result however, 

the Public Trustee’s office often receives a court order without 

having been aware of the court application and without having 

had an opportunity to appear in court to speak to the matter or 

to have input into the wording of the order. 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

The proposed amendment would ensure that the Public Trustee 

can make representations to the court in applications for the 

appointment of the Public Trustee as trustee for an individual or 

estate. This would ensure that the Public Trustee’s office is not 

surprised by unexpected appointments. 

 

As well, the changes will enable the Public Trustee to decide 

whether to consent to such orders. The Public Trustee Act 

allows the Public Trustee to assign duties to the deputy public 

trustees. The Act will be amended to permit delegations of tasks 

to others, including trust officers and other support staff. It is 

anticipated that such delegation will result in more efficient 

service. 

 

The Act is also being amended to allow the common fund to 

accept monies from other sources, specifically the victims’ 

fund. Money received by the Public Trustee is held and invested 

through the Public Trustee common fund. The fund is invested 

in accordance with policies and performance objectives. Fund 

performance is reviewed quarterly. 

 

The victims’ fund is made up of surcharges on fines imposed on 

offenders for offences under federal and provincial legislation. 

Being part of the larger Public Trustee common fund will 

provide an opportunity for the victims’ fund to earn a greater 

return, depending on the overall performance of the common 

fund. Any additional earnings will be used to fund victim 

services and programs. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the amendments will clarify the 

Public Trustee’s powers and responsibilities. They will achieve 

some administrative efficiencies within the office. They will 

also provide an opportunity for the victims’ fund to earn 

additional investment income to be dedicated to developing 

victim services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Public Trustee Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have 

this opportunity to speak to Bill 31. I believe it’s an important 

Bill, and I also believe that whenever the handling of public 

funds are concerned, that it is important that it’s done in a most 

meticulous, fair, and judicious manner. 

 

The major amendments proposed within this Bill will empower 

public trustees . . . one of the things will be to administer the 

money collected in the victims’ fund. And I certainly do not 

have any objections to having qualified officials handling 

money that is collected in the public’s interest. 

 

I do have some reservations however, about the minister’s 

intentions for the victims’ fund. If this fund is large enough to 

warrant the use of public trustees to overlook the management 

and investment of these public monies, I would like to know 

why there may be a surplus building up. It’s a tragedy — it 

really is — that victims of crime are often forgotten in a legal 

process. That’s become better now, however, even though these 

people have scars that remain long, long after their attacker or 

attackers have served time and subsequently been released. 

 

And I recognize that this government is taking some steps to 

remedy this flaw by employing victims’ services coordinators. 

And these people, without a doubt, are doing good work. It’s 

come a long way in that respect — in recognizing that victims 

of crime are people that deserve a great deal of attention. And 

just to reiterate, that in the past few decades, the entire 

Canadian judicial system has come a long way in developing 

new programs to assist these unfortunate victims of crime. 

 

But I am concerned that all the money collected by the victims 

of crime surcharge is not all being directed back into 

compensation and counselling for Saskatchewan victims of 

crime. Surely even if the entire victims’ fund was returned by 

way of compensation or services to the victims, the amount 

collected by way of the surcharges would not nearly be enough. 

 

So I am somewhat curious to know why the victims’ fund is 

substantial enough to now require some investment planning. It 

seems to me that if Saskatchewan was in the midst of a period 

of a low crime rate, the victims’ fund might not need to be 

dispersed as rapidly as it is collected. But on the other hand, 

why would the minister even consider building up the victims’ 

fund if he is directing his attention to lowering the crime rate 

further in this province? 

 

If the amendments contained within Bill 31 are intended to 

enable the victims’ fund to build up, I have to wonder if the 

minister and Saskatchewan Justice officials are anticipating 

perhaps a greater increase in the crime rate? I would hope not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we still have some questions with respect 

to the current use of the victims’ fund and if it is meeting with 

the objectives for which it was established, we require just a 

little more time to gather some input into the amendments 

proposed, and therefore I move to adjourn this motion at this 

point. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes 

d’actes criminels 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Victims of Crime Amendment 

Act, 1997. This is a companion amendment to those found in 

The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 which authorizes the 

Public Trustee to accept money from the victims’ fund. The 

victims’ fund is made up of surcharges on fines imposed on 

offenders for offences under federal and provincial legislation. 

 

Money received by the Public Trustee is held and invested 

through the common fund. The fund is invested according to 

policies and performance objectives; fund performance is 

reviewed quarterly. Participation in the larger Public Trustee 

common fund provides an opportunity for the victims’ fund to 

earn a greater return, depending on the overall performance of   



590  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

the common fund. Any additional earnings will be used to fund 

victim services and programs. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, this amendment will provide an 

opportunity for the victims’ fund to earn investment income for 

users of victim services through the investment activity of the 

common fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Victims of Crime Act, 1995. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These Bills and 

amendments that are being proposed and put forward are 

extremely important to the needs of people within the province 

of Saskatchewan. There is a need however, to examine some of 

the impacts that this legislation will in fact have. And therefore, 

I’m again pleased to be able to share the concerns of the Liberal 

caucus and also the concerns of the growing number of victims 

and potential victims of crimes in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is truly a sad issue that we must discuss today and deal 

with. It is horrible to think that our communities are plagued 

with continuously increasing crime rates. It is a difficult and a 

sad topic, Mr. Speaker, but one that definitely cannot be 

avoided for discussion. 

 

We all know far too well that crime statistics are on the rise. 

The community of Regina, as we’ve all heard about . . . and 

experienced perhaps in some cases, the rash of car thefts in the 

not-so-recent past. And we must not think that these were 

isolated incidents. In one year alone — this is hard to imagine 

— 3,000 cars were stolen. 

 

The statistics in that respect are staggering, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely staggering. And the crime is on the rise and there 

needs to be something done about it. But we must get beyond 

statistics, Mr. Speaker, and look at the ramifications of these 

crimes and the ramifications they have on the victims of these 

crimes and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

These people are not just statistics; they are not just numbers. 

As a former RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer, I 

saw firsthand how violent crimes against a person and crimes 

against property and, yes, even white collar crimes, how they 

can traumatize the victims. These crimes leave scars on people 

that last a very, very long time. 

 

We’ve come a long way, as I’d mentioned earlier, in trying to 

alleviate some of the hurt but we still have a long ways to go. 

 

As a police officer, I want to recognize those people . . . the 

good work that are done by the victim service coordinators, 

which I also talked about earlier. We want to applaud these 

people and the good work that they do to alleviate some of the 

pain. 

 

However today we must recognize that a large portion of the 

crimes occurring in society are not covered, unfortunately, by 

victim services. The victims’ fund unfortunately does not apply 

to crimes of property. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite may say that crimes of 

property are different than crimes of violence. The minister may 

say that such crimes should not be eligible for compensation 

because people should carry insurance on their homes and on 

their properties. 

 

This is not to say, Mr. Speaker, that this assumption does not 

have a great deal of legitimacy but, Mr. Speaker, it is high time 

that the minister opposite recognizes the psychological costs of 

crimes of property. I think it must be recognized that the line 

between crimes of property and crimes against the person is 

indeed a very fine line. 

 

Because crime has gotten so out of hand in many areas of some 

communities, insurance companies refuse to insure property in 

those locations. Even if insurance companies will cover 

property, oftentimes the premiums are so high that, particularly 

seniors on fixed incomes, cannot afford to pay the price. 

 

Again it is the people in our communities which need protection 

and compensation the most, that do not receive it; those people 

that cannot protect themselves, that become victimized and 

traumatized through no fault of their own. 

 

Insurance premiums aside, financial costs are most certainly not 

the only cost of crime. Arguably these costs may not even be 

the most significant costs of crime. People who are violated in 

any way, whether their body is violated or their property, often 

experience emotional costs which far surpass any financial 

costs that one could imagine. 

 

All too often as a society we neglect to recognize in a 

meaningful way the physical, emotional, and psychological 

scars which stay with the victims of crime long after the media 

has lost interest. The pain which these people experience is a 

real pain whether their scars are visible or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I have some serious 

reservations about the implications of some aspects of this Act 

and we are still gathering input. Therefore at this time, I move 

adjournment of this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motion for Interim Supply 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Deputy Chairman. Welcome to 

the minister and officials, just several questions on the interim 

supply. 

 

In reference to budgets, and for the sake of many of the viewers 

of the Assembly back in my constituency, could you briefly 

explain what the interim supply purpose of the budget is, and 

basically give us a rundown of the purpose of interim supply? 

 

(1130) 

 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes. To the member opposite, I 

would be very pleased to do that because I think it’s . . . 

sometimes it’s a difficult concept to understand — why we’re 

doing this at this time. 

 

Essentially what happens is the government brings in a budget, 

usually in February or March, because the government’s year 

end is not December 31; it’s March 31. So it’s close enough to 

the year end that you know what your situation is, but it’s 

before the year end so that, you know, you’re not into the next 

year. 

 

And the difficulty becomes, the legislature, quite rightly, wants 

to debate the budget for a long period of time. And they want to 

go into detailed discussions about the budget, which is the 

estimates. 

 

They bring the ministers in. The Minister of Education comes in 

with all the officials and all the detail. So you can ask all the 

detail about what’s in the Education budget and you can be sure 

that you understand or accept what’s in the Education budget, 

etc. So it’s a long time between the budget being introduced 

into the House and the budget actually becoming formally 

passed by the legislature. 

 

The problem is that beginning April 1 there are a number of 

groups out there that depend on the government giving them the 

money that is going to be approved in the budget. So in order to 

get to the date between April 1 and whenever the budget is 

eventually passed, you have what you call interim supply. And 

all it does is it authorizes the different departments of 

government to make the payments that have to be made in that 

interim period before the budget’s approved. And then as soon 

as the budget’s approved, interim supply lapses and the 

budget’s in place. So that’s essentially what we’re doing today. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And again the 

purpose of the budget is to determine where allocations of the 

provincial government will be allocated to various departments. 

As we know, we have roughly, in this department of summary 

for the two-twelfths interim supply, we have roughly 33 

allocations. 

 

And again when you budget for a home or you budget for a 

business or you budget for a municipality or you budget for a 

corporation or you budget for the government, basically the 

theory is very simple, in which you try and balance your 

incomes with your projections. And you’re certainly trying to 

operate in a sound fiscal manner in which you make sure, by 

what you get in as government, that you don’t exceed what you 

give out as government. So really it’s a planning process. 

 

And again the theory of balancing your budget and the theory of 

budgets in general is to see how you can operate with all the 

dollars you have to make sure you’re operating in a sound 

manner. 

 

Just in reference to the PST (provincial sales tax) reduction in 

your budget, I don’t believe there was no question that it was a 

very good move for the people of Saskatchewan in the 

reduction of the budget, I think, from 9 to 7 per cent. We 

simply had no choice as a province but to reduce the high 

taxation that we have, and that in turn reduces investment to the 

province and it certainly reduces consumer confidence. 

 

And I think as time progresses and perhaps over the next 

several years, the next year’s question that people have to ask 

about the budget — is a further reduction to a 5 per cent PST 

possible over the next coming years? Or the second part of the 

equation is: can perhaps people look at retaining the 7 per cent 

but increasing government services, increasing allocations to 

such areas of health care or highways or education or 

post-secondary institutes, or perhaps developing a better 

environment for the economy to thrive? 

 

These are all choices that Saskatchewan people have to make in 

the future, and I think many people in northern Saskatchewan. 

And there may be some students watching this today, Madam 

Minister, and we do this basically for explanation to them as to 

what budgeting is all about and the choices that governments 

have to make. But what we do want to explain as well for many 

of the people out there listening, that budgets are simple in 

nature but very complex in terms of designing and 

implementing your priorities as government. 

 

The first question I have in reference to budgeting. The Premier 

of course is meeting this week with several bond agencies and 

the Leader-Star of today, and I quote from the Friday, April 4 

paper: 

 

Saskatchewan will know in six or eight weeks whether 

Romanow’s budget presentations have translated into a 

higher credit rating. 

 

The question is, in terms of addressing our debt issue, the better 

the rating we get from the bond agencies, of course the lower 

interest costs will be the end result. We look at the six- to 

eight-week period in which we are confident that we’ll get a 

better bond rating and therefore lower interest rates. 

 

In view of this particular statement, are you fairly confident as 

Minister of Finance that the low . . . or the better bond rating 

will indeed happen? And if it doesn’t happen, will that affect 

your surplus in terms of your budget allocation, and by how 

much? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

raises a lot of good points, which I’ll address — a number of 

the ones that he raises. I thought that that was a very good 

explanation of balancing the budget. That you know you really 

have to have a balance between how much money is coming in 

and how much you’re spending. And it sounds pretty basic but 

it’s what got us into this mess into the 1980s, because in the 

’80s, each and every year, there was more money being spent 

— about a billion more a year, actually — than was coming in. 

 

And I think it’s a good explanation because it also makes 

another point. Things that aren’t in the budget are not 

necessarily things that are bad or things that . . . There can be a 

lot of things that are good and should be done, but you can’t 

afford them all. And part of what budgeting is, is saying here 

are the most important, the highest priorities, and that’s why   



592  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

they’re in the budget. There’s a whole series of other things that 

are good things as well. They’re just not as high in the priority 

list of the people of Saskatchewan as what we’ve done. 

 

Now the member talks about the sales tax cut, and we think it’s 

a very important and good part of the budget, and we believe 

that it will help the economy. It will create jobs. And we believe 

that the average person welcomes the sales tax cut. 

 

He talks about where we go from here. But I think in a way, the 

answer to that question is in your own preamble. What we’re 

saying in this budget — as we look four years out because this 

budget goes right to 2001 in terms of the projections — we can 

afford all of this and we won’t have to reverse any of this. This 

is all affordable as far out as you can possibly see. 

 

But that question about what comes next has to be answered 

only when this situation changes. That is, when you’ve done 

better than you think or you actually can afford the next step. 

Because the only real danger is taking the next step before you 

can afford it. Which again is what happened in the ’80s. The 

gas tax was cut; it was cut dramatically; wasn’t affordable; and 

within a number of years you have the gas tax back. 

 

Now you’re asking about the Premier’s trip to Toronto and New 

York to talk to the rating agencies. It’s difficult to know what 

the result will be and we’ll just have to see. But I do want to 

make two points. One about government travel. When you go to 

see these investors, you’ve got to remember that investors 

around the world see a map of Canada and often . . . I mean I’ve 

gone to places to talk about Saskatchewan’s credit rating and 

they think Saskatchewan’s a company. The secretary said: is 

this a company? No, it’s a province within a country called 

Canada. Oh, of course. Now these aren’t the analysts but this is 

the secretary for the rating agencies thinking that Saskatchewan 

is a company somewhere. 

 

So one of the things you’re doing, and the Premier’s doing, is 

you’re spreading the word. You’re saying, please look at these 

numbers; they speak for themselves. And the numbers say that 

in 1993 we were here, and in 1997 they were here. And the 

reason they want the minister there, by the way — because the 

officials can give the numbers — is they want the political 

commitment; where you’re going next. 

 

But what are you going to do next? Are you going to continue 

to . . . Yes, you talk about reducing taxes — good point. You 

talk about spending — yes. They also ask you . . . And I must 

admit the member from Melfort concerned me a bit budget day 

when I heard him on the radio saying he thinks we’ve done too 

much of the balancing of the books. You’ve got to keep on 

reducing that debt because they want to hear the commitment to 

do the other things. 

 

They also want to hear that the debt is coming down. And it’s 

an essential message because the reason we have the money to 

reduce taxes and do all the other things is because we’re saving 

so much on interest payments. So it’s not possible to say, well 

you wouldn’t have done all the tough stuff to balance the books 

and pay down the debt, and yet be willing to spend the money 

that comes from the benefit of reducing the debt. 

So by persuading these agencies that, not only have you made 

incredible progress as a province, but as the people who are 

going to be leading the province you’re still committed to 

making further progress, this can save you what, to the average 

person, is infinitesimal amounts of money in terms of basis 

points and the interest you pay. It comes down . . . a basis point 

is a 10th of a per cent. It comes down, whoa, a 10th of a per 

cent? You say, well you’re saving a 10th of a per cent on the 

interest you pay on the money you borrow? But that can 

translate into millions of dollars of savings because of the 

amount of money you’re borrowing. 

 

So often, I have to confess, I become some annoyed when 

people say, well where’s the Premier staying when he’s 

travelling or what’s he doing? These trips can save the province 

millions and millions of dollars just on the interest that you 

save. And it’s important to have the key ministers — and 

obviously the Premier is the most key — there because they 

want to see what your resolve is for the future. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I think the 

clear thing that we wish to clarify here is, certainly as a member 

of this Assembly I support some of the travel that’s necessary to 

conduct government — the trade missions and the discussion 

with the bond agencies. In order to get things done, we 

obviously have to travel. If we sat in this Assembly every day 

and every day of the week, and debated amongst ourselves the 

value of our bonds, then certainly we’d never see the interest 

rates go down. 

 

And there is no question that the irresponsible spending of the 

Tory government in the early ’80s is certainly going to have 

ourselves and our children pay for that debt for many, many 

years. And then we see the further irresponsibility of getting up 

in the Assembly and debating the merits of travel when they 

done the very same thing when they were in office. So it was 

really a question of how much longer can the irresponsible 

Tories continue to drag this province down to silly games in this 

Assembly, and their past spending habits. So certainly from my 

perspective there is no question that travel and government is 

necessary — and very necessary — because the dollars you 

save in the future can certainly help out not only the 

constituency of Athabasca but the province as a whole. 

 

So in reference to the interest payments that you have indicated 

in your budget, at one time the interest amount was $850 

million a year. And that $850 million could translate into a 

tremendous amount of investment into roads and into schools 

and into hospitals and so on and so forth. 

 

So, and I guess in essence there is no question that if we didn’t 

have the interest payments to make, then we could of course 

spend more money on a number of areas. However, in saying 

that, I think the people of Saskatchewan know. I’m not going to 

belabour the point of Tory mismanagement. That’s going to be 

around for the next 10, 15 years, if not longer. So we won’t sit 

here and debate the whole issue at all. 

 

But going back to the drop from 9 per cent to 7 per cent, you 

indicated roughly that’s $80 million per point in terms of 

percentage of provincial sales tax. That’s $160 million. Would   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

it be fair to say that some of the Cameco shares that were sold 

several years ago, some of the increased activity in natural gas 

and drilling in general, is that where the balance of the $160 

million will be coming from to compensate for the reduction of 

the PST? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, no, the Cameco shares, not directly; indirectly because 

our interest payments are going down. The Cameco shares all 

went to reduce debt. Our balanced-budget legislation tries to 

deal with the problems of the ’80s. One of the problems of the 

’80s was, major assets were sold — the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan privatized at a loss, a huge loss — and money 

was just spent. So according to our balanced-budget legislation, 

if a major part of a Crown is sold, it has to be used to reduce 

debt. You can’t spend it. 

 

So any of that one-time money went to reduce debt. But 

because we reduced the debt, we’re saving less on interest . . . 

or we’re saving money on interest. We’re not paying as much 

on interest. So indirectly. And the benefit of that is when you 

save money on interest, you save it each and every year. When 

you sell something like Cameco, it’s once. But if you reduce the 

debt and the interest payments come down, you have an interest 

saving each and every year. 

 

So there’s two reasons why we could afford the sales tax cut 

and the new spending. Our interest payments are coming down, 

and they’re going to continue to come down. And the only 

reason they’re coming down is because we did make the 

difficult choices quickly and we continue to pay down debt. 

And the other reason is the economy has turned around. 

 

And there’s all kinds of factors as to why the economy has 

turned around. But some of them have to do with, the first fact 

is if you’re thinking about investing in a province like 

Saskatchewan, what you want to know is what the fiscal future 

is going to be like. And in the ’80s you would be very nervous 

about investing in Saskatchewan because you’d look at the 

fiscal future and you’d look at the deficits and you’d say, it’s 

not sustainable. And you would be afraid that your taxes were 

going to go up at some point to pay for those deficits. One of 

the comments that Grant Devine made that was accurate was 

deficits are deferred taxes. 

 

So the fiscal stability has helped investment because people say, 

what I see here is a fiscal regime that’s stable and because it’s 

stable and improving — the debt is coming down — I actually 

see a fiscal regime that’s going to be better for my company 

because the tax regime is going downward, not upward. 

 

And I think the other thing that the government did to promote 

the growth in the economy is it changed the royalty structure for 

the oil companies, sat down with them and said okay, we need 

money from oil companies for our services. We need royalties 

but we also want to have you here. How can we restructure this 

to meet both of our needs? And I think that was another factor 

in the economy moving, plus our other measures 

to keep the economy moving. 

 

So in short, we can afford this because our debt is going down. 

Our interest payments are declining, and our economy is doing 

well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. On the interim supply motion, 

you know certainly servicing the provincial debt is something 

most, many people support. And looking at the interim supply 

again, we noticed that the debt reduction balance here in terms 

of under Finance, Servicing the Public Debt, we’re looking at 

765,000 for 1997-1998, and for the two-twelfths interim supply 

it says, zero balance. So is that to say that for this next two 

months, as a province, that there will be no payment made on 

the debt, that zero dollars sent to reduce the debt? Because in 

general mortgage terms, would it not be wise for a person that’s 

entering into a mortgage to pay their mortgage payments once a 

week so in essence you’re borrowing some money at lesser 

time. 

 

So the question I have is on the interim supply motion. Why is 

it that the servicing of the provincial debt is zero? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I explained the other day that the 

only things that are not in interim supply are what is statutory; 

that is, where there’s statutes that require the government to do 

this. This isn’t included in interim supply and this particular 

item is statutory. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And the federal 

. . . or the provincial budget roughly runs over $5 billion per 

year, and obviously the federal government does contribute to 

the province. Is this contribution in quarterly payments or is it 

contributed monthly? And if so, what are the total transfer 

payments from the federal government to the provincial 

coffers? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The total amount for today is 650 

million. But I think the number that has to be laid out because it 

puts this into the proper perspective. When we became 

government, about 30 per cent of our revenue came from the 

federal government. 

 

We’ve been talking about the federal government offloading 

and the problems it’s causing for health care and the problems 

it’s causing for education. And we’ve been upset with the 

members opposite for not taking a stand. 

 

When you think about the fact that it was about 30 per cent of 

our revenue, when we became government in 1991, came from 

the federal government; do you know what it is this year? It’s 

12 per cent — 12 per cent. That is a massive, massive 

withdrawal of funding from priority programs. So that’s the 

issue that we’ve been trying to drive home to people in this 

province — a massive withdrawal. 

 

And I guess part of my concern is I’ve become very sceptical 

when I hear the same government now deciding that they’ve 

rediscovered social programs. That government in Ottawa has 

done more than any other government in the history of Canada 

to undermine social programs. You just think about that   



594  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

number — 30 per cent of our revenue came from the federal 

government in ’91. And not to the province, but to people in the 

province for services like health, education, social programs. 

 

Now it’s down to 12 per cent. No wonder there have been 

problems in areas like health. And no wonder we and other 

provinces are so upset about what has been going on here. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just a few 

questions left. In reference to the whole federal allocation to the 

provincial government, is it safe to say that the federal Liberal 

government in Ottawa has been making contributions to the 

provincial government in Saskatchewan over the last seven or 

eight years for Social Services, for Justice, for Health, for 

Municipal Government, and the list goes on? Is it safe to say 

that at this point in time, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, it’s difficult to define exactly where the money comes 

to because, for example, some money that might be for Health 

might actually go into Social Services, depending on the nature 

of the program. 

 

But I think the key thing about it is that sort of decline, when 

you’re going from 30 per cent of your funding coming from that 

source to 12 per cent, is putting pressure all across the system. 

So it’s in Health, massive reductions in federal funding for 

Health. It’s in for Post-Secondary, massive reductions in 

funding for Post-Secondary. It’s in Justice — reductions of 

commitment to legal aid. It’s in Social Services — reductions of 

commitment to status Indians, social assistance payments and 

other payments. 

 

So it goes across the piece and the effects are felt across the 

piece. It’s in Highways with the shift of the Crow benefit. When 

you lose the Crow benefit all of a sudden there’s more pressure 

on roads. 

 

So lots of, lots of departments are affected. But the thing is it’s 

not the departments — it’s the people. The people of 

Saskatchewan have suffered huge losses of services because of 

the reductions from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Just to the 

closing remarks, I want to make it abundantly clear today that 

over the last 20, 30, 40, 50 years, the federal governments have 

been contributing to Saskatchewan in terms of dollars for a 

number of sources. And in Saskatchewan when the provincial 

economy is doing well, obviously the equalization payments 

will drop. 

 

The simple fact is we look at the whole problem of allocation. 

And what the northern Saskatchewan communities should know 

is, for years the federal governments do have allocation to the 

provincial government in education, health care, highways. 

There has been money constantly funnelled to the province for 

northern Saskatchewan communities. 

 

So what we have to be very careful and very clear here is that 

the federal government do contribute to northern Saskatchewan 

in a number of other sources. And we always see that every 

time there’s some initiative happening, it’s the provincial 

government that’s usually in the front row taking the credit. 

 

So my problem that we have today is that if we get allocations 

from the federal government, it’s been done over a period of the 

years, the Saskatchewan economy’s doing just great, why are 

we having continual problems in the North in reference to 

housing, to highways, to education, to training, to health care? 

And the list goes on and on. Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think, to the member opposite, if 

you looked at the reductions in funding and you looked at the 

regions of the province that are dramatically affected, the North 

would be one of the regions really dramatically affected by the 

federal government withdrawing from certain areas. 

 

For example, housing. The member opposite would know the 

kind of commitment the federal government had at one point to 

housing, and the removal of that commitment. The member 

would know the removal of the federal commitment to status 

Indians and the impact that has on the North. And reductions in 

health of course affect the whole province. 

 

So I think that when you look at the problems in the North, the 

federal withdrawal has had a dramatic effect on them. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

we over here have noted that many national commentators have 

taken note that our provincial government has oftentimes 

criticized the Hon. Paul Martin for following basically the same 

fiscal policies that Madam Minister has followed — namely, 

coming into office with a large deficit and attempting to deal 

with it. 

 

The difference is of course that when Madam Minister attempts 

to deal with the deficit and debt of this province, she is entitled 

to a hero’s medal and the undying thanks of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Well when Paul Martin attempts to deal with the 

deficit and the debt he inherited, he is insensitive, cruel, and 

destroying the country. 

 

Many national commentators haven’t seen the sense in that, and 

I guess I’m one of the people who doesn’t understand that and 

doesn’t see much sense to that. 

 

The other thing that troubles us over here is that Madam 

Minister and members opposite are continually accusing us of 

not using this legislature as a forum for running the federal 

election campaign. Now I’m sorry that we haven’t been doing 

that. It’s not because we are embarrassed about the government 

of the Rt. Hon. John Chrétien — far from it. The reason is that 

we see a somewhat different role for the Saskatchewan 

legislature and the Government of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

(1200) 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I’d like the member to come to 

order, please. I have been listening very carefully this morning 

and this . . . the latitude of the comments and the replies and so 

forth are extremely . . . varying substantially beyond the 

provisions of interim supply. 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

I would ask both the minister and the members to narrow their 

comments down to interim supply, and remind you that the 

purpose of the interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of government departments, of programs on an 

interim basis, while reserving the Legislative Assembly right to 

complete detail review of estimates later. 

 

So I remind the members and the minister that the debate 

should focus on the need to grant, reduce, or refuse the supply 

in respect to the resolution before the committee. And so 

therefore I would invite the members to discuss departmental 

policies and details of programs, and political comments to be 

put under the appropriate place. And this, I don’t believe that 

interim supply is so. I would ask them all to narrow it up and 

stick within what interim supply is. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I will be pleased to say . . . 

to pass on from the federal election. I agree that it’s really not 

an appropriate matter for discussion at this time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we here are pleased with the improvement in the 

province’s financial situation. We are pleased with the lower 

interest rates, the improved picture in the balance statement of 

our province, and the lowering of the provincial sales tax. 

 

However the question here on the interim supply I have for 

Madam Minister is that, unfortunately while we do see many 

bright spots, it still appears to be a jobless recovery. Now I 

would like Madam Minister to please tell us how the interim 

supply will deal with the issue of why we still don’t seem to be 

creating a lot of jobs in this province; why that continues to be 

one unfortunate area of what otherwise is an improving 

financial picture for our province. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I certainly respect your admonition. I just want to take 

one moment to answer in technical terms the point raised — 

why we have concerns about what occurred in terms of the 

federal cuts to the province, problems that we had and other 

provinces and other social groups have out there — it’s not 

other governments, it’s other social groups. 

 

The money that the federal government provides for health, 

education, social programs, is only 14 per cent of the federal 

budget. It’s a very small part of the pie, yet over 70 per cent of 

their cuts came from that part of the pie. So we are saying this is 

grossly unfair to the people of Canada. And the other thing 

we’re saying is the priorities of the people of Canada are health, 

education, social programs, where 70 per cent of the cuts came 

in funding for those priority areas. 

 

Now just in general terms, I’m always pleased to talk about the 

budget in terms of what it does for jobs. I would point out to the 

member opposite that the employment picture in Saskatchewan 

does look very optimistic – 6,000 more people working than a 

year ago. Small businesses told us the most important thing that 

we could do to create growth and jobs in the province is to 

lower the provincial sales tax, which of course occurred in the 

budget. We have taken other measures to promote the hog 

industry; we have expanded our spending on roads. So I think 

our employment picture in Saskatchewan looks rosy. We have 

significantly more people working than last year. Our 

unemployment rate remains the lowest in Canada, and I think 

this budget is an excellent budget to keep the momentum going 

and to even pick up steam there. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I thank Madam Minister for her 

answers. I hope that her projections on job recovery will prove 

to be correct and I hope that we will leave aside the federal 

election campaign and deal with the issues of this province. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

we had an opportunity yesterday to begin asking you some 

questions that we think are important to the people of 

Saskatchewan with regards to your request for monies in 

interim supply which would amount to two-twelfths of your 

total budget. 

 

Now yesterday we established some of the groundwork, in that 

you had conceded to us that each month has a different amount 

of money that is required from the government treasury. In fact 

you said, as I recall, something to the effect that third parties’ 

demands on government would influence how much money 

was required on any particular month and that that was not 

completely predictable. Therefore the question remains in my 

mind, how do you decide how much money to ask for in interim 

supply if it is a varying amount. Now I’ve taken a look and it 

appears that you simply are looking for two-twelfths of the total 

bundle. Now obviously there would be times of the year when 

government would spend more than one-twelfth in each month. 

Just as in a farming operation you find that about two months of 

the year are extremely heavy in terms of expenditures. And I 

would think that the relationship should be somewhat the same 

in principle. 

 

For example in farming, as you know, at seeding time people 

have to buy fertilizer; they have to buy fuel; they have to buy 

seed; they have to buy oil; they’ve got to put filters on their 

tractors. And likely they would be spending probably two- or 

three-twelfths of their yearly expenditures in that one-month 

period of time — the great megaproject of the province being 

seeding. 

 

Now it would seem to me that government would be in the 

same situation; that in the springtime when all of the winter’s 

activities of frozen-up ground and frozen-up province and 

things not moving all that much . . . It would seem to me that 

springtime would be the natural time for the province to start to 

blossom and to bloom, the same as the grass and the flowers do. 

And that economic activity, at that point speeding up, would 

similarly contrast the farming operations of our province, and 

that the expenditures of the province would go up as well. 

 

So, Madam Minister, is that philosophy somewhat accurate, I 

guess, is my question? And if so, then how can you possibly 

look to two-twelfths of the total budget being enough to sustain 

you through the first two months of this fiscal year at a time 

when most probably your expenditures are going to be very 

much higher than two-twelfths of the total budget? 

 

  



596  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite: I guess the first comment I would make is that what 

we’re doing today is exactly the same thing that was done when 

the Conservatives were in power, when the Liberals were in 

power, when the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) was in power. It has been absolutely traditional that, 

in order to bridge between the budget being introduced into the 

House and the budget actually being passed, there’s interim 

supply. 

 

Now in terms of the amounts, the Department of Finance has 

canvassed the different groups. The money, by the way, that is 

urgently needed is needed for social groups. And I will begin, 

as we proceed here, to start reading some of these groups out to 

you. And we are going to find information about some of these 

groups that are now operating on lines of credit and paying 

interest because this money is urgently needed. 

 

So it’s absolutely traditional to do it this way. What the 

Department of Finance did was check and be sure that 

two-twelfths is enough to ensure that they can continue to 

operate for the time frame involved, and they’ve assured us that 

it is. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I find that a strange 

comment to a relatively lengthy and important question. And 

that of course being that you have suggested, I think, in your 

answer that somehow, if we don’t pass this really quickly, some 

social groups in our province may be going to suffer. I think 

maybe it would be appropriate if you would identify those 

social groups for us, and tell us exactly who is going to suffer 

and how much they’re going to suffer. We might as well get 

this right out in the open because I have a feeling that you’re 

not telling everything just exactly the way it is. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 

member opposite — the Chairman may want to note that 

particular comment; it has a certain tinge to it — I would be 

most pleased. And this is not all the groups; these are some of 

the groups: the Battlefords Residential Services Inc., Biggar 

Community Group Home, Cheshire Homes of Regina, 

Cudworth Columbus Society, Cypress Hills Ability Centres, 

Harvest Community of the Prairies, Weyburn Group Homes, 

Wilkie Independent Living society, Buffalo Narrows Day Care 

Center, Cumberland House Day Care Center, Borden Place 

Child Care Center, Kerrobert Day Care Center, Melfort Day 

Care Co-operative, North Battleford Day Care Centre, 

Shaunavon Daycare Centre, and the list goes on. 

 

And what happens is that these groups, their fiscal year starts 

April 1. They have bills that they have to pay. They depend on 

government providing them with the money to pay those bills, 

and traditionally governments have provided them with that 

money. If they don’t get the money in time, they have to 

operate on a line of credit and they end up having to pay the 

interest, obviously, on the line of credit. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I noted a couple of 

interesting comments there. The Borden Place Child Care 

Center and the Shaunavon Daycare Centre sound like somewhat 

similar. 

So, Madam Minister, in those two situations, rather than to deal 

with each one individually — I expect that there’s an awful lot 

of similarity in the way that each of these institutions operate — 

so in general principle if you explain how it works in a couple 

of them probably we’ll have an understanding of how it works 

for the rest. If not, of course, you can clarify that. 

 

Now you’re saying to us that in the Shaunavon Daycare Centre, 

for example . . . First of all perhaps you’d outline what kind of 

work they actually do and what kind of folks would actually get 

services from that centre so that we’ll have an understanding of 

what we’re paying for. 

 

And then carry on to tell us how it is that at the first days of the 

month . . . And I think we’re at what, about the 4th now? April 

4. You started on April 1. How is it that you now have expenses 

that need to be paid? 

 

It’s a little strange for me, you see, because in the farming 

business — and I’m a farmer — I get my bills on April 1, 2, 3, 

4. I don’t have to pay those bills until at least the last week of 

April. I don’t have any creditors that demand payment. 

 

Now employees, of course, sometimes get paid bi-weekly. So 

that would be on maybe the 14th or the 15th. People that work 

for me, I pay them every two weeks. I don’t pay them before 

they work; I pay them after they work. Is there something 

different about the way government does business? 

 

Oh I see the member from Regina, south Regina here, thinks he 

knows how to run a government. I rather suspect that the whole 

thing would collapse if this was in his hands because we’ve 

seen some examples of the way he thinks in some of his 

speeches. 

 

Madam Minister, I will reiterate that it seems passingly strange 

to me that you feel that you are in a crisis situation here about 

needing to meet payrolls and government obligations to third 

party interests when we are at April 4 and the bills that had to 

be paid only start to accumulate as of the 1st, which was the 

start of this week. 

 

So, Madam Minister, explain to me how it is that you’re on the 

hook or that somebody might suffer or somebody might lose 

their job or some creditor might not be paid in time if you don’t 

have your money available by the end of this day. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’m not on any hook. The people who are on the hook 

are the people who are running these agencies, that run often on 

a shoe-string budget, and they’re requiring their money as soon 

as we can get it out to them. And if the member would like a list 

of the types of groups, I’d refer him to Public Accounts. There 

are pages and pages and pages of those groups listed there. 

 

So it’s the members opposite, it’s not me. I’m saying to those 

groups that I made myself available for three days. I said let’s 

get this through — through as quickly as we can after the 

budget has been through the process in the legislature. Let’s do 

this as quickly as we can so that we ensure that you don’t have   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

to go out and run a line of credit to pay your expenses. Because 

some of them are going to have to do that. 

 

It’s up to the members opposite. If they say through their 

actions that they don’t care about these groups having to run a 

line of credit, I would say that this perhaps reflects on their 

sense of compassion for some of the groups who do not have 

the capacity to find extra money sitting around and will be out 

borrowing money to ensure that their operations continue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, this grows more and more interesting. I think, to tell 

you the truth, Mr. Chairman, this is probably the biggest 

snowstorm we’ve seen all year. Now it’s been a tough winter, a 

long, hard, cold winter, a lot of storms. But we’re getting a 

snow job in this Assembly today the likes of which I’ve never 

seen before in my life. 

 

To expect ordinary folks even, not even geniuses or smart 

people, to believe this story would be probably the most 

amazing thing that could ever possibly happen in any Assembly 

in the world. I mean it is phenomenal that you could stand in 

your place and try to tell us that folks are going to basically be 

in financial, extreme crises as a result of our not passing interim 

supply for you this very day. It is absolutely ridiculous, Madam 

Minister, and you know it. 

 

Everybody in this province that runs a business, 90 per cent of 

people— at some time 100 per cent would have a line of credit 

— 90 per cent would run a line of credit almost every year. I 

would be willing to bet that if you went into a bank in 

Saskatchewan, you could not find a bank that doesn’t run a line 

of credit for business people. They all do it. It is a part of the 

cost of doing business in life. 

 

(1215) 

 

Running a line of credit is nothing to be afraid of and it’s 

nothing to get all alarmed about, and if a few folks have to go 

on a line of credit for a few days in order to keep things going, 

it is not going to be the end of your world and it won’t be the 

end of their world. 

 

What will be the end of the world politically is if we don’t get 

answers from you about how you are squandering and wasting 

the money of this province — $5.2 billion, all of it wasted and 

gone, thrown away on all kinds of hare-brained schemes that we 

can’t even find out about. There’s all kinds of stuff that money 

is being spent on nobody ever discusses because you’re in a 

hurry. And why are you in a hurry? The only people that are in 

a hurry when they’re spending other people’s money are people 

that are spending it where they shouldn’t be spending it. 

 

Imagine, Madam Minister, if some of the people in a company 

called Bre-X would have done their research before they bought 

shares, how much more relief there’d be in a town in Alberta? 

 

Mr. Chairman, I want the minister to tell us about two-twelfths 

of the budget, interim supply. I want her to tell us how she’s 

going to spend that money, and I want direct and reasonable 

answers about where that money is going and how she is going 

to attribute money out of the government coffers for such 

important things as flood control at this particular time. 

 

We’ve got some specific things that need to be dealt with, and 

you coming up with red herrings like people are not going to be 

paid will not wash today. Today we want answers, Madam 

Minister. Where are you going to get the money for the 

municipalities of this province that the minister of the Water 

Corporation promised us two days ago in question period; 

promised us that he was going to alleviate the problem in 

cabinet through regulations; promised us that he was going to 

set things up so that relief would be on a fair, level 

playing-field, the same as before? Where is that money going to 

come from, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. He’s putting a lot of heat onto this subject — 

absolutely no light, I would say. What the member opposite 

knows full well is that if he wants those sorts of details, he can 

move to the process whereby he can bring the department here 

and get those sorts of details. 

 

But you know? Today has been a very revealing day. I am 

taking this Hansard and I’m going to look through this very 

carefully because we had some tough things to say about the 

other group that sits over there. But I’ll say one thing about 

them. They at least have some understanding and compassion 

for the groups who will be jeopardized by what’s happening 

right now in this House. They at least have that understanding 

and that compassion. 

 

That they know that if you’re talking about the Infant Hunger 

Action Group — yes, the Infant Hunger Action Group — and to 

have the Conservative Party stand there and say, well if a few 

folks have to go out and borrow some money, what’s the 

problem? How much capacity do you think the Infant Hunger 

Action Group has to go out and borrow money? 

 

I thought you folks would try to turn your backs on the ’80s and 

the hard-heartedness of what you were all about. You’re right 

back where you were before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

how much money is being budgeted for flood control in the 

province of Saskatchewan today? 

 

Apparently the minister wasn’t listening as usual, so we will 

allow her to get back her officials to consult while we ask you a 

very simple question. How much money are you allocating to 

flood control for this spring? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite: the member opposite knows that if he wants that kind 

of detailed information, he can move very quickly through this 

process and get that kind of information. And he knows very 

well that I do not have the detailed budgets here of every 

department, but we’re more than willing to talk about those 

issues when we get to that process. 

 

  



598  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

But what I want to bring the member opposite back to — 

because it is striking what’s happening in this House. You talk 

about defining moments; we have a defining moment here — 

there are groups in this province who provide vital services for 

families and children in this province. I am putting the member 

opposite on notice that they have told our government that if we 

do not begin to process this money as soon as we can, they are 

going to have to go out and figure out how to borrow money on 

a line of credit. And I want the member opposite to reflect on 

the fact that he has said to these people, well if a few folks have 

to go out and borrow some money, what’s the big deal? That’s 

what’s happened in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can do what they want 

today, but they’re going to be held accountable for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, we will all be held 

accountable in the democratic process on election day and of 

course the quicker that comes the better for me because I think 

we can wipe you out. The way that you handle money is an 

absolute fiasco. The way you answer questions is a disgrace to 

this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I will ask the minister once again. In the absence 

of a fixed, budgeted amount, how much do you intend to spend 

to provide relief and compensation for the current flooding 

crises? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the member opposite is continuing to ask a question 

which I have given the answer to many times. I’m not going to 

change my answer because it is the correct answer. 

 

The answer is this: this government welcomes the opportunity 

to lay before the people of Saskatchewan, through the 

legislature, the detailed answers to those sorts of questions. And 

we’re quite willing to move to that process so we can bring the 

proper people in here to provide those sorts of answers — the 

estimates process. 

 

But for the members opposite to say that because I’m not 

prepared to bring in all of the details right now they’re going to 

hold up money to these groups, that’s a choice that they’re 

making and we will be sure that they are held accountable for 

this choice. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, this is a choice that you have made. It was your choice 

to bring in a budget this late in the season instead of starting this 

Assembly in January when you should have. There’s absolutely 

no excuse for this government to be sitting around all through 

January and taking flights off to everywhere in the world while 

every cabinet minister has an all expense paid trip some place 

under the guise of doing business for this province. 

 

You should have been here working. There’s absolutely no 

excuse for this delay. You’re the one that made the choice. 

We’re not the government, you are. You decided to do this, 

nobody else. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, the province has a budget for disaster 

relief in foreign countries, and you have specified how many 

dollars you have. And yet you stand in your place today and say 

you couldn’t be bothered to tell us how much money you’ve got 

for flood relief in Saskatchewan. You couldn’t be bothered to 

figure out how much money you have available, or even how 

much it might cost. It would be an imposition on you to have to 

do such a terrible amount of work. But you knew exactly how 

many dollars to allocate to foreign countries through some kind 

of a scheme that you’ve got going there. 

 

So, Madam Minister, how is it that you can find the time to 

budget an exact amount of money for somebody else, but you 

can’t find the time to tell us in this Assembly how much money 

you’ve got available for flood crises relief in the province right 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the members 

opposite, you know, to have lectures by the Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan on how to prepare budgets and how to run the 

finances is almost laughable if it weren’t so tragic, if it weren’t 

so tragic. 

 

When you think back . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the 

year end for this government is March 31, 1997. We bring our 

budgets in in February and in March. 

 

In 1991, the province of Saskatchewan had no budget because 

the Conservative government of that day didn’t bring one in. 

They brought it in — they couldn’t get it passed. They 

prorogued the legislature without a budget, without a budget. 

Because they couldn’t get it through the legislature, they had no 

budget. 

 

But what I want to say to the member opposite is: who is 

interim supply for? It’s not for the Minister of Finance. It is for 

the groups out there that require funding. 

 

And I want to remind the member opposite that when he says if 

a few folks have to go out and borrow money, what’s the 

problem, let me remind the member opposite of another of the 

groups of “few folks” who will be borrowing money: The 

Parkland Society For Aid To The Mentally Handicapped. Do 

you think they have the capacity to go into a bank tomorrow 

and say, we need some extra money . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes. 

 

And what we’re saying to the members opposite, one part . . . 

two-thirds of this House understand this problem. We 

understand this problem. The Liberals understand this problem. 

The Liberals didn’t even support this budget but they 

understand the problem. They do not have the hard-heartedness 

of the Conservatives who say who cares if some of these groups 

operating on a shoestring budget have to borrow some money? 

Who cares about the child care centres? Who cares about the 

mentally handicapped? You will be held accountable. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 

Minister, I sat around in my kitchen all through January waiting   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

for that very important call from the Premier, waiting for that 

very important call from the Premier to tell me . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. I would ask the members to come to 

order. The Chair cannot hear the member’s question and I’m 

sure that the minister cannot. I would ask the members to please 

come to order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

last January I was sitting in my house waiting for a call from the 

Premier; waiting for him to phone up and say, Jack, let’s go 

back to work. He never called. No calls in January. 

 

We waited halfway through February thinking, boy, it’s going 

to get pretty tough to get a budget in and for folks to get paid. 

It’s going to be awful hard for municipalities to make some 

plans for the year because they don’t know where the 

government’s coming from in their offloading or downloading, 

or whatever loading they happen to think up next. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, the truth of the matter is that the choice 

to be here today, behind, and not having your work done, is 

your choice. Your Premier, you and your cabinet couldn’t get 

your act together, couldn’t get your work done because you 

were too busy off holidaying around the world under the guise 

of trade missions. 

 

And what did we get for it? A minister that comes in at the last 

minute and tells us we cannot have grievance before supply in 

the democratic process in Saskatchewan because she got 

behind. She didn’t get her homework done. She never had the 

will or the inclination or the desire to do her job. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, if you’re tired of your job, resign. We’ll 

find you somebody that can do it right. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you’ve had all kinds of time to figure 

out whether or not you’re going to help a foreign country. I see 

in my notes here that one of the countries that would have 

qualified for foreign aid money was Guyana where they 

endured severe flooding last year, according to our research. 

Now because Guyana is so poor, the relief effort was almost 

entirely underwritten by foreign agencies. 

 

Now can you tell us if Guyana received flood relief from 

Saskatchewan last year and if you have budgeted for that kind 

of disaster in those kind of countries out of your two-twelfths 

this year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I think the member’s condescending tone speaks for 

itself and I think his lack of understanding of the process speaks 

for itself. 

 

There are certain deadlines. Why don’t we bring in a budget in 

October? Because there are certain deadlines. 

 

The end of the year for the Government of Saskatchewan is 

March 31. Because we care about running the province’s 

finances properly — unlike the record, the record of the 

members opposite that are chirping from their Tory seats speaks 

for itself, speaks for itself — we want to wait till as close as we 

can to the end of the year to know exactly what our situation is. 

It’s like a business — you don’t do a budget halfway through 

the year, you wait as close as possible to the end of the year. So 

there’s one deadline, March 31. 

 

The other thing we want to wait for is the federal budget. The 

federal budget has an impact on the budget of the province of 

Saskatchewan as does on every other province. We want to look 

at that budget, do the analysis, see the effect it has on our 

budget. So it means a budget in March, which is a very 

appropriate time for a budget, a traditional time for a budget in 

Saskatchewan, an early time for a budget in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the members opposite know that because of the problem 

of some groups requiring funding immediately and the 

members wanting — which is their right and we welcome it — 

to talk about the budget for many weeks in the legislature. We 

have to provide interim funding. 

 

(1230) 

 

But I will remind the members opposite what they’re doing. 

The members opposite are saying to the child hunger, an 

education program group: look, if you folks have to go out and 

borrow some money in order to make your payments, what’s 

the big deal? That’s the Tory approach — what’s the big deal if 

people who are providing vital services to children and families 

in this province have to go out and borrow money in order to 

get through so that this can go on in the legislature, this 

particular process. What’s the big deal? I think that comment 

speaks for itself, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I wish I would have 

heard an answer out of that; I could somehow feel justified to 

go on to a different line of questioning, but I haven’t heard an 

answer. I hear the minister spending most of her time, while 

we’ve been in this Assembly, pointing her finger at Ottawa 

saying that all of the province’s problems are because Ottawa 

done it all wrong. And probably they did. 

 

Once she gets done with those folks, though . . . And people 

aren’t listening in the media anymore and nobody cares 

anymore what she’s saying about Ottawa. She blames the 

Liberals in the province here for having created all of her 

problems, and when that doesn’t work anymore, of course, she 

digs up the past and blames the governments of decades back 

for all the problems that she inherited. 

 

See, Mr. Chairman, there they are, there they are singing the 

praises of the past. Living in the past . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order. I would ask the members that the 

questions cannot be heard and the answers cannot be heard . . . 

Order. All members will come to order and listen to the 

questions and the answers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now as they live 

in the past, what they fail to understand, Mr. Chairman, is that 

we have to have justification in this Assembly for why money is 

being spent. We are being asked for two-twelfths of the   



600  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

budget to be spent before we finish the debates, before we go 

through interim supplies and discuss these matters. Give us the 

money first; we’ll explain where it went later. It’s not the way 

it’s supposed to work in a democracy. 

 

You see . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I guess the 

member opposite would like to stand on his feet and make a 

speech. Well when your turn comes, you go right ahead. You 

talk to me, you talk to me about the past. Let’s talk about the 

past. We’ve got folks down in Minot right now, in North 

Dakota, that are thanking the . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order. I will ask the members to 

come to order, on both sides. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now as the 

members opposite are pointing out, the Rafferty-Alameda dams 

were things of the past that people criticized and unfortunately 

for them, they’ve had to eat crow because those dams are filling 

up and stopping floods and keeping people alive. 

 

And it is nice to know that some people can recant and actually 

admit that they were wrong. And I’m glad that those members 

opposite today are starting to eat some of that crow because 

they were wrong, they were wrong about everything. In fact 

they were so wrong about everything in the past . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I will like to remind the members 

that we are into interim supply, and therefore the members 

should reserve their detailed questions for later when the 

estimates are up. Interim supply is the granting of interim 

supply and I would ask the members to narrow it up. We’re 

getting far ranging here now again. 

 

So I would ask the members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And I would ask the members on the government side to come 

to order. 

 

Order. So I would ask the members to keep in mind that we are 

in interim supply. Government departmental estimates will be at 

a later date. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, 

rather. Mr. Chairman, we are determined to stay on the track of 

why we are here, which is to ask the minister to give us answers 

about where she’s going to spend the interim supply that she is 

asking for. 

 

What the members in the government side seem to want to 

avoid is an explanation of where those monies are going to be 

spent and how it was determined how much monies would be 

spent where. They somehow don’t want to have to answer those 

questions. They want the minister to have access to a great pool 

of money. What is two-twelfths of five point something billion? 

It must be a fair few dollars. And yet they would expect us to 

stand here and listen to their rhetoric about how all their 

problems come from the past, instead of answering the 

questions that we have directly asked. 

 

We’ve asked a very simple question here this morning and I 

haven’t had an answer. I’ve asked it three times now. How 

much money has been delegated for flood relief in the crisis that 

we’re in? Have you heard an answer? I haven’t heard an 

answer. Has anybody heard an answer that I’ve missed 

somewhere? 

 

Madam Minister, the truth of the matter is that you don’t have 

your answers because, like yesterday, you don’t have your 

homework done. I asked the minister yesterday this same 

question and she babbled on about a whole lot of others things, 

but never answered the question. And why? Does she not 

know? Or is she afraid that the numbers are so high that it will 

wreck the balancing of this budget? 

 

The Chair:  Order. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I think the member’s questioning and 

line of attack is completely out of order. Nothing in giving 

approval to interim supply . . . 

 

The Chair:  Would the member wait to be recognized by the 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Chairman, on a point of order, I 

would submit that the comments by the member from Maple 

Creek are out of order. Nothing in voting approval for interim 

supply precludes the opportunity for the member to ask 

questions about anything of interest to him when those specific 

departments come before Legislative Assembly during the 

course of discussion on the budget, during our estimates 

process. 

 

That’s when the member should be asking detailed question 

about spending priority for a department, and he will have that 

opportunity during estimates. Those are not the kind of 

questions, Mr. Chairman, that should be brought up here during 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just in 

response to the point of order raised by the member from 

Regina Victoria. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Chairman, that I didn’t 

have a moment or take the time to go back and review the type 

of questioning that the member of Regina Victoria used to get 

into when we were into interim supply. 

 

Mr. Chairman, you’re right. Mr. Chairman, you are right in 

talking about interim supply. But, Mr. Chairman, the interim 

supply Bill that has come before the Assembly is a request for 

an allocation of funds for two months supply . . . two months 

funding for the province of Saskatchewan — that means 

expenditures in the province of Saskatchewan — and some of 

the questions that are being asked by this side of the Assembly 

are asking of the minister how she intends to expend that. 

 

Now the minister has pointed out a number of areas where there 

are expenditures, but there are other areas that we’ve been 

trying to get a bit of an idea as to where this total funding will 

be going. And I think it’s certainly appropriate, Mr. Chairman, 

that while we are talking interim supply, interim supply covers 

the whole gamut of expenditures and fiscal responsibility in the 

province of Saskatchewan and how the monies . . . it goes to 

every one of the departments. 

  



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

And while we’re not asking to get specifically into all the 

details, we certainly need to know how the government intends 

to cover the expenditures over the next two months that they’re 

asking for today. And I believe that’s what we’ve asked for and 

those are some of the questions that we are raising. That’s my 

response to the point of order raised by the member from 

Regina Victoria. 

 

The Chair:  I want to bring to the attention of the House that 

when the Chair has intervened in the past two times that 

certainly the same statements have been that the member from 

Regina Victoria brings up — that there is a place for line 

estimates, and that is departmental lines. This is an interim 

supply. 

 

We have in the past allowed a fair bit of latitude in this. I have 

been trying to bring it back to what it is supposed to be on 

interim supply, which is an interim supply for the departments 

not a line-by-line estimate of the departments. 

 

I would take that the point of order from the member from 

Regina Victoria is well taken. I know that a lot of the questions 

have been in order. Some are, however, becoming very 

irrelevant to interim supply. And I would ask the member that is 

now on his feet or asking the questions, and any former . . . or 

members that are going to be, to please make your questions 

relevant to interim supply, not line-by-line estimates of 

departments. We are on a line by line . . . We are in interim 

supply and I would ask them to hold their remarks to that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 

Chairman, I would like the minister to explain to this Assembly 

how she is going to spend two-twelfths of her budget and know 

for sure that she has allocated the right amounts of money when 

we find that this province is presently in a court case over the 

government’s illegally breaking of the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) contracts that has finally of course made it 

to the stage of trial. 

 

Now according to legal experts across the country, the farmers 

have a solid case, Madam Minister. And as well there is some 

precedence — Manitoba Pea Growers won a suit against that 

government and its attempts to unilaterally change the GRIP 

program. Now you will recall that. And from our own estimates 

you could be looking at repaying in excess of 800 millions of 

dollars if the farmers win. 

 

Now what is your estimate of that potential liability yourself? 

And have you allocated those kinds of monies to be available 

for those farmers in these next two months? You say that you’re 

very much concerned, you have a bleeding heart for all of the 

people in day care centres. How much does your heart bleed for 

the farmers who may be demanding as much as $800 million in 

the next two months? Have you got that money available? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the members 

opposite. I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan will be rightly 

suspicious of the Tories when they start using numbers. And the 

members know very well that this is before the courts and the 

government can make no comments about any issue before 

the courts. 

 

But I will keep reminding the members opposite of what is 

occurring here. We have in this House 58 members; 53 of them 

— 53 of them — from two different parties understand the 

importance of what we’re trying to do here today; 53 of them, 

Liberals and New Democrats, and the Liberals have not 

supported this budget and have many questions to ask and many 

concerns which I’m sure they’re going to raise because they 

understand when the time comes. 

 

There are five people in this legislature who are saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they still lack the compassion that 

they exhibited in the past for groups and people who are 

struggling out there. So the members opposite have to be 

prepared to tell the women who run the Lestock Women’s 

Centre, have to be prepared to tell them when they call because 

we’ll be forwarding the call, you have to be prepared to say, 

women at the Lestock Women’s Centre, if you folks have to go 

out and borrow some money, what’s the problem? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

we’ve been talking over the last couple of days about interim 

supply, the expenditure and the allocation of I believe two 

months supply of funding for the province to operate. You’ve 

been telling us this morning that there are a number of groups 

that are going to be out money. 

 

I would like to know, Madam Minister, when do cheques start 

rolling out of the departments to groups. It’s the fourth day of 

the month of April, first part of the month. It seems to me, 

Madam Minister, that most individuals or groups either receive 

by middle of the month or at the end of the month. Your 

suggestion today that if you don’t have this interim supply 

passed today that somebody is going to be out of funds doesn’t 

seem to have a lot of weight. I would like to know when the 

process is in motion. And it would seem to me also, Madam 

Minister, that you wouldn’t also have that process moving. The 

cheques will not leave even if this motion is passed today. The 

cheques are not going to go to different partners at least till the 

middle of the month and certainly in some cases till the end of 

the month. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, this is exactly the problem. The lack of . . . Why 

didn’t you ask us this question a long time ago? We could have 

told you. The Department of Finance . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, I have been here for three days 

— and I will not say the same thing for these people — 

answering these members’ questions. The Liberals have been 

available for questions and I appreciate that. They have been 

very thorough in ensuring that they took up their time to ask the 

appropriate questions. 

 

The Department of Finance cannot start issuing cheques until 

you have the legislative authority to do it. What you’re saying 

to me is frightening — why can’t we start printing cheques 

before we have the legal authority to do it? That’s exactly what 

happened in the ’80s. 

 

(1245) 

  



602  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

And I’ll say to the member opposite, they are making a very 

clear point here today and it won’t be missed on the people of 

Saskatchewan. What the members opposite are saying, that the 

Kipling and District Association for Handicapped Adults — 

they’re saying to this group: don’t worry, don’t worry if you 

have to go out and borrow money because we, the Tory Party in 

the legislature of Saskatchewan, aren’t worried about you 

having to go out and borrow money. Even though the other 53 

Liberal and NDP members understand that this is problem, the 

Tories don’t. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I guess, Madam Minister, you’ve just 

proven a point. We didn’t have a response to the question. 

When do cheques normally leave departments and go out? 

When can the Kipling handicap centre . . . when would it 

normally get its cheque? Does it get its cheque on the first of 

the month, ahead of when they’ve expended their . . . or done 

the work? 

 

Madam Minister, I don’t get my cheque until the end of the 

month. You don’t get your cheque until the end of the month. 

Other groups don’t get their cheques till the end of the month. 

 

And, Madam Minister, no one is saying that groups are going to 

be out of funds as a result of the debate that’s taking place in 

this Assembly today. And nobody’s saying that the Department 

of Finance or that groups are not planning ahead and already 

have in motion a process. They will not cut the cheques 

certainly, until the funding is available. 

 

But for you to stand here and tell us that people are out of 

money because they didn’t receive their cheque on the first day, 

I haven’t seen anyone be paid for services done until those 

services are done. And so, Madam Minister, whether you 

receive your approval for interim supply this morning is 

irrelevant to the fact of whether individuals get their money on 

time. 

 

The fact that you . . . Does it take your department that long? 

Are you telling me that you’re expecting us to sit in this 

Assembly and discuss interim supply for the next three weeks? 

You’re afraid we’re going to hold you that long? 

 

I’m not sure why we would. We certainly haven’t given that 

indication. But I’m not exactly sure why, as a Finance minister, 

you should expect to walk into this House and ask for an 

expenditure of a sum of money and just have the Assembly give 

it a fait accompli; rubber stamp it, including the . . . Some of the 

members of the official opposition say, well I guess that’s the 

way we do it and away we go. We don’t hold you accountable. 

 

It seems to me, Madam Minister, that there have been some 

legitimate concerns raised. And I would also suggest, Madam 

Minister, if you think that the bow has been quite wide in some 

of the questions here over the last couple of days, maybe you 

should review what took place prior to 1991. See how broad the 

bow was at that time, what ministers of the day had to deal 

with. 

 

But let me ask again, Madam Minister, when are cheques 

normally processed? When would individuals and groups 

expect to receive their cheques — middle of the month, end of 

the month, or the first of the month before they even expend 

any, or before they’ve done any of the work? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. What I’m trying to tell the member opposite is that 

these groups get their cheques traditionally April 1, May 1, June 

1 — the first of the month. 

 

Each and every day that goes by these groups are facing the 

possibility of bills coming in that they will not be able to pay. 

And you know, I would say to the members opposite though, 

what I would say to the members opposite is this: this is 

reflective of an attitude. It’s reflective of an attitude because we 

have 53 members in this legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . You know, if the member from Cypress Hills would like to 

have an answer, he should listen to it. 

 

The 53 members of this legislature understand that they have 

other opportunities to ask all of the detailed questions about the 

budget that they want to ask. But my understanding is that the 

Liberals are prepared to vote this off today. And do you know 

why they’re prepared to vote this off today? 

 

Because, like us, they understand that the Weyburn and Area 

Child Abuse Council provides vital services to the people of 

this province and they can’t go to the bank and get a loan as 

easily as the Conservatives would allow us to believe. What the 

Conservatives are saying to the Weyburn and Area Child Abuse 

Council is, look folks, if you’ve got to go and borrow money at 

the bank, no big deal to us. The same old hard-hearted Tories 

who lack an ounce of compassion. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s certainly interesting to 

listen to the minister and all of a sudden, she’s got this ounce of 

compassion for individuals or this government or many of its 

members. 

 

The interesting thing, Mr. Chairman, in the whole debate that 

we have before us, it’s as if we’re facing a crisis in the province 

of Saskatchewan. And I don’t know of any organization that 

goes out and borrows money on the first of the month. I don’t 

know of any organization that all of a sudden finds . . . and 

doesn’t believe the funds will be there. I don’t know of any 

organization that relies on government expenditures and many 

. . . I’m not exactly sure how many receive the money up front. 

 

It seems to me the cheque may have gone out on the first of the 

month, Mr. Speaker, but that’s basically addressing last month’s 

expenditures, and either they’re paid the end of the month or the 

first of the month. And we can check our own cheque stubs and 

find out when we have those funds deposited into our accounts, 

and it wasn’t for something I had up front. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it . . . Well we can 

talk about the handicap centres. If the minister’s talking about 

an expenditure to the handicap centres, I would suggest to you 

that some of those centres may find that while the minister’s 

saying we can’t get the cheque out, I’m sorry we can’t get it out 

tomorrow and you’re going to have to borrow money; I don’t   



April 4, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

think they will. 

 

The one thing that they will find, Mr. Chairman, and I’m sure if 

you talk to any one of them, when that cheque does arrive, it 

certainly is not going to meet the requirements that they’ve 

been asking of this government — the services they are being 

asked to provide. And as a result then they end up going back to 

local organizations to seek more help as this government 

continues to offload services onto local governments and onto 

the local tax base. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s certainly a concern when you 

talk about individuals receiving their cheques on time. But I 

don’t know if the minister can just hide behind the fact that if 

the cheque isn’t out tomorrow, these organizations are going to 

be in difficulty when they rely on when government funding is 

coming out. 

 

I don’t think the hospital in Kipling is going to close down 

because the funding doesn’t get out to the district health board 

tomorrow so that they can make sure that a cheque is made 

available to the hospital in Kipling. Or to the Willowdale lodge, 

or to the other handicap services in . . . And I happen to be 

talking about my constituency because of the fact of the 

services that I’m aware are available there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, when we talk about interim 

supply . . . And we can talk about the social agencies. There are 

other agencies as well out there that are looking for some funds, 

that need some funds to survive. And you ask yourself . . . the 

Minister of Municipal Government was just talking about the 

fact the other day that they may face some exceptional 

circumstances as a result of flooding taking place this summer. 

My colleagues tried to get some questions answered and so far 

we haven’t got any answer. 

 

So, Madam Minister, we’re talking of a two-month supply, 

we’re talking of funds made available to agencies to operate in 

this . . . at this current time. We’re talking about them. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to remind the minister of the 

fact too . . . the minister always says, I think my colleague from 

Cypress Hills pointed out, and I could . . . we could certainly go 

back through the . . . prior to the 1991 period. And we could go 

through a number of days of debate on interim supply. 

 

And if you thought that some of the questions today were 

frivolous, I guarantee you, Mr. Chairman, you would have a 

heyday looking at some of the questions. In fact I should dig 

some of them out so that Madam Minister would have a chance 

to respond to similar type questions. But I won’t do that, to save 

the members who were in the Assembly at the time the 

embarrassment of the type of questions that were asked. 

 

But I find it interesting that rather than responding . . . And you 

know, Mr. Chairman, whether or not a question is directly 

related and may be involved in some way in a department, it 

seems to me the Finance department, when they do their 

homework, are quite well aware of the number of circumstances 

that they face on an annual basis. They’re well aware of the fact 

that they must plan. And the minister talked about planning. 

The minister talked about how they have to plan. 

 

The reason we couldn’t have the budget until the end of March, 

because they had to know what the federal government was 

doing, they had to know how much they were going to have cut 

in transfer payments, they had to know how much more was 

going to be offloaded by the federal department. And therefore 

it took them some time. 

 

We understand that. That isn’t . . . certainly isn’t a concern. I 

understand the problems the Department of Finance faces. They 

want to know exactly what they will be receiving and what they 

can anticipate receiving. 

 

When the minister prepares her budget, Mr. Chairman, what 

does she do? Does she say that oil prices are going to be at $25 

today? I doubt it. I would guess that her department would look 

at where oil prices are in general, and they will pick a good 

average so they can anticipate what they hope to achieve in 

returns to the Finance department; so that they can put the 

programing in place or let groups know what they can 

anticipate receiving from the Department of Finance, and the 

expenditures as far as funds that they can use to operate. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, as we stand here this 

morning, and when we ask questions about what the Finance 

department is doing to address some of the problems that may 

arise as a result of the flooding problems . . . The other day I 

noted in the paper that the Minister of Finance has indicated 

that provided there aren’t major problems in the forest industry 

with fires this summer, that they have so much money available 

to expend on those circumstances; if more is needed they may 

have to look for it elsewhere down the road. 

 

I guess, Mr. Chairman, if the Finance department and the 

Finance minister are doing their job, which in many cases I 

believe they are doing their job commendably, they would 

anticipate not only what the revenues may be, but they would 

also be anticipating what they may face over and above their 

expenditures, and having a bit of money put aside to address 

these shortfalls. 

 

And I guess when it comes to discussing finances in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Finance said they are 

certainly doing a much better job than they were in 1991. Well I 

guess that’s her prerogative, that’s . . . She’s the minister; she 

would want to think that she is doing a better job of managing 

the funds of this province. 

 

But I find it interesting, Mr. Chairman, when we talk about 

finances . . . and everyone was all excited about the 2 per cent 

reduction in the provincial sales tax. And I guarantee, Mr. 

Chairman, that people in your constituency were more than 

pleased to see the reduction. People in my constituency were 

pleased to . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I would advise the hon. member 

not to involve the Chair in debate. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And my apologies. 

While I was trying to make sure my remarks were going   



604  Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 1997 

through the Chair, yes, I did inadvertently draw the Chair in and 

although . . . I can certainly say that in my constituency people 

were certainly pleased to see the 2 per cent reduction in the 

sales tax. 

 

And I think the Minister of Economic Development or the 

Premier — I’m not sure which — just a day or so ago did 

comment about a report in the Moosomin World Spectator 

talking about the fact that 2 per cent was more than welcome. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, it wouldn’t be real positive for each one of 

us on the opposition side of this Assembly as well to just stand 

up and applaud the government for everything, when there were 

areas in the budget debate that people have a lot of questions, a 

lot of concerns. 

 

And so I think you will have to admit that over the past number 

of years this caucus has certainly applauded the government 

when they have made moves that we felt were beneficial to the 

taxpayer. 

 

There’s even just a Bill that was brought forward today that 

we’re going to be debating in the near future, Mr. Chairman, 

regarding maintenance and regarding enforcement — child 

enforcement — and those funds. And there’s funds as well that 

I’m sure that the department are quite well aware. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when we discuss all of these things, over the 

period of time we have certainly given credit where credit is 

due. But at the same time, before we are totally prepared to 

endorse an expenditure, I think it behoves us as opposition 

members to bring the concerns that taxpayers have as well, as to 

how these monies are expended; how much is needed for 

certain services. 

 

We’ve had a number of individuals on this side of the Assembly 

today, or in the last couple of days, have been trying to get 

some answers from the minister as to some of the emergency 

funding that they may foresee, or they may have even set aside 

today in . . . or in this budget, to address some emergency 

measures that may come up. 

 

But I would like to just come back to one other point, and that 

was when the minister talked about how well they are managing 

the books. I found it interesting that the day after the budget the 

Provincial Auditor, while he applauded the government on a 

number of cases, still brought out the fact that there are areas of 

concern that he has with the way money is moved in and out of 

accounts. And on many occasions, why is it moved back and 

forth from the Crown entities to the general revenue, or vice 

versa. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we’re aware of the fact that the reason the 

auditor pointed that out is because, when the government moves 

from one entity to the other, all they are doing, Mr. Chairman, 

is trying to show the government whether or not – whether or 

not they need – whether or not they, Mr. Chair . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. It now being 1 o’clock, this 

committee will rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being past the normal hour of 

adjournment, and with the encouragement to all members to 

enjoy the weekend home with their families in their 

constituencies, this House now stands adjourned until Monday 

afternoon at 1:30. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 577 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 577 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 577 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Get Well Wishes to Member from Regina Northeast 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 578 

 University of Saskatchewan 90th Anniversary Celebrations 

  Whitmore ................................................................................................................................................................................... 578 

 Battleford News 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 578 

 Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Powwow 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 578 

 Tartan Day 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

 Dairy Youth Ambassador 

  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

 Funding for Repair of Moose Jaw Bridges 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

 Wildlife Columnist Doug Gilroy 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 580 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 580 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 582 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 583 

 Child Pornography on the Internet 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 581 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 581 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 582 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 582 

 SaskPower Guyana Project 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 584 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 584 

 Health Districts’ Labour Standards Violations 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 584 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 584 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 44  The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 584 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 16 — The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 585 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 585 

 Bill No. 28 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 586 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 587 

 

 Bill No. 31 — The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 588 



 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 589 

 Bill No. 35 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 1997 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur les victimes d’actes criminels 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 589 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motion for Interim Supply 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 591 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 594 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

  Van Mulligen (Point of Order) ................................................................................................................................................ 600 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 600 

 


