



















































Hansard: April 08, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 695 

 April 8, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, just to go over a little . . . a few 

of my remarks before the supper break, I’d like to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Start from the beginning. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Well that would be interesting, but I won’t go 

through everything there because some of the members that 

started on this particular debate, I think once over will be good 

enough for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’d indicated previously, that this motion by the 

member from Saskatoon is one that impacts on the federal 

Liberal government’s policies and especially on that policy in 

regards to funding the programs that they put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that you can say about the 

federal Liberal government — and in saying that about the 

federal Liberals you also say it about the policy, about the 

opposition Liberals in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker — is that for 

the most part they are prone to moving towards policies which 

are very short term and in that sense cover up the lack of a 

long-term policy or program that they have. 

 

One only needs to look at the infrastructure program that they 

started out with here a number of years ago, about four years 

ago, that to begin with was for two years and then when they 

moved on, they brought it in for only a single year. Whereas at 

the same time as they are bringing into the province of 

Saskatchewan a program that only cost them $11 million, 

infrastructure, which I believe will mostly be used in 

transportation and road construction in this province, they 

removed subsidies through the Crow rate subsidy of something 

over $300 million. So what it is, is it’s a game of shuffling the 

cards around and always coming up with the card that is a 

short-term program card and less funds. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is something that indicates that we are not 

going to receive from the federal Liberals or haven’t seen from 

the federal Liberal government any policies that have any 

length of time. 

 

Now I have here, Mr. Speaker, two pieces of information 

related to news releases and it says, the headline on the one 

says, “Goodale promises backlog penalties” and in doing that 

he says, “Goodale said there is a need to be more responsive 

and accountability by all players in the industry.” 

 

I think that’s fairly clear, Mr. Speaker. He isn’t singling out any 

one group for any punitive action more or less than another 

group, and he isn’t singling out any one group that would not 

receive it. But one day later, actually at 11 o’clock, it says 

officials in the office of the federal agricultural minister say 

Goodale’s remarks have been misinterpreted when coming up 

with an account for what was really going to take place to bring 

the railways . . . and make the railways responsive and 

accountable for what they are doing or not doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have here the minister saying that no, he was 

misinterpreted. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that that type of remark by the federal 

minister indicates where the whole Liberal government is on 

policy — nothing that is going to have any lengthy time; it’s 

going to be something that is short term, keyed on votes, and 

then disappear shortly after. And the members opposite, in their 

remarks related to the resolution, have indicated that they think 

that that’s the direction that the Liberal Party should go in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just to indicate . . . add a few more details to 

what has taken place related to rail transportation. The CTA or 

the Canadian Transportation Agency last week, I believe — I’m 

not sure of the exact date — made some changes that said that 

the railroads’ cost of capital for hauling grain would be the 

same as the cost of capital for any other item. And in doing so, 

the adjustment would result in a maximum freight rate scale for 

grain increasing some 30 or 40 cents per tonne, impacting about 

15 million on western Canadian farmers. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

comes under the federal Liberal policies, which are: number 

one, deregulating transportation; and number two, following the 

rules of . . . (inaudible) . . . Now, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

Liberals and their cousins here in Saskatchewan are prone to 

doing these particular things — short term and reducing the 

support for the agricultural community. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this change then later on . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

indicating that what the federal government is doing is just 

underfunding their responsibility in rail transportation. And I 

agree with them that that’s what they’re doing. 

 

If you look at the BNA Act (British North America Act) that 

basically is the constitution for the Canadian government 

system — both federal and provincial — the breakdown there 

says which of the government levels is responsible for what. 

And in this particular case the federal Liberal government is not 

accepting the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, that it has to maintain 

good rail service, and thereby keep the country together. 

 

I could say that probably one of the things that kept the Roman 

Empire together, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that they built roads 

and all the roads led to Rome. Well, Mr. Speaker, this federal 

Liberal government is destroying the roads that were built, that 

did keep this country together, and you will see the support that 

is coming from the members opposite on this indicates that they 

are fully aware of what is happening and are supporting that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool is asking for is that they’re calling on the railways 

to dedicate some crews, locomotives, cars, and track necessary 

to get the grain moving. And I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, the 

farm community needs someone to start doing that. It used to be 

that that responsibility could be tagged on to the federal 

government. After their abdication of what they were   



696  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

responsible for, there appears to be no one in the system that is 

responsible for maintaining a system in Canada that moves the 

grain out to the coast. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we accept that the federal government is 

moving away from its responsibility in providing rail service to 

the farm community, then we should take a look at it and decide 

what is really taking place. And, Mr. Speaker, what is taking 

place in this regard is that the federal government is offloading 

that responsibility onto the provincial government and the local 

people in the community. And in doing so, they’re transferring 

costs to the province. 

 

Now it’s indicated from the members opposite that this is 

exactly the same as what is happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan. But I’d like to disagree with the members 

opposite because what is taking place in Saskatchewan has been 

that when there was a deficit created and a huge debt with its 

interest payments of something over 800 million a year, there 

was less funds going to the municipalities and to the school 

divisions. And in that sense everyone was accepting the 

responsibility for paying some of the cost that the previous 

Conservative government left in this province. Everybody was 

picking up their share of the cost. 

 

But in this particular budget, as the members opposite full well 

know, that now that there is some area or window of expansion 

in the economic conditions of the province of Saskatchewan, 

we are starting to put some money back in to that. Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t see that taking place with the federal government. In fact 

what I do see is that they’re continuing to increase the debt. 

And when they are taking away funding to the provinces in 

transportation, they’re doing it in a manner that means that it 

will never come back that way because they’re literally cutting 

off and getting rid of the rail transportation system totally and 

replacing it with simply short-term, single-year funding if they 

replace anything at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways . . . I should 

say, Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech debate on the throne 

speech, this government indicated that it was going to move a 

transportation strategy, an integrated transportation strategy, 

into place. And an important part of that strategy will be 

planning our transportation system in partnership with industry, 

communities, and local people to ensure that we have a system 

that will meet the needs of the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for this motion is that quite frankly the 

federal government in their movement away from regulating 

rail transportation did not do anything like that  to put in 

place a system that would meet the needs well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometime later on in this session we will be seeing 

a new transportation Act which will give some assistance to 

putting together this planning into the future. 

 

As well we’ve made a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to put $2.5 

billion over the next 10 years into the highways and roads in the 

province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite indicates that he doesn’t think 

that the numbers are very high. Most of the afternoon we 

heard some complaints from the previous speaker that they had 

a highway that had 56 or 58 vehicles on it per day and, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to point out that there are some driveways 

where you have two teenage kids in the family would be able to 

meet that particular number of vehicles over them in a given 

day and not be considered anything more than just a lane. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is taking place in the area of transportation is 

that as you move the costs away from the federal government 

onto the province, you will therefore impact very severely the 

economic conditions of the agricultural community. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want a run-down of some 

of the last years of fuel tax. For two years, Mr. Speaker, there 

was no fuel tax collected at all which started some of the debt 

that this province has because they didn’t collect it; and I realize 

that the member that brought this up is not of the political party 

that caused it; he’s not a Conservative. But what he should 

understand is that when he looks at the revenues and that for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the impact on the expenditures 

of it  and I happen to have here, Mr. Speaker, the budget 

address that says Investing in People  indicates to me that the 

transfers from the federal government, the federal Liberal 

government, have dropped to $650 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1990 that figure was about $1.6 billion. So 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, over a period of five years we’ve 

seen a drop of almost $1 billion of transfer payments from the 

federal government, and it is those kind of funds, those drops in 

funds, have to be picked up some place else if we’re going to 

maintain education and health care in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what the people in this province wanted the 

priority of money spent on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the backlog of grain that the deregulation 

and the offloading and the inability or the lack of desire of the 

federal government to meet their responsibilities continues on 

today. It’s not something that can be blamed on cold weather. 

It’s not something that can be blamed upon the farmers. It’s not 

something that can be blamed upon the port handlers. 

 

This particular lack of movement of grain, there’s only one 

place where you can blame it. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, 

that that is the federal Liberal government, who’ve decided that 

they want to deregulate and get out of the industry and out of 

the rail industry and get away from the responsibility that is 

inherent in the structure of this country, of the federal 

government managing and looking after the rails. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Wheat Pool has a news release out 

which says that since the grain handling companies 

implemented a seven-day-a-week operation at the Port of 

Vancouver, allocated the limited cars supply offered by the 

railways each week to high through-put and main-line facilities, 

and began trucking and loading programs to move the grain 

from facilities on the unused branch lines, they still haven’t 

come up to speed of moving this year’s crop. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you and to other members of   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

the House that I’m going to be supporting this resolution and 

voting for it when it comes to vote. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

in the debate this evening and listen to the hypocrisy come from 

across the floor regarding a national transportation policy as it 

relates to the federal government of the day. 

 

I recall back in 1991 as we were sitting around the kitchen table 

one night on my farm with some friends, and we were listening 

to the then transportation — or the Agriculture minister of the 

day, Rosetown-Biggar — speaking of how he was about to pass 

retroactive legislation regarding the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program and the discussion quickly went 

to: looks like we have little to look forward to from this 

government over the next four years. Unfortunately that’s 

turned into the second term and I don’t think those opinions 

have changed. 

 

The members’ opposite narrow view of the transportation 

policy of this province is greatly reflected in this past budget, 

Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Deputy Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, 

is reflected in the last budget. 

 

Again back to 1991 when almost everyone in the province, 

including all the farmers and most politicians — except I think 

those across the floor — realized that things were changing. We 

were seeing things change on the farm; we were seeing things 

change the way we transport our grain; we’re seeing much less 

efficiency and coordination by the grain companies in moving 

our product to port, and certainly within the system within the 

province. To this day we’re still seeing tremendous amounts of 

product being moved from elevator to elevator, which makes 

very little sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The problem being there, of course, as I said, is the lack of 

coordination in the transportation system right from the small 

towns, the small elevators, through to these large cement 

elevators right to port. 

 

So everyone recognized, Mr. Speaker, that there were problems 

a way back then. This government came to power in 1991, in 

the fall of 1991, and you would have thought that one of the 

first things that they would want to start working on would be a 

major transportation plan for the province of Saskatchewan. 

Coupled with that you would have thought they’d want to 

coordinate a plan, their plan from the province, with the federal 

government of the day. Did that happen? No, it didn’t happen. 

And it didn’t happen in 1992, it didn’t happen in 1993, it didn’t 

happen in 1994, and it sure hasn’t happened in 1995 when they 

got re-elected and when I got elected. 

 

And one of the first things . . . As the critic for Transportation 

and Highways, I called on the government to introduce a 

transportation plan for this province. And did they do it? No 

they didn’t. They took some time to think about it. And now 

finally the government is saying, oh my heavens, my goodness 

gracious, we’re in a problem. Our roads are full of potholes, 

people complaining from east to west, from north to south  

what’s happened to our highways. No commitment to the 

highways, no commitment to transportation, no commitment to 

anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now today we hear the members opposite talking about a 

national transportation plan. Of course a national transportation 

plan makes sense and we need that. We also need a 

transportation plan for our province, and we need leadership. 

And who do you think should provide it, Mr. Speaker? I would 

think that the provincial government should provide that 

leadership. But do we have that? No. We have the members 

condemning the federal government for a lack of a plan when 

indeed the province does not have a plan at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan everything we do is based 

on travel. We go to get the mail, we have to travel on a road. 

Whether it’s a highway, whether it’s a municipal road, we have 

to travel on a road. We’re getting to the point, Mr. Speaker, 

where the farmers in my area are complaining because of 

people driving in the field because the roads are impassable. 

The roads are so rough that people are saying, I should drive on 

the field because it’s much smoother. 

 

Now that certainly isn’t the solution. That’s certainly not the 

one that I hope our Transportation minister is thinking about 

implementing and saying, maybe we don’t need any roads at 

all. 

 

So in rural Saskatchewan, everything is based on travel, based 

on roads, and still no commitment. As I look in the provincial 

budget, Mr. Speaker, I see $56 million dedicated to total for 

construction of transportation system — 56 million. I think to 

use the minister’s figures of a million dollars per mile, that 

relates to about 56 miles of highway in the province  not very 

much in a massive province like we’ve got with the massive 

problems that we’ve seen in road deterioration and the changing 

of traffic flows in this province. 

 

Sure, some of that can be blamed on the federal transportation 

system . . . federal transportation plan, or lack of, and the 

federal government. But however, there has to be a commitment 

from within the province, Mr. Speaker, to a transportation 

system, to a province that so desperately depends on 

transporting their products to and fro market and across the 

piece. 

 

Now the whole issue of the change in the way we do things in 

Saskatchewan is not unlike many of the other provinces in 

Canada. Things are changing at a rapid pace and unfortunately 

this government is not keeping pace with changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could, one of the things as well that I notice 

was missing from the budget was the lack of commitment as it 

pertains to a transportation strategy, and as it pertains to our 

railway system. Now we all know the massive miles of railroad 

that are being abandoned in this province, and we also know 

that once these rail lines are abandoned, that they come under 

provincial jurisdiction. So it seemed to be prudent for our 

provincial government to say, all right, these lines are going to 

be abandoned; we’re going to take some action. Once they   



698  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

become abandoned, we’re going to work with our people, our 

farmers, our elevator companies, our municipal governments, to 

come up with a plan as to where we’re going to ensure that 

these rail lines are maintained, or where we’re going to have to 

build some pretty massive, heavy highways. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that isn’t happening. And I mentioned in the 

House a couple of weeks ago about the dangers of what can 

happen when some of these rail lines are abandoned. What 

happens to the communities that are affected by these rail lines 

and what happens to the people that live in these communities? 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, if I might, I’d like to talk for a minute 

about a few of the communities that I’m familiar with where the 

rail lines are slated to be abandoned. The line that’s called the 

Imperial subdivision of course really starts at the community of 

Watrous, which is in the riding of the present Agriculture 

minister’s riding, and it flows on down through what used to be 

Amazon and to Simpson, which is still in the Agriculture 

minister’s riding, and then it enters my riding at Imperial on 

down to Stalwart, to Liberty, to Penzance, to Holdfast, and 

eventually it ran to Dilke, which was abandoned many, many 

years ago. 

 

Now this line has been slated for abandonment by Canadian 

National Railways. And for years and years my father and our 

older friends fought to save that rail line from abandonment 

from the rail line, from the tyranny of those dreaded national 

rail line companies. 

 

The problem that we’re seeing now with a lot of these rail lines, 

Mr. Speaker, is that we’re not only having to fight the rail line 

companies, we’re having to fight the elevator companies. The 

elevator companies are heading for the borders of this province, 

to the cement terminals, faster than fleas off a dead dog, if I 

may use that phrase. And so now our problem is twofold. How 

do we maintain, we maintain . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But 

anyway our problem is twofold. The line is up for 

abandonment, and everyone wants to move off it, and the 

Canadian National is not interested, as I understand it, in 

transferring the line or selling it. 

 

So what happens to the town of Simpson that’s in the Minister 

of Agriculture’s own riding, in terms of local property taxes? 

Mr. Speaker, in the town of Simpson, that community stands to 

lose about $19,000 a year in taxes once the elevator companies 

have moved out of Simpson. How do they cope — small town 

of 300 people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the town of Imperial we’re going to see a loss 

of in excess of $16,000 a year in property taxes. How’s a 

community of 400 people cope with that loss of tax revenue? 

Move on down the line to my home town, Mr. Speaker, of 

Liberty. We’re looking at about a $14,000 a year tax bill loss. 

 

We can move on down to Holdfast  and the list goes on and 

on  in Holdfast we’re looking at 13, $14,000 a year for one 

elevator that is still there of property taxes being lost. 

 

Now if you look at the town of Imperial, Mr. Speaker, what 

happens when those elevators are gone. I think in the town of 

Imperial right now we have something like four families 

employed in those elevators. Of those four families, children 

attend our school in Imperial — six, seven children out of those 

families that will be lost. What happens, Mr. Speaker . . . in our 

town presently we have two grocery stores. When you lose four 

or five families, does that jeopardize one of the stores? 

 

Of course we have probably the envy of Saskatchewan in a 

health centre in Imperial that we fought hard to maintain and 

are maintaining and will maintain that as long as the need is 

there, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t see an end to that. How long can 

we maintain that once we lose our drugstore because the 

communities aren’t there, the people of the community are 

moving out. If we lose our doctor because there isn’t enough 

business to keep him there, we lose the drugstore. It doesn’t 

stop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1930) 

 

What happens to our manufacturing plant? If we lose a store, if 

we lose the drugstore, if we lose a doctor, if we should lose our 

health centre, will anybody want to come to Imperial to work in 

a manufacturing plant at Rite Way where there’s no services? I 

think not, Mr. Speaker. The whole point of infrastructure in 

rural Saskatchewan is key to its survival and certainly the 

transportation system is one of those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most recently Canadian Pacific Railways 

announced some more abandonments and unfortunately one of 

those lines is on the west side of my constituency, and it’s the 

line that runs from Broderick to Moose Jaw. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

there are many, many communities along that line as well that 

will be affected in loss of tax revenues if the rail line is 

abandoned. Now this rail line is up for transfer and hopefully 

that it can get transferred and that a short-line rail company will 

take a look at it. 

 

But without some leadership from our provincial government to 

take a leadership role and say yes, we want to maintain that 

line; we’re going to do everything we can; we’re not going to 

let it be abandoned; we’re going to ensure that those elevator 

companies are not going to be able to tear down their elevators 

and move out faster than we can stop, and thus would make a 

short-line rail very unfeasible  without that assistance, 

without that leadership, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be awful 

tough for communities like Broderick or Loreburn or 

Strongfield or Elbow or Marquis to maintain that rail line or 

turn it into a short-line feasible project. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I might, just to run through quickly a few 

of those communities and what a loss in tax revenue means to 

those communities as figures that I have been able to obtain and 

that some of the communities have provided for us. We look, 

for example, in the community of Eyebrow; there’s about 37 or 

$38,000 a year taxes, local taxes that will be lost if that rail line 

goes and their elevator closes. Hawarden, Strongfield, 

Loreburn, in excess of $9,000 a year in taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s Elbow — now Elbow’s a great place to talk about and 

I’d like to talk about Elbow for a few minutes. Now as you all 

know, Elbow is on the edge of Lake Diefenbaker and the   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

Saskatchewan River. And of course, I’m sure that many of the 

members opposite have gone to the Harbor Golf Club near 

Elbow to golf, one of the most renowned golf courses in 

Saskatchewan, one of the best kept golf courses in the province. 

And so they realize the value to the community of that golf 

course. As well as the golf course, it’s also a tremendous resort 

area. 

 

Now I could quote you at length, Mr. Speaker, from articles 

from the mayor of Elbow, from the surrounding RMs (rural 

municipality), from their business group, from their tourist 

group, talking about the lack of a commitment by this 

government to a road system to get the people, get the traffic, 

into the resort area available. 

 

I hear horror stories all summer long, all last summer, of huge, 

expensive motor homes, boats, trailers, campers, you name it, 

coming in and vowing never to come back because they would 

not have to traverse the roads that they do to get there. The 

potholes  they just said never again, we’ll not come back. 

 

And this is a major concern to the people of Elbow and the 

community and certainly the business people there such as the 

mayor of Elbow, who runs the marina there. His livelihood is 

based on attracting people in — tourists into that community — 

and the roads are in such tremendously tough shape that they 

can’t get there and so his business is declining. 

 

Now back to the town of Elbow itself and the taxes that will be 

lost, Mr. Speaker. In excess of $16,000 in business taxes that 

will be lost to that community if the rail line is gone, not to 

mention the same scenario as I indicated for on the Imperial 

subdivision line of businesses that will be lost, as well as people 

moving away because there are no services. 

 

So why won’t this government, why won’t the minister 

responsible for Highways and Transportation, take some 

responsibility for what’s happening in the province? Why won’t 

he take a leadership role and say yes, I’m going to do whatever 

I can to maintain these services in rural Saskatchewan. I’m 

going to get out there, roll up my sleeves, and I’m going to fight 

with the mayor of Elbow, with the mayor of Imperial, with the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Arm River, 

from all those people. 

 

So let’s get to work here and let’s get a transportation system in 

this province — a transportation policy that makes some sense 

— a transportation policy in this province that reflects what the 

people of the province want. Not what some bureaucrat wants, 

not what some political philosophy might dictate, but what the 

people of the province actually want and the people of rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, I could go on and on 

about different communities. And certainly these are only two 

of the branch lines that are up for abandonment and there are 

many, many more right across the province. But I’ll let some of 

the other members talk about their own particular instances. 

And I hope that the members across have the foresight to stand 

up and speak for their constituents, and how the rail lines affect, 

how the rail lines affect their communities and what the loss of 

them can mean. 

 

But not to leave out the rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker — as 

I look at some of the rural municipalities that are involved in 

the rail line from Broderick to Moose Jaw — I see the RM of 

Rudy, the RM of Loreburn, the RM of Huron, the RM of 

Eyebrow, the RM of Marquis, and the total revenues for the 

taxes that will be lost there if this rail line should go is in excess 

of $25,000 a year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you couple that with the devastating cuts 

that this government has made to municipalities right across this 

province, I’m not sure whether there’ll be any of them left or 

not. 

 

They talk about 30 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker, in funding. 

Now we’re gathering information daily by the dozens of 

municipalities that are telling us that the cuts are more like 50, 

60 per cent. Our local municipality at home is being cut 

something in the order of 55 per cent of their funding. You 

couple that with these losses and I don’t know how the 

municipality will survive. How will they ever build another 

gravel road to take the traffic that’s getting off the highways 

because they’re in such terrible shape? 

 

One of the RM councils last year . . . When we were out visiting 

some of the municipalities last summer, one of the RM 

councillors from the RM that neighbours Highway 44 . . . and 

of course I’m sure the members all realize that Highway 44 runs 

from Davidson across to Loreburn to No. 19, and of course now 

it’s half gravel — it’s half potholes and half gravel. And so the 

minister is going to have to make a decision there as to whether 

he’s going to completely rip up the road or whether he’s going 

to re-blacktop the half that’s gravelled. 

 

But one of the concerns that the councillor that I talked to had, 

Mr. Speaker, was the fact that because of Highway 44 is in such 

disastrous shape, and the trucks were pounding it out, they were 

constantly moving on to the RM gravel roads. And as they 

moved to one road and pounded it out, Mr. Speaker, then they’d 

move a mile over to the next one and they’d pound that out, and 

they’d move over and they’d pound the next one out. 

 

So my question would be to the Minister of Highways, is how 

— and this government — is how they expect the RMs to 

maintain the rural road system, the gravel road system, when 

they’ve slashed our funding by 50 per cent or more in some 

cases, by not taking a leadership role in ensuring that we have 

short-line railroads in this province where they’d make sense, to 

ensure that the tax base is not eroded once again. 

 

And I’d asked the minister that sometime, Mr. Speaker, if he 

would stand up in Executive Council for the people of rural 

Saskatchewan and say hey, we need some roads. $56 million is 

not enough — $56 million for our crumbling infrastructure road 

system is not nearly enough. 

 

However I do notice, Mr. Speaker, that as they continue to 

condemn the federal government I notice that in the budget of 

course that here again we have the Canada-Saskatchewan ag 

infrastructure program. Now I don’t know who actually is   



700  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

paying Canada’s share, but I think it must be those nasty feds 

— I’m not sure, but I guess they are. And so here’s some 

money coming from the federal government — it’s kind of like 

biting the hand that feeds you. 

 

This government continues to criticize the federal government, 

and in the meantime their hand is out. They’re saying okay; 

come, feds, send some money over. And the federal 

government, the great people that they are, are sending some 

money over. They’re sending money, and here is another 

example in the Canada-Saskatchewan ag infrastructure 

program, Mr. Speaker, of some more money, another $11 

million. That’s about a quarter of the total construction budget 

this province has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if this government isn’t committed to a provincial 

strategy, one that we’ve called for, one that I’ve been calling on 

them for since I got elected, one that brings together provincial 

government, of course the federal government, our municipal 

governments, the local communities, the elevator companies 

and the rail lines . . . and sit down and say okay, we need to 

have a plan, and we are going to come up with one. And if 

they’re not prepared to do that — and they haven’t been for the 

last six years since the NDP (New Democratic Party) have been 

in power — then maybe it’s time they moved aside. 

 

The people out there are certainly saying, hey if they’re not 

capable of making a decision, putting a plan together, then 

move aside. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that in 

the next provincial election that we see that happen. And there 

are many people who are willing to work towards those ends 

I’m sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I stand here tonight and as there are people 

from across this province watching the session tonight — 

certainly there are people from my constituency watching — I 

want the members opposite to know that what I’m talking about 

tonight is not just my own personal view. It’s what people are 

telling me. 

 

It’s what farmers, whether it be from Loreburn or Broderick or 

Central Butte or Holdfast or Bethune or Simpson or you name it 

. . . (inaudible) . . . Yes, Simpson from the Minister of 

Agriculture’s riding. They’re talking to me saying, hey we have 

more input through you than we do through our own minister. 

What can you do? You got to get some sense into this 

government; that they have to come out with a transportation 

strategy, one that makes some sense, one that will help rural 

Saskatchewan survive. 

 

So I hope that the members opposite will listen. I know the 

Transportation minister is very eager and willing to work with 

us, and I would challenge the government that now is the time 

to get out and come up with a strategy. Work with the 

municipalities. Work with the federal government. Work with 

the people of this province, and come up with a transportation 

strategy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would ask once and for all that if the members opposite 

would quit playing politics for once with the lives of rural 

Saskatchewan people and get down to the business at hand, 

we’d have a much better province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 

I’m glad to enter into this debate about the transportation. We 

have heard this morning from our Agriculture federal minister, 

Ralph Goodale, agree finally, that the penalties should lie on the 

transportation railroad companies. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon the federal minister’s office is 

saying, sorry, the minister didn’t really mean it. Mr. Speaker or 

Deputy Deputy Speaker, we are not surprised. This is just part 

of the sidestep the federal Liberals are doing. The federal 

Liberals would sooner make farmers pay the demurrage charge 

for shipping their grain to port than they would have the 

railroad companies pay. 

 

(1945) 

 

On the other hand, the federal minister is saying that the 

railroad companies should be rewarded through bonuses for 

doing their job, but we know farmers are paying railroads 

enough to have their grains moved to ports now. 

 

We do not believe, however, that the railroads are the only 

problems leading to the current situation. We feel that the 

legislative framework that the federal government inherited in 

the transportation Act could have a major factor in the current 

situation. All three prairie provinces made it clear when the 

CTA was introduced that they believed that the legislative . . . 

shift the balance of power far too much to favour the interests 

of railroads. We warned the federal government that there 

would be negative consequences to the legislation. Now we are 

seeing the results. 

 

As such, we believe that rather than an ad hoc solution by the 

federal government, it would be better to hold an independent 

inquiry across all of the provinces in this system. We believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that the backlog in the grain-handling system 

clearly demonstrates that the federal move to deregulate the 

grain-handling system has been a failure. The four western 

provinces have called on the federal government to hold an 

inquiry into the grain blockage. Mr. Speaker, farmers cannot 

afford to let their grain sit in their bins. They cannot afford 

another disruption, and our reputation as a reliable supplier of 

grain to the world has already been tarnished enough. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the federal government to join with our 

provincial minister, come up with a national highways 

transportation plan — a long-term, national plan, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the only country that has no national plan. Also, Mr. 

Deputy Deputy Speaker, we need to look at the short-lines, but 

the federal Liberals are abandoning railroads faster than the 

regional transportation system can get some consultation in 

their region. Yet the provincial Liberals asked the provincial 

government to . . . or the federal government to put a two-year 

ban on removing rail beds and siding from across lines. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Liberal members to 

talk to your brothers and sisters in Ottawa to hold off from   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

railroad abandonment. Give the committees time to look at their 

local transportation. Mr. Speaker, the opposition will attempt to 

make the case that the Government of Saskatchewan is causing 

rail abandonment because of its restrictive labour legislation. 

 

I am the member . . . I know the members from both the parties 

opposite attended the short rail conference supported by DHT 

(Department of Highways and Transportation), SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 

Unfortunately they didn’t learn a thing when they were there. 

Had they stayed to the very end, they would have been around 

when Sinclair Harrison called for a vote on the question — on 

Saskatchewan short-line rail friendly. But roughly a two-third 

majority, conference delegates, said yes, we are short-line rail 

friendly. After weighing all the evidence and listening to all the 

speakers, the delegates concluded that opposition was wrong. 

Why can’t they accept that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  The members opposite continue to try to 

blame the government for the actions taken by their federal 

cousins. All three prairie provinces fought the federal 

government, government CTA (Canadian Transportation 

Agency) because they knew it would result in abandonment. 

August ’95 the provinces made joint submissions to the House 

of Commons standing committee. March ’95 appeared before 

House of Commons standing committee on transportation. 

April ’96 appeared before the Senate standing committee on 

transportation and communications. What did the opposition . . . 

commented to the federal cousins on the wonderful job they 

were doing. You couldn’t avoid your responsibilities on this 

one. 

 

July 1, Mr. Speaker, the federal transportation Act proclaimed, 

making it easier for railways to transfer on unwanted rail lines. 

CN’s (Canadian National) three-year plan identifies 300 miles 

of rail lines in Saskatchewan to be abandoned: Arborfield, Mr. 

Speaker, 19.4 miles; Big River 5.2 miles; Cudworth 46.6 miles. 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m trying to say is this is just the start of the 

rail line abandonment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I ask the federal government to listen to 

the provincial government, SARM, farmers, and quit pulling 

out lines until the committees have time to look at short-lines. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a hard act to 

follow the member for Saskatchewan Rivers but I’ll do my best. 

The motion that’s on the floor, Mr. Speaker, and when we take 

it piece by piece I think we, as a whole, support it. 

 

I’d like to read through it though and just kind of break it down 

into sections. It says that this Assembly urged the federal 

Liberal government to develop a comprehensive national 

transportation policy. Agreed. That’s where we’re both . . . I 

think every party in here probably agrees it should have been 

done. Needs to be done. And we have urged them to get on 

board and do this, and we hope they take our advice and yours, 

and the third party’s. 

 

I would like to carry on though and it says, in cooperation with 

all levels of government. Now that one is really hard for me to 

bite because knowing that the Minister of Municipal of 

Government over there agrees with what I’m about to say — 

that there has never been much cooperation from the 

government on that side since ’91 when it was elected, with any 

form of government in this province or country. And I’m 

talking about urban, rural, or whatever; there is absolutely no 

cooperation. Because if there was we wouldn’t have seen 

downloading since 1991 before this year to the tune of 50 per 

cent of the funding that we’re getting, and now this year on top 

of that another 30 per cent. To me that would be like starving 

your kids and then telling them when they finally did grow up, 

I’m just trying to cooperate with you and see you get through. 

And they’ve just about starved to death. And that’s what you 

people are doing to all forms of municipal government. 

 

And then it goes on to say, and that it provide funding to the 

program. And doesn’t it sound familiar from the members 

opposite? It will provide funding, and I presume “it” means the 

federal government because this government does not fund 

roads of any kind in this province. All we have to do is see the 

conditions of our highways. 

 

The Minister of Highways would probably agree with me that it 

better fund something pretty quick because we’re in bad shape 

when it comes to our roads. But I would say to the members 

opposite, if we’re going to wait for ever for “it” to do it, it may 

never get done. Why don’t we take the leadership role and do it 

ourselves in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a government comes out and said they want 

to do something in cooperation with everyone else and they put 

$30 million of new money in, at first I congratulate the Minister 

of Highways and the government. And then I look to see where 

it came from. And I look on the other side, and they took 29 

million out of Municipal Government. So they actually put a 

million dollars into it, and with inflation . . . that won’t even 

cover inflation. Actually it should be actually downright 

embarrassing to the Minister of Highways that he should even 

bother mentioning in the budget that they would put a whole 

million dollars of new money into highways. 

 

To the people in Kamsack, Mr. Speaker, that drive No. 8 and 80 

Highway . . . and when it rains their cars kind of float from one 

side to the other. Then you go from Wroxton to Churchbridge, 

and you don’t have that problem because there’s so many holes 

the water drains away. It doesn’t sit in the ruts. 

 

You go on from Churchbridge, and you go to Langenburg down 

to Spy Hill, and really neither problem happens because the 

road from one side . . . I’ll tell you how bad it is, Mr. Minister, 

is that the highway truck that paints the centre line has got big 

curves in the middle of the road because his truck is so unlevel 

as he’s trying to paint the line. That’s how bad it is on that road. 

 

Then we can go over then to a little place from Atwater, and   



702  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

they’ve got a paved surface out to 22 Highway, and it was 

impassable for about two months this year. So yes, I believe, to 

the member that presented this motion, we definitely need 

cooperation. But I would suggest it should start on the other 

side. 

 

Maybe just to reiterate what I was saying here before . . . and 

I’d like to go through some numbers here from ’91 and bring 

them right up to the date of this last budget. But the amount of 

money spent on maintenance and construction for highways 

was about 139 million, which represented $15.63 million less 

than the year before. We go to ’92-93 which was . . . it’s down a 

bit, 113 million nine seventy-eight, down 41 million two 

ninety-eight, if you add the two together. ’93-94, 124 million 

spent on highways, maintenance, and construction — 31.126 

million more shortfall — and the list goes on. ’94: 118 million. 

And this just keeps going down and down and down. 

 

And I guess the message I’m trying to get to the members 

opposite is that the million dollars of new money that you put 

into highways this year is a far cry less than the $187 million 

you cut since 1991 when you came to power. You have a bit of 

a shortfall there of $186 million. So don’t wait for me to 

applaud the million dollars that you put into highways. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see why, with the overall 

principle of the motion that was presented here . . . it has good 

merit to it, yes. The federal government should be getting on the 

ball here and doing something about this. But yes, this 

government should be joining with them, taking a leadership 

role, and — if nothing else — embarrass the federal 

government into helping you. But if you wait for them to do it, 

we may wait a long time. We’re not sure, and we cannot afford 

to wait. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, there’s so many reasons why, I guess, we urge 

the government and the federal government to come out with a 

transportation policy. The short-line rails is a good example, 

and we’ve talked on that. And I think the Minister of 

Transportation agrees with us that a leadership role has to be 

taken in this respect. And if the rail line abandonment is 

happening, when they are abandoned, that falls under the 

jurisdiction of this government. And once again we are asking 

this government to take a leadership role. Don’t wait for 

somebody else to do it. You do it, and let’s help the people out 

there that are trying to start short-line rail companies. 

 

And a few of the ways you can do that is to deal with the 

successor rights. That’s one of the main problems. 

 

Another one is the purchasing of the rail beds, which may be an 

impossibility if the rail companies feel that competition may be 

not to their liking and they want to put a high price on this. 

Maybe these people out there need your assistance to negotiate. 

So that’s another area that they do. 

 

I think another big area that we’re falling down in this province 

right now is that companies like Sask Wheat Pool — for that 

matter, any big company out there — is coming along, and 

they’re building an inland terminal or a brand-new elevator 

anywhere they choose in this province. And they’re doing that 

for one reason — because we do not have a national or a 

provincial transportation policy. So what happens? They plop it 

in the middle of an RM that has no roads to that specific spot. 

And with the downloading that you’ve done to RMs, they have 

to come up with this money on their own. 

 

Why don’t we get a transportation policy that when some 

company comes out to build a new terminal or an inland 

terminal, that it has to fit with the policy we have in place and 

not cost the municipal governments out there thousands and 

thousands of dollars to build new roads into these facilities all 

because somebody wouldn’t take a leadership role. And I’m 

afraid being the government, I have to point the finger at you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although I support the concept of what we’re 

doing here and I feel there’s a great need for it, I think there is a 

great deal of hypocrisy on the other side pointing the finger at 

someone else. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The two 

preceding speeches were almost so good that a fellow could 

probably stand up and say ditto, but that wouldn’t be in the best 

interests of good debate and of the parliamentary process that 

we’re involved in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  As we did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

budget, we took a look at it. We assessed it for what it was. We 

didn’t try to read between the lines. We didn’t try to judge it on 

what wasn’t in it. We took it at face value, and we read what 

was there. We liked what we saw, and we supported it. 

 

We take a look at this motion. We know there’s lots missing. 

We know there’s lots not covered. But we’re not here to judge 

that. We’re here to judge what’s written on the paper for this 

particular motion, and we support that principle. We’re not 

afraid to stand up in our party and support those things that we 

think are right. 

 

However we do want to take this opportunity, because in this 

process that we are involved with we have the opportunity, to 

try to show to the government how they can expand their role 

and even do a better job. And we want to be constructive, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because this is a subject that is near and dear 

to all of our hearts and will affect every person in a land-locked 

area of the world. Saskatchewan doesn’t have an ocean front to 

give us cheap transportation, as much of the world has fought 

wars in order to achieve. Those European countries that were 

land-locked would have sacrificed armies in order to get a 

seaport, in order to have a piece of land, a tract to an ocean. 

 

We haven’t got that opportunity here. And besides that, we are 

not a warlike, violent nation or a violent people, and we won’t 

go to war to try to take away somebody else’s seaport. And 

even if we did, we’d have to get our farms all the way to the 

coast, and it wouldn’t do that much good. 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

So what we have to do is deal with reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We have to deal with the reality of how we can make our world 

work better and make our system work better, and in doing that, 

a national transportation policy is important, and it’s good. 

 

But let’s face it, folks, we’ve talked about this for 50 years that 

I’m aware of. And I’m presuming from the stories I heard from 

my elders that the conversations in years before that were along 

the same line. We need transportation in this country. We need 

it desperately. We are land-locked. It’s been a problem from the 

beginning of time in this province and it will always be a 

problem because we are what we are — we are land-locked. 

 

And we will never be able to break out of this mode of being 

the hewers of wood and haulers of water unless we have not 

only a national transportation policy but alternatives to the 

present system. 

 

And that’s why we have talked about putting blame where 

blame should be. Who causes the problems that people in the 

mid-part of this country have? Who causes them? Obviously the 

CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) and the CN are those vehicles 

that carry grain and produce, cars, whatever, to and from our 

coasts, to and from the lakeheads. So we can clearly identify 

that the rail system is key and important to us. 

 

Obviously the highways are becoming more important as we go 

along because people are using bigger and bigger trucks — 

A-trains, B-trains, now C-trains. Who knows where it’ll stop 

when we get these multi-powered engines, not even of the 

diesel vintage any more but the jet-engined trucks that can 

probably pull 10 or 15 or 20 trailers behind them. We could 

have trains on roads. 

 

These are the realities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have to 

deal with, and when we point fingers we have to point them at 

who is causing the problem. Obviously at the moment it is the 

CN and the CPR because we don’t have these big trains or 

trucks yet. So we got to blame the reality on to these people. 

How would you solve the problem of these folks not moving 

grain? 

 

Ask yourself this: we had the biggest surplus of grain last year, 

of high-priced wheat, in this country, the biggest carryover 

we’ve had in years. Why did we have that at a time when the 

world was hungry not only for grain but willing to pay a high 

price for it? 

 

What were we doing in September when the crops were in the 

fields already ripe and many of them being combined and 

harvested and put into bins. We had a bumper crop on our 

hands; everybody knew it. The world around us knows that we 

are not such an inefficient country that we wouldn’t finish our 

harvest. This is not Russia. People don’t get drunk on vodka in 

harvest time and quit harvesting. They carry on with the job and 

they get it done. We knew the job would get done. We might 

end up with a few million bushels of tough grain but we were 

going to have a bunch of it. 

 

But what does the CPR and the CN do? Who knows what they 

were doing. They surely weren’t shipping grain. The trains sat 

idle. The grain sat idle. We could have filled the terminals up at 

both ends of the system and we could have had it in place and 

ready to go. 

 

You know we’ve gotten so used to being pushed around and 

shoved around in this business, of being farm people in 

Saskatchewan, that today we have people saying there are only 

10 ships in demurrage — only 10 — like that’s pretty good. 

Well how about only one? We only need one lined up to get 

into port. We’ve come to the point where we expect that we 

should be taking less than perfect as being good enough. In fact 

half is good enough any more. 

 

How many ships did we have in demurrage, paying them 

millions of dollars for paid holidays? How do you solve that 

problem? You put the responsibility of paying out of the 

pocketbook, you put that on the people that move the grain. If 

they got to pay the penalty, then they’re going to definitely do a 

better job. Okay, CPR, CNR, they’re the villains to start with. 

Let’s attach some cost to them for demurrage, a share of the 

demurrage they pay. 

 

Who else in this system helps to create the movement of grain? 

The Canadian Wheat Board. A lot of folks are going to say, 

now he’s going to go out and beat up on the Wheat Board. Well 

you’re right. I’m not going to stand here though and say that we 

should abolish it. Obviously if it’s supposed to be abolished, in 

time that’ll happen. I don’t think it’s the thing that most people 

want. What they do want is for the Wheat Board to have some 

responsibility. And the people that make the decisions have to 

be tied to the cost of their decisions. If you’re not tied to the 

cost of your decisions, you’re not going to make a good 

decision. Or you’re going to make one that does not necessarily 

benefit the people who need to have that system working. 

 

So a portion of the demurrage has to be charged to the Canadian 

Wheat Board, and that means of course you have to charge it to 

the people who are the directors on the Wheat Board because 

obviously if you charge it just to the board, then it would be 

taken out of the price of our wheat and we farmers would be 

paying for it. And we have nothing to say about the decisions of 

what the Wheat Board does with that grain, or if they ship it in 

September or wait till January. 

 

So you have to attach it to the individuals that make that 

decision, just as you attach it to the CPR and the CNR. A 

portion of this cost has to be transferred to those people that 

make the decisions of whether or not grain’s going to move or 

other products are going to move. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the things that we need to 

address here. These are the things that we have to include in this 

debate. 

 

Another thing we have to do is to talk about alternatives. We 

cannot ever have a monopoly unless it is scrutinized by some 

authority that will work in the best interests of other people than 

those who control the monopoly. It doesn’t matter what a 

monopoly is on. It will be bad for you if there’s only one person 

doing a job, or one company doing a job. 

 

  



704  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

If the CPR and the CNR have no competition — and effectively 

because they don’t run in the same areas of the country, there is 

no competition — then the only alternatives are, either this — 

there are one of two — either we provide some mechanism for 

competition or else we have to have a mechanism that polices 

them or watches over them that has some clout. A price review 

commission kind of concept. The Americans have got it for 

their monopolies. They do it very stringently, much more than 

we ever have in Canada, almost an overkill down there in some 

places now. So we got to be careful we don’t go too far, but at 

least we have to start, and we have to start by placing 

responsibility on those people that make decisions to pay some 

of the bills. Hit them in the pocketbook, or you won’t hit them 

at all. They’ll never care unless they start to pay some of the 

bills. 

 

And the next thing is to provide true competition. Now if you 

can . . . (inaudible) . . . well whatever that word is. Think about 

the possibility . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: Order. Why is the member on her 

feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  To ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and my thanks to our colleague, the member from Cypress 

Hills, for this courtesy. 

 

We have some young guests seated in the Speaker’s gallery this 

evening. They are the Regina 86th Cub Scouts. There are nine 

Cubs and three leaders. The Cub Master is Tammy Henrie and 

Suzy Eras, and they are accompanied by a chaperon, Sean 

Bates. And I think Joëlle has taken them for a tour. 

 

And we’re happy to welcome them here, and we hope you 

enjoy the debate and the discussion that goes on, and we thank 

you for taking the time to come and see democracy in action in 

Saskatchewan. Please join me in extending a warm welcome to 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s truly 

good to have people watching our democratic process, and we 

want to talk tonight about transportation and the problems that 

we have with transportation in this country. 

 

We are going to support the hon. member’s motion. As we go 

through the evening, there is no question about that. However 

we do want to point out that there’s more things that you can 

and need to do. We were talking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

competition as an alternative to get things working better. There 

is different kinds of competition. I mentioned that you could 

end up with big trucks with whole lines of trailers on, trucking 

grain back and forth. 

 

But let’s look at another real reality. How about north and 

south? North, we’ve got a railroad. It’s already there. It’s now 

been put into a short-line kind of a concept, a good idea. For 

years people fought against that, but here we have an alternative 

that at the last ditch, people have said we either lose it or we try 

something else. So we’re trying something else, and I think 

that’s good. We’ll ship some grain up north. If that’ll work, 

fine. That’s some competition. 

 

What’s wrong with going south? People all of a sudden when 

you say we want to ship grain south, the hair on the back of 

their neck seems to stand up for some reason because somehow 

going south is against the grain of what people think in our 

country. And we’ve got to get over that. The natural flow of 

many things is north and south. Where do the geese go for the 

wintertime? They go south. Where does your grandpa go for the 

wintertime? He goes south. Have you ever seen him go north? 

My friends, the reality of life is that there’s a natural flow north 

and south as well as east and west. In fact it may be more 

natural. What’s wrong with shipping some grain down the 

Mississippi and selling it to the Chinese or the Japanese or 

whoever, load it on a boat out of the Mississippi instead of at 

Thunder Bay. 

 

You don’t have to do a bunch of that. All you have to do is 

enough to create the impression that it can be done. 

Immediately competition is what it is. It kicks in. It shows the 

CP and the CN that they have got to get their act together or 

they lose the business, and then they’ll compete. They’ll be 

competitive. You don’t necessarily have to ship a lot but you 

got to do some in order to prove the point that you’re willing to 

take the extra step and the extra mile to do whatever has to be 

done. 

 

The other alternative of course is to scrutinize it. And to 

scrutinize it with legislative review committees or that sort of 

thing becomes extremely complicated and difficult. And it has 

to be, in my mind, the last-ditch effort we try. I prefer 

competition. Competition will always work quicker and better. 

But if we can’t get past that stumbling block then we have to 

look at this next possibility, and that is, my friends, that we 

have to have somebody that has some determination as well as 

some clout to say to these people: you get to work; you 

perform; you do it at a right and reasonable cost. And when you 

have ships lined up and you don’t do your job, you pay the 

demurrage and you pay the costs. 

 

The transportation issue is in crisis in this province. We are 

absolutely in crisis. We’ve been in crisis for a number of years, 

but we build into this crisis more and more each day. We have a 

committee formed in south-west Saskatchewan, and it is only 

logical that it would happen there first because we always 

experiment with a lot of things and have a lot of new ideas. But 

necessity is the mother of invention, and necessity is, right 

down there today, that we have rail lines that are going to be 

abandoned in places where you drive 40 or 50 miles already to   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

find a rail line. And now they are going to take out even some 

more. 

 

We have nothing against the inland terminals and the concepts 

of those things being built and allowing them to work. But at 

the same time there has to be some reasonable limits to how far 

people can and will go. And it is always going to be cheaper to 

roll steel on steel than rubber on pavement or gravel, unless 

they come up with some kind of new synthetic rubber some 

place that we haven’t heard about yet. But at this time friction 

makes it an impossibility for us to totally compete that way. 

 

Eventually, if we don’t have to go too far or if we can put the 

kind of wheels on these trucks that’ll last longer, and we can 

build our roads heavier and stronger, but these are things that 

need a lot of money and a lot of consideration. And here’s 

where the provincial government comes into the play. We have 

seen the situation where the Crow’s Nest freight rate agreement 

was dealt away. And we sold that for about $84.6 million 

nationwide. That wasn’t enough. We sold out too cheap. And in 

the end of course, the loss of the Crow may help us. That’s true. 

We may become self-dependent or independent. We may 

diversify and all of that might be better in the long run. But in 

that transition period we sold too cheap, and we sold too fast, 

and we never heard a word from these people saying anything 

to anybody. 

 

(2015) 

 

Even the National Farmers Union never said a word. Their best 

supporters never said a word. They were as quiet as quiet could 

be, like lambs going to the slaughter. Just let it happen; let it all 

drift over. 

 

Should have had double that kind of money for the roads. 

Didn’t fight hard enough; didn’t fight fast enough; didn’t even 

get into the battle. 

 

What we need, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, is less 

concentration on election rhetoric in these issues, and more 

concentration on solving what is an ongoing problem from one 

political party’s time in office to the next. It passes past that in 

time. 

 

We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another crisis that plays right in 

with the one we’ve got with transportation and the rail line 

abandonment. And the member from Saltcoats used such a 

good list of numbers that I’m not going to go into repeating 

them all because he already did it and anybody that wants to, go 

back and check it in Hansard. But it’s real. Those numbers are 

facts. 

 

But the next crisis we’ve got is at the west coast and the east 

coast and it has to do, of course, with another thing that this 

political party that calls themselves the government in 

Saskatchewan can and should be doing something about — and 

that of course, is the ongoing labour unrest in this country. 

 

The ongoing labour unrest that every time a farmer gets a 

bushel of wheat extra in his bins and thinks he’s got a good 

market for it, these guys are off on some strike. And who 

supports them? The NDP. 

 

And the whole system falls down and collapses. If it isn’t the 

railroads not shipping the stuff when it should be going and 

allowing ships to line up, it’s the labour unions on strike trying 

to get more out of the farmers’ pockets. 

 

And what does the farmer in Saskatchewan have to say about 

that? Nothing. Where do we have any input into it? We have no 

say about it at all. We are controlled by the forces of all of these 

mechanisms, and we’re asked to pay the bill. That’s not fair. 

 

These things of labour unrest have led to such things as a lot of 

political debate. And you’ve heard the background music in the 

Assembly here tonight, and that’s because the members of the 

government don’t care for what I’m saying about their union 

buddies. And I don’t blame them. They do vote for them so 

they have to defend them. That doesn’t make it right. 

 

But what is right — what is right is that succession rights within 

the union structure . . . And just for the moment, some people 

don’t understand what that means. It means that when you have 

a short-line railroad that gets set up, the union regulations that 

were set up with CN or CPR that owned that rail line before, the 

union rights are transferred over to the short-line. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Members will have the 

opportunity to enter this debate when the hon. member for 

Cypress Hills has completed his session. And I ask hon. 

members on both sides of the legislature to please allow the 

member to complete his speech in a manner that we can all 

hear. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 

pointing out, the problem of course has been clearly identified 

now because when we try to go to the short-line rail system, we 

had to find a way to operate those short-lines economically. 

And what was discovered? The succession duty rights of the 

union contracts that go from the CP or CN over to the short-line 

because of legislation of this government — nobody else — 

because of that legislation those costs are tied to that short-line. 

 

And when the people that try to run these short-lines or try to 

take them over do a cost analysis — they hire experts to figure 

it out — they find that those are the costs that kill the chance for 

that short-line to operate — can’t be done. What does that prove 

to you? That proves to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it will prove 

to the members opposite, that those costs are already real for 

CN and CP. Why did the price of moving grain go up then? 

Face the reality. If it’s transferred over to the short-lines and 

that is the cost for them not being able to be economically 

operated, then it is the reason why CP and CN are having to up 

their rates for us right now. Think about it. 

 

Also, you might think about this. There are some people who 

honestly believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the rail line is no 

different than a road. And we might have to consider at some 

point doing something as drastic as nationalizing the rail bed. 

Now I see my leader thinking of course that well . . . 

 

  



706  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Whoops, now the member from Cypress 

Hills has gone right over the hill. But I haven’t because what 

we’re saying here is that this issue is so important, so 

dramatically needing resolution, that we would have to consider 

every radical option in order to bring these people to their 

senses so that they will deal. The CP and the CN have got to be 

shown that either they’re going to pay for their mistakes, or 

we’ll take the railroad away, or we’ll do whatever has to be 

done. But they’ve got to play ball and they’ve got to be right. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, succession duties, succession rights rather, 

have clearly demonstrated — clearly demonstrated — that the 

contracts that we have with the unions in the CP and CN are 

causing the costs of transportation to go up unrealistically so 

that you cannot compete. We’ve proven that. Now we have to 

prove to CN and CP that we are also serious about them. We’ve 

done that in this argument. We’ve shown that we need to 

change the labour laws in this province. I know the Minister of 

Labour is listening carefully, and I’m glad to see that because it 

is he who probably drives the engine that will make these 

changes. 

 

Now while you’re changing those things that affect while you 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh he wanted to get his other tie. 

Well that’s all right; we’ll get back to him. 

 

What we really need to do is to be very serious about the fact 

that we have to lay blame where it deserves to be. We have to 

let these folks know that we are so serious that we would even 

say things that would excite my leader, and we have to do 

something to excite the Minister of Labour. We’ve got to get 

these people to take this issue seriously. No matter what we 

have to do, we’ve got to get them to take a look at changing the 

labour laws, at putting responsibility on the CP and CN, at 

putting responsibility on the Wheat Board, and we’ve got to 

have some changes. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will support 

the motion. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wish to offer 

some of my perspectives as the MLA for Athabasca in terms of 

the member’s motion. In reference: 

 

That this Assembly urge the federal Liberal government to 

develop a comprehensive National Transportation Policy, 

in cooperation with all levels of government, and that it 

provide funding to the program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very important that we look at 

the whole issue of transportation. And I think that a key thing I 

want to certainly elaborate on and concur with the member from 

Cypress Hills is the fact that Saskatchewan is a land-locked 

province and that many occasions we tend to try and neglect our 

highways and forget our highways as the only means of 

transportation for a great many people . . . and of course the rail 

line industry in terms of the agriculture of Saskatchewan. 

 

But what I wanted to speak about today in terms of why the 

provincial government insists on putting motions of this nature 

forth, in terms of trying to put all the pressure and all the 

responsibility on the federal government, the question we’re 

going to have to ask at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, as the 

members opposite will begin to yell, the responsibility of 

Saskatchewan transportation also lies with the Saskatchewan 

province, the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And, Mr. Speaker, the most important thing 

that I’ve heard many, many times in this Assembly . . . and it 

comes from the third party. The common phrase that they use 

is, if the dog dies, the fleas leave. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m trying 

to figure out what exactly is meant by that phrase. And I must 

indicate that . . . And they’re probably thinking about all the 

different opportunity associated with Saskatchewan, in 

particular some of the problems associated with living in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question — there’s no question in my 

mind — that we must make every effort, every single effort, to 

dedicate serious and continual dollars to maintain our 

transportation system. As I’ve said before, we are a land-locked 

province, so we have to do all we can to enhance our highway 

system and our railroad system. 

 

Now let’s look at some of the problems associated with the 

current NDP government in terms of the challenge of rural 

Saskatchewan, let alone urban Saskatchewan. In rural 

Saskatchewan . . . If you want to kill rural Saskatchewan, 

there’s two things you do. First you shut down a number of 

their hospitals; then you decrease funding to their 

municipalities, you decrease funding to their school boards, you 

put in some VLTs (video lottery terminal), and you also again 

begin to neglect the highway system. 

 

All of a sudden, bit by bit, by bit, by bit, by bit, we begin to 

have problems in rural Saskatchewan. So the fact of the matter 

is, after several years of this — four, five, six, seven years — 

we get up and we talk about transportation, a comprehensive 

transportation. And I can quote from the private members’ 

motion: 

 

. . . urge the federal Liberal government to develop a 

comprehensive national transportation policy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how about if we talk about the provincial 

government doing a provincial transportation policy — a policy 

that will dedicate real and serious dollars to the enhancement 

and protection of our transportation industry. Unless and until 

you begin to address some of the problems associated with our 

highway system and our railway system, then obviously we’re 

going to continue facing challenges that have been holding this 

province back for years and years and years. 

 

So we go back to the original statement that we make as we 

must dedicate serious dollars and a continual amount of serious 

dollars year after year after year, to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have a very modern, up-to-date, well-maintained highway 

system. Once you begin to decrease dollars to the highway 

system, once you begin to decrease staff to the highway system,   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

once you begin to decrease departmental allocations to the 

highway system, then what you’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is you’re 

putting another nail in the coffin. And that coffin, Mr. Speaker, 

at this point in time is rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I’m going a lot out on a limb here to talk about a number 

of other problems we have in Saskatchewan as a whole. But I 

wish to also reflect some of my areas . . . in some of my areas of 

expertise and some of the communities that are involved with 

transportation in northern Saskatchewan. I know for a large 

example that some of the policies, Mr. Speaker, that is instituted 

with this current government in terms of transportation, is 

regional managers are sometimes enticed and enhanced to save 

money. Save money. Don’t let that gravel truck go out one extra 

day, or don’t let that grader go out for an extra half-hour. We’ll 

save that money. 

 

And at the end of each fiscal period and each budget, what 

happened, Mr. Speaker? Where does that savings go? Does it 

come back into Regina? Is it split up amongst the employees? Is 

it given to senior management? What happens with all these 

savings in the Highways budget? Where do the savings go? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there should not be any savings. There 

should never be savings in highways. There should be more 

investment. 

 

I want to talk about some of the things we’re talking about in 

terms of the provincial economy and the reason why we cannot 

continue focusing the responsibility of a comprehensive 

transportation policy and a plan on Saskatchewan and simply on 

the federal government. It’s got to be done by the provincial 

government as well. 

 

First of all, on some of the VLT revenues, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government has currently made $140 million; the GRIP 

claw-back from farmers, 188 million; the lower northern forest 

fire cost, 40 million; the Cameco sales, the share of some of this 

Cameco shares, 700 million; the interest savings as a result of 

lower interest rates country-wide, 45 million; the rate increases 

of some of the utilities, 13 per cent. And you talk about the sale 

of LCL Cable — 118 million. 

 

You tally up all those points, Mr. Speaker. All of a sudden you 

have $1.261 billion, Mr. Speaker, and we haven’t talked about 

oil and gas industry. We haven’t talked about uranium. We 

haven’t talked about the commodity price increases, and we 

haven’t talked about the gas tax and some of the other taxes 

associated with the transportation system of Saskatchewan. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, we have a whole pile of 

brand-new money coming into this province, a whole pile of 

brand-new money. And then we talk about the province getting 

up and saying for the next 10 years we will contribute $2.5 

billion to the provincial highway system. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

over 10 years 2.5 billion is peanuts. And I think the key thing 

here is you look at the whole situation of our earlier point: if 

you want to kill a province, you break their small communities. 

You break agriculture’s back. You forget about the highway 

system. You forget about the railroad system, and you say this 

is not our problem. This is not our fault. It’s the federal 

government’s fault. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the purpose of a provincial 

government if they cannot address some of these problems? We 

live in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is our 

province and every time that we have a problem we cannot say, 

well we’ll blame the federal Liberal government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the time has come where people in this 

province are saying enough is enough. We’ve got to begin to 

dedicate serious and sustained dollars to our highways and our 

railway system so we’re able to begin to develop a very, very 

exciting economy based on agriculture and the value added 

process of agriculture. 

 

(2030) 

 

Time is not on our side, Mr. Speaker. The next 5 to 10 to 15 

years at the most, we will begin to understand the pressing need 

for a very aggressive provincial transportation system. We have 

no choice. 

 

And last year as I was sitting here, the Liberals gave me the 

honour of making three different speeches on agriculture, and 

my background is not agriculture. But bless their hearts, these 

Liberals are very kind, caring, charismatic, and intelligent 

people and they have asked me, would you make an effort to 

learn about the agriculture system, the agriculture of 

Saskatchewan. And I said, as always, if I am willing to sit here 

and learn from you guys, as long you’re willing to teach me, I 

will make every effort to learn. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I may not be an agriculture expert, but I 

know one thing is, that if the dog dies the fleas will leave. And 

the point of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is if agriculture is not 

developed and not enhanced, if we’re not looking at a 

comprehensive Saskatchewan lead role in developing our 

transportation systems, then obviously we’re going to lose a lot 

of opportunity with agriculture and a lot of other opportunities 

in mining and forestry. And the list goes on and on and on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, in terms of the federal 

government contribution, I do not wish to speak on their behalf. 

I cannot speak on their behalf. But there are many occasions 

where they have made various statements in this House saying 

that your federal cousins . . . So if I can say a few words on 

behalf of the federal cousin in terms of what they’re trying to 

do. 

 

Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, you look at some of the examples 

that we have and some of the contributions that the federal 

government has made in terms of transportation. You know 

they had the foresight . . . Again, not being an agricultural 

background, you know they can hold me accountable for some 

of my statements in Hansard, but I’ll always have the old 

cop-out where, well I’m not a transportation nor am I an 

agricultural expert. 

 

But what they have done, with the demise of the Crow Rate, is 

they have given, they have given the Saskatchewan people and 

the Saskatchewan producers, an opportunity to value add all the   



708  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

commodity, all the benefits associated with agriculture. They 

can value add, Mr. Speaker, instead of transporting raw 

products to foreign soils, and they can again begin to develop a 

very diversified economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

All of a sudden, you’re talking about canola plants, you’re 

talking about pasta plants, you’re talking about cooperative 

efforts in every regard in terms of agriculture; so the whole 

vision at that point in time is somebody in Ottawa said let’s do 

away with the Crow Rate because we are simply transporting 

raw products out of the prairie provinces. That’s not helping our 

federal economy. So let us try and do something to help out the 

farmer. And in essence, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t that make sense? 

Doesn’t that make sense? To do away with the Crow Rate so 

the people of Saskatchewan can have some money in their 

pockets to kick-start a value added process campaign when it 

comes to all the agricultural products. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Now I am again not an agricultural expert, 

but I know one thing. In order for this process to begin to work, 

in order for us to assist the farmers that are now using our roads 

more than our railways is we can’t argue the benefits and the 

merits of the Crow Rate at this point in time. That’s history, Mr. 

Speaker. We have to look 5, 10, 15 years from now and we 

have not got, Mr. Speaker, very much time. The opportunity 

and the window of opportunity is fast closing and again, if the 

dog dies, the fleas will leave. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, continuing on with some of the specific 

points I wish to make in terms of the federal contribution. We 

heard last year that Mr. Ralph Goodale, the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, announced 85 million for rural roads. Several years 

ago, the federal government announced a major infrastructure 

program for all of Canada and roads were a part of that. And 

again, this year again, the second phase of the infrastructure 

program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the federal government is making some 

effort, not all the effort, but some effort in terms of getting a 

provincial transportation policy in place for Saskatchewan 

people. And I think it’s high time that this provincial 

government start to begin to dedicate serious and real dollars to 

match at the very least some of the effort being made by our 

federal counterparts. 

 

Now again, I go back to some of these points, Mr. Speaker, in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Now I’m not going to belabour 

some of the points of the federal Liberal contributions to the 

province because that’s not what they’re about. I’m not going to 

expound on some of their values and virtues in terms of their 

contributions to Saskatchewan because again, I go back to my 

earlier point, is we are provincial people. This is a provincial 

responsibility as well. It’s not a total federal responsibility. 

 

So coming back to our point we say, okay what should we do? 

What should we do? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan I can 

almost challenge the Minister of Highways that if you take 

away the forestry companies’ contribution to the provincial 

plan, you take away some of the Indian bands’ contributions to 

some of the northern roads, you take away some of the 

infrastructure program dollars from the federal government, 

some of the contributions by the RM, the municipalities, and 

you take away some of the gas tax that was paid by a great 

number of our motorists, and then you could really ask, how 

much has the province contributed for road construction in this 

province of Saskatchewan? How much has the provincial 

government actually contributed to the highway maintenance 

system, the railway system in the province of Saskatchewan? 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can almost tell you that amount would be 

zero. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we are in support of calling on the 

federal government to do more transportation, the challenge 

again goes back to the provincial government. If we are going 

to encourage them to help us build a very aggressive and stable 

transportation system, which is needed and desired and required 

and all the people of Saskatchewan want, then we have to put 

our money where our mouth is as well, Mr. Speaker. We have 

not got a choice. 

 

Now going back to some of my earlier points in terms of my 

specific area, Mr. Speaker — my specific area of northern 

Saskatchewan, the Athabasca constituency — there is a number 

of highway problems. And I have over the next period of the 

next few weeks going to be presenting some petitions on behalf 

of the constituents of Athabasca talking about transportation 

problems of a Saskatchewan region, Saskatchewan region, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’ll give you some of the names of some of the 

communities who have been desperately . . . and who have been 

asking time and time again for a transportation policy from the 

provincial government. And are these people asking for 30,000 

kilometres to be fixed? Are they asking for 300 miles to be 

fixed? Mr. Speaker, they’re asking for less than 300 kilometres. 

 

And this is what we talk about when we talk about 

transportation, is we want some commitment to transportation 

policy in Saskatchewan so we can build an economy in northern 

Saskatchewan as in southern Saskatchewan, western 

Saskatchewan, and eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

Canoe Lake needs 30 kilometres of work redone. Garson Lake, 

a small community in Saskatchewan, wants to be connected to 

the province, needs 40 kilometres. Patuanak, who is often six 

weeks, eight weeks isolated from the province of Saskatchewan 

because of wash-outs and very, very poor roads, they need 80 

kilometres. Dillon, again, very poor roads, they need 60 

kilometres. St. George’s Hill and Michel Village, they need 20 

kilometres. And, Mr. Speaker, you look at those amounts — 

you have 60 and 40 is 100; 80, 180, 200, 230 kilometres of road 

that is required to serve one, two, three, four, five, six 

communities that have a population of roughly 5 or 6,000 

people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, how long has this problem been going on? 

This problem has been going on for as long as these   



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

communities have had roads. And this, Mr. Speaker, is not an 

excuse for the provincial government to say, well what are the 

federal government doing? Well it’s high time that the province 

owe up to what they have been telling people for many years — 

is that we’ll deliver benefits; we’ll deliver roads; we’ll deliver 

health care. 

 

So we’re looking at those five areas that really need and 

desperately call for a better road system to serve their people. 

 

And Black Lake — there’s a road being planned from La Ronge 

into Black Lake. And of course Stony Rapids is also connected 

to Black Lake. So Black Lake and Stony Rapids in the far North 

will also have a toll road that will connect them to the rest of 

the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did the province put into the whole 

contribution for a road to connect our far northern 

communities? They contributed $l.5 million, Mr. Speaker — 

l.5. And what did the federal government, along with some of 

the Indian bands, contribute? They contributed $5 million, Mr. 

Speaker — $5 million to the Canadian Coast Guard and the 

Indian bands. 

 

And that leaves the other part of the equation now. What 

happens to Uranium City? What happens to Fond-du-Lac? 

What happens to Camsell Portage? Mr. Speaker, once the barge 

stops taking supplies to the far northern communities and what 

you’re going to have is you’re going to have some problems in 

terms of making sure that people of the far North are continued 

to be served with products and services that they need to 

survive. 

 

And obviously, has there been much consultation? Has there 

been much effort? Has there been a comprehensive strategy 

developed for those people up in the far North to ensure that 

there is better service, and to ensure that freight doesn’t kill any 

hopes of any industry being developed or enhanced in the far 

North, and also to make sure they get food products and fuel 

products at a reasonable price? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that that comprehensive 

strategy or plan has been done by the provincial government 

and therefore it makes no sense to me why they would propose 

to have this responsibility transferred to the federal government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re putting in $5 million already, and 

yes, they should put in more, but, Mr. Speaker, they should put 

in more. But the province should put in an equal amount and 

then you’ll begin to see some movement in terms of northern 

economy and in terms of northern people wishing to help and 

participate in some of the provincial economy and jobs. 

 

Continuing on, Mr. Speaker, the Cumberland House bridge . . . 

You look at what happened at the Cumberland House bridge; 

$2 million of the $6 million cost come from the community 

itself as part of the SaskPower settlement, $2 million came from 

the federal government, and after both groups come up with 

their money that literally forced the provincial government to 

come up with their 2 million. If they did not do that, then that 

$6 million project would never happen. 

 

So in that sense, the federal government and again a small 

community of 1,300 people with the Indian bands and the 

municipality, put their money together and challenged the 

provincial government. All of a sudden, action happened. The 

Cumberland House bridge was built. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, we’re talking about a serious 

problem in Saskatchewan. We’re talking about major 

implications on our economy. We’re talking about agricultural 

challenges, we’re talking about northern challenges. And let’s 

not even mention some of the problems associated with the 

mining sector in the far northern communities. Let’s not talk 

about the forestry sector in the far North. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I can say with every 

confidence that the forestry companies probably spend more 

money, if not 10 times more money, than the provincial 

government do on maintaining provincial highways in northern 

Saskatchewan; than the forestry companies do on maintaining 

their forestry companies. 

 

And some of the serious questions we’ve got to ask, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the serious questions we’ve got to ask is, we 

can find money to develop roads in the North to extract all 

kinds of resources, be it in mining or forestry. We can find 

money for that. But to service Highway 155, to service Turnor 

Lake, to service Patuanak, to service Garson Lake, to service 

Dillon, to service Black Lake, St. George’s Hill, Michel Village 

— there’s no money, there is no money. But, Mr. Speaker, if 

there is money to extract resources, then there’s got to be 

money to serve people. 

 

And once again if we do not begin to address some of these 

problems, what you’re doing is you’re taking away from the 

economy of the province of Saskatchewan. And this is where 

the critical argument that we have in terms of as an opposition, 

we get up and we say yes, we’ll support your call to get the 

federal government to develop a national transportation policy. 

It’s nationwide, it’ll help. 

 

But we better start doing something here within the province of 

Saskatchewan because this window of opportunity that we have 

is not going to wait — is not going to wait. If we don’t again 

begin to commit serious dollars — and not smoke-and-mirrors 

dollars — but serious dollars to the problem, addressing some 

of the transportation challenges of Saskatchewan, then what 

you’re going to end up happening in 10 to 15 years from now, 

Mr. Speaker, is you’re going to have, again, people shipping out 

the raw product simply because they cannot afford to develop a 

new economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, roads are just as important as education, as 

health care, and a roof over your head. You’ve got to have 

access to the markets. 

 

(2045) 

 

And again we hear time and time and time again, Saskatchewan 

is a land-locked province. Well if we are a land-locked 

province, then we’re destroying the very link that could build a 

bright future, not just for you and I — but for our children and 

our grandchildren. 

  



710  Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1997 

So the investment’s got to happen now. The investment’s got to 

happen now. We have got to commit serious dollars — serious 

dollars — to road construction. And we’ve heard reports time 

and time and time and time and time again, that if we do not 

begin to redress and address the deterioration of our 

transportation system — and the example I’m using is roads — 

then what you’re going to have happen, as the deterioration gets 

so bad, to the point it may cost us three or four times more as 

short as two or three years down the road. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the highway system has got to have much, 

much attention placed on it. There is no question in my mind 

that unless we begin to address these issues, then we are in 

deep, deep trouble. This is not fearmongering. I notice most 

members on the opposite side are quiet. They begin to 

understand that some of these points are right — some of these 

points. 

 

And the member from Regina South speaks. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he’s probably got about two kilometres of paved road to come 

from his office to this office here. How about some of those 

other people that have 200 kilometres to travel on roads that 

shouldn’t be travelled on? Or how about the thousand people in 

Patuanak that are isolated for six weeks because of wash-outs 

and ruts? How about the people of Dillon that can’t travel 

because of wash-outs and ruts? How about the people of Turnor 

Lake? If they had two miles of paved road to travel on, they 

wouldn’t be complaining, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the problems of highways does indeed exist. This is not a 

figment of the opposition’s imagination, Mr. Speaker. This is 

not. This is a serious problem. 

 

And again, if you want to build up rural Saskatchewan, build up 

this province, then you’ve got to stop hurting their schools; 

you’ve got to stop hurting their municipalities; and you’ve got 

to start building their links and connections to these highways 

and now to this . . . to the rest of Saskatchewan, by developing 

up and building up their highway system and a transportation 

system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we speak in support of this motion, we 

also have to point a finger at the provincial government. You 

get the gas tax, you get the gas tax, you get the gas tax. So you 

get moving on a provincial highways plan, you get moving on a 

provincial highways plan, and you get moving on a provincial 

highways plan. Now I’ve said it three times in a row, Mr. 

Speaker, so they can’t accuse us opposition of never ever 

expressing some of the concerns when it comes to highways. 

 

They have cut highways back and back and back and back, until 

all of a sudden we’re now a bare-bones highways budget. So 

what does that do, Mr. Speaker? It kills the transportation of 

this province. And when you kill the transportation, again you 

kill the economy. So therefore, while I can speak in support of 

the motion, I must add the province has got to do more than the 

federal government in regards to this problem. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I rise to speak on this motion because I 

want to mention to those who may be listening and also to the 

members in the House that this issue of transportation in 

Saskatchewan is important not only for rural Saskatchewan but 

it’s also important — a matter of fact it’s critical — to urban 

dwellers. And I want to speak from the urban dwelling point of 

view just for a minute or two to bring out that point, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no matter where you live in Saskatchewan, in 

rural Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, transportation — 

modern transportation — is an important issue. Our whole 

livelihood and the way we make our living is dependent on it. 

The motion that we are dealing with here urges the federal 

Liberal government to develop a comprehensive national 

transportation policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are undergoing a change in transportation 

patterns here in Canada, in Saskatchewan, now which I think 

will, if you look back in time, it will be comparable to the kind 

of change that Canada underwent when the railways first went 

through Saskatchewan and through the west. 

 

It was a major effort that was needed to change the face of the 

country, and at this stage we also need a major cooperative 

effort between the federal government and the provincial 

government and private industry in order to restructure our 

transportation system so that we can continue to compete and 

thrive into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all want the services of schools and hospitals 

and the good things that we have. In order to have those we 

have to be able to pay for them, partly from our own pockets, 

but partly through taxes. In order to have taxes you have to have 

a good economy. To have a good economy you have to have 

jobs in industry. To have jobs in industry you have to have a 

good, solid transportation policy. 

 

Everybody in the city will thrive and thrives more when we are 

able to ship our grain, our raw products such as mining 

products, our forestry products, fishing products, the 

manufacturing products out to the markets. If we can’t get our 

machinery sales and our manufacturing out of the province, we 

lose jobs, and as a result the cities themselves would be in a 

decline. 

 

The transportation policy does not only deal with industry and 

agriculture and mining and forestry and fishing. It also deals 

with one of the biggest growing industries now, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is tourism, which is managed by a lot of people who 

work from the cities and from the urban centres. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to be able to add those few 

comments to the comments which have been made, and some of 

which I’ve really appreciated, from members of both sides of 

the House. I will be very pleased to add to the numbers that will 

be supporting this motion and I expect we will be taking this 

vote very shortly. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:48 p.m. until 8:55 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

  



April 8, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

Yeas — 30 

 

Flavel Johnson Whitmore 

Lautermilch Kowalsky Renaud 

Calvert Koenker Trew 

Teichrob Hamilton Murray 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Jess Langford Murrell 

Thomson McLane Gantefoer 

Draude Osika Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Aldridge 

Boyd Heppner Goohsen 

 

Nays — nil 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After that unique 

display of unanimity in this House, I think it is time that I 

would move that this House now adjourn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:56 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — National Transportation Policy 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 695 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 697 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 700 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 701 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 702 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 706 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 710 

 Recorded division ......................................................................................................................................................................... 711 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 704 

 


