



















































Hansard: April 15, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 859 

 April 15, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the construction of a 

new facility in La Loche, a new hospital that will provide 

adequate health care centre to the northern residents. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

people like James Janvier, Pio Janvier, John Harpe, Mary Piche, 

Archie Janvier, Margaret Herman, Dorothy Sylvestre, Guy 

Janvier, and the list goes on. 

 

And I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions once again of people throughout the province 

that have been affected by big game damage. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees, which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

from Chaplin in the Thunder Creek constituency, and Pelly and 

Kamsack areas of the province. 

 

I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

And the following petitions for private Bills are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of the Lutheran Church of Canada, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to provide for the 

continuation of the Lutheran Church-Canada, Central 

District; and 

 

Of The Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company, Montreal 

Trust company of Canada, and the Montreal Trust 

company in the province of Saskatchewan, praying for an 

Act respecting those respective companies; and 

 

Of the TD Trust Company and Central Guaranty Trust 

Company, praying for an Act respecting TD Trust and 

Central Guaranty Trust Company. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Twinning of the Yellowhead 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased last 

week when the Minister of Highways and Transportation 

announced that the Yellowhead highway would be twinned, 

albeit by the year 2012. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most dangerous single stretch of highway in 

Saskatchewan and the one which costs the most fatalities is the 

Yellowhead from the Battlefords to the Alberta border. I would 

hope that this could be given a much higher priority than 15 

years; especially the entrance of Highway 40 into the 

Yellowhead has been a serious issue before. It is now especially 

serious in view of the construction of the Pool terminal at 

Brada, and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has identified that as 

a serious issue in the construction of their terminal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my predecessor as member for the Battlefords 

promised in 1952 that he would twin the Yellowhead. I am 

delighted that the NDP (New Democratic Party) is keeping that 

promise. I just wish it wouldn’t have to take 60 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Horizontal Drilling Activity 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Renewed confidence 

and optimism are encompassing our oil and gas industry. The 

exploration and discovery of new reserves has only heightened 

the interest throughout the province, which not only benefit our 

provincial economy but also encourages job creation. 

 

As part of this new-found interest in this industry, 

Saskatchewan is hosting the fifth international Williston basin 

horizontal drilling workshop, which is now under way here in 

Regina. 

 

The new discovery of deep oil deposits in the Williston basin, 

which encompasses the south-east portion of the province, have 

increased interest in our oil and gas sector. The south-east area, 

Mr. Speaker, is the most active area in Saskatchewan for oil 

production, accounting for over half of the province’s total 

production. And now with deep oil reserves being found, that 

production may increase. 

 

Furthermore, horizontal drilling activity has increased from 8   



860  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

per cent of the total monthly average in 1991 to over 50 per cent 

in 1996 and has increased our total oil production by 40 per 

cent. 

 

This workshop, Mr. Speaker, will help our oil industry expand 

its knowledge and expertise in this increasingly important area 

of oil exploration and recovery. It will also serve as an avenue 

for increasing cross-border business opportunities for oil 

producers and service companies. 

 

This year’s workshop is co-sponsored by Saskatchewan Energy 

and Mines and the North Dakota Geological Survey and has 

attracted over 650 oil industry delegates, which signifies the 

importance . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member’s time has 

expired. 

 

Leader of the Opposition’s Birthday 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with a 

very deep concern about the openness of certain members of 

this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House often urge more 

openness and accountability in the legislature. And today I have 

only the latest example of a member not being completely 

honest with the rest of the voters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member I speak of is the Leader of the 

Opposition and the member from Canora-Pelly. It came to my 

attention that today is the member’s birthday, but exactly which 

birthday it is remains anybody’s guess. He claims he’s 39 but I 

have reason to doubt it. 

 

At any rate, Mr. Speaker, like a bottle of good wine, the Leader 

of the Opposition just gets better with age. And I ask all 

members to join with me in wishing him a very happy birthday 

and more to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Record Oil and Gas Land Sales 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Saskatchewan 

announced the details of Partnership for Growth, our economic 

development strategy, we identified oil and natural gas as a key 

growth sector for the provincial economy. Certainly it’s an 

important part of the local economy in my own constituency of 

Lloydminster. Well, Mr. Speaker, the announcement last 

Thursday that Crown oil and natural gas land sale revenues for 

the first part of the year are more than double from the sales of 

last year shows that the strategy is working. 

 

Of course sales of petroleum and natural gas rights do more 

than bring revenue to the provincial treasury. This record 

activity will bring important spin-offs in the form of jobs and 

economic growth. When you look around the city of 

Lloydminster, the benefits of this growth are obvious — 224 

building permits issued in 1996, up from 169 in 1995. In 1996 

construction increased by 56 per cent. 

The Bi-Provincial upgrader was designed to process 4,600 

barrels of heavy crude a day, but actual production is currently 

up to 60,000 barrels a day, and the refinery is processing about 

150,000 barrels a day. Husky is the largest employer in the area 

with more than 700 people working for the company in the 

Lloydminster area. In fact except for Regina and Saskatoon, 

Lloydminster is the fastest growing urban area in 

Saskatchewan. Our Partnership for Growth is working in 

Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, and it’s working all across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Good News on the Rafferty and Alameda Dams 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

update the Legislative Assembly on the success of the Rafferty 

and Alameda dams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both Rafferty and Alameda dam are doing a 

wonderful job in providing flood protection for south-eastern 

Saskatchewan and our friends from North Dakota, the governor 

of whom we met with today. I along with a couple of my 

caucus colleagues had the opportunity to get a firsthand look at 

just how quickly water is pouring into these important facilities. 

Rafferty was filled with ducks, geese, loons, and other wildlife, 

happily paddling along and preparing their nests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you’ll be relieved to know that none of 

these ducks, geese, loons, were found floating feet up, drowned 

from the rising waters. Mr. Speaker, because of the Rafferty and 

Alameda dams, ducks in south-east Saskatchewan have been 

reacquainted with their natural habitat, water. 

 

But the wildlife aren’t the only ones who appreciate the water in 

these dams, Mr. Speaker. People from all over the south-east 

are thankful to be protected from the devastating effects of 

floods brought to them in the past, that many are presently 

experiencing in other parts of the Prairies. Our prayers go out to 

those families along the Red River in North Dakota and 

Manitoba who are presently fighting the rages of that river. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, people in my constituency are offering 

prayers of thanks that their communities aren’t suffering the 

same fate. Hopefully the members opposite can now set aside 

partisan politics and appreciate the outstanding contributions 

these structures are making to the province’s south-east. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Pelleting Plant 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind that 

Saskatchewan rural residents have the ability, the innovation, 

and the determination to improve their communities through 

diversification. As part of the diversification that is occurring in 

the Wilkie area, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a new 

pelleting plant that is going to be built in the west-central region 

near Wilkie. 

 

This proposed venture between 12 communities in the area will   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

be designed to create a value added product from one which has 

traditionally been seen as a by-product of grain farming, grain 

screenings — the screenings, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are tired 

of paying freight rates on. Dockage that will now be a value 

added commodity — high protein livestock feed. 

 

And with further federal Liberal deregulation of the rail 

industry, Mr. Speaker, those freight charges will almost 

certainly increase. This new $1.2 million pelleting plant will 

further enhance the economy of the west-central district. 

 

Innovation, determination, and cooperation are assets that can 

describe the people of this province. This project is another 

example of Saskatchewan communities working together, and I 

want to wish well the West Central Pelleting Ltd. all the best in 

their new venture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Memorial Curling Bonspiel 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m pleased 

to once again announce that this weekend in my home town of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse a curling bonspiel will be held for the second 

year in a row in memory of a great man, Raymond Daigneault, 

who passed away November of 1994. 

 

Raymond was a great man. He not only touched my life through 

his guidance and friendship but he touched the many lives of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse people, and his contributions to Ile-a-la-Crosse 

and region will be never forgotten. 

 

Raymond was a hard-working miner for 18 years but still made 

time for his family and friends. He was a father of four of his 

own children but he helped raise 10 foster children throughout 

his short lifetime. 

 

The Raymond Daigneault Memorial Bonspiel is one way that 

Raymond’s memory will live on in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Given his 

active involvement and love for sports of all kinds — hockey, 

softball, and curling, to name a few — I am sure Raymond is 

happy that his memory is being kept alive through such a fun 

social curling event and cabaret. 

 

There are 30 teams that are entered this weekend, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to commend the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse for 

their continued commitment and gesture of Raymond’s 

memory. 

 

I would ask the Assembly to join with me and recognize the 

accomplishments of my home town and that of Mr. Raymond 

Daigneault. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Broomball Teams in Odessa 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many times we 

talk of the rich traditions of this fine province and the 

community spirit that seems to encompass our rural 

communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, today I would like to talk 

about both of these very positive traits that help identify who 

we are and what this province is about. 

 

For the past six years, a small community south-east of Regina 

has continuously demonstrated its community spirit and support 

of their local sports teams. These sports teams, Mr. Speaker, are 

creating a tradition in that community — a tradition that 

everyone can be proud of. 

 

The town I am referring to is Odessa. The sports teams are the 

junior boys and junior girls provincial champion broomball 

teams. This past weekend, these two teams were in Montreal to 

compete for the national titles. The boys team, the Odessa 

Bandits, placed fourth in the A side, just out of the medals, and 

the girls, the Odessa Flames, will be bringing home a bronze 

medal as souvenirs. This is the sixth consecutive year that 

Odessa has represented our province at the nationals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the accomplishments of the 

Odessa community, and the efforts of its residents and team 

members. This community and its broomball teams are showing 

the rest of the country what people from rural Saskatchewan can 

do. 

 

I congratulate the teams on their accomplishments and on their 

lengthy record. I also commend the efforts of the community of 

Odessa for the support and encouragement they have shown. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have a very special 

guest, the Governor of North Dakota, in your chamber, in your 

gallery actually, and I wonder if I might ask leave of the House 

to introduce to him to you and the members of the Assembly. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank all hon. members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the 

members of this Assembly, a very special and distinguished 

guest — they actually are all very special and distinguished — 

but in particular the Governor of the state of North Dakota, Mr. 

Edward T. Schafer, who is seated in your gallery. Please, 

Governor Schafer, would you please stand? 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Who is accompanied, Governor 

Schafer is, by is his chief of staff, Ms. Carol Olson, and legal 

counsel, Mr. Bob Harms, who is not in the gallery, and of our 

protocol office, Ms. Ella Denzin. 

 

I will not go into the details, in the interest of time, of the very 

distinguished career the Governor has already had, other than to   



862  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

say that he is really a native son of North Dakota, born and 

raised in Bismarck, mainly educated there, with some extra 

special education outside of North Dakota. He was first elected 

Governor of North Dakota in 1992 as a Republican Governor, 

and was re-elected for a second term in 1996, which I think is 

either the first time that feat has been done by any governor or 

by a Republican governor. Either way, it really is quite an 

accolade for this person’s acceptance in public life. 

 

Governor Schafer is visiting us today on a very important 

matter, and that is the fifth international Williston basin 

horizontal well workshop, where myself and the Governor 

shared the stage in addressing members of the industry 

respecting the Williston basin. 

 

This workshop, Mr. Speaker, very briefly, has attracted nearly 

700 participants, one of the highest attendance rates of any oil 

and gas conferences anywhere, and it opens up the doors for 

many opportunities for North Dakota and for Saskatchewan and 

for the private sector. 

 

I look forward to further meetings with the Governor this 

afternoon. He’s telling me he’s anxious to watch question 

period, so please, opposition members, be on your best 

behaviour today. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that he’ll be 

meeting with you, sir, with the ministers of Energy and Mines, 

Agriculture and Food, and Highways and Transportation. 

 

So once again, on behalf of all the members of the Legislative 

Assembly, please join me in welcoming our very distinguished 

guest, Governor Schafer of North Dakota, to this Assembly and 

to the province of Saskatchewan and Canada — Governor 

Schafer. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Leader of the Opposition granted leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 

members. I’d like to, on behalf of the official opposition, I 

would like to add to the words of the Premier, a very sincere 

welcome, Governor Schafer, to the province, and to your staff 

as well. I hope that you enjoy your stay. A busy convention and 

a busy seminar and meeting many people I’m sure is going to 

give you a lot of ideas on the kind of communication that we 

have between our very close neighbours to the south, the states 

on the very top of the United States of America. We look 

forward to that continuing . . . continued dialogue. Welcome to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Leader of the Third Party granted leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too as well in the 

PC (Progressive Conservative) opposition, would like to join 

with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

welcoming Governor Schafer to Saskatchewan, as well as his 

chief of staff, Carol Olson, to Saskatchewan. 

 

We very much enjoyed Governor Schafer’s comments at noon, 

at the noon luncheon that we attended. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, Governor Schafer is here at a bit of 

a difficult time for his state, as large parts of the state are 

experiencing flooding conditions down in the state of North 

Dakota. And I would hope that the Premier would join with us 

in extending our thoughts on that flooding and our hopes that 

that’ll soon be remedied. I hope as well that the Premier would 

want to join with me in extending our thoughts and hopes that 

the Rafferty-Alameda projects will provide some degree of 

flood protection for the city of Minot, as I’m sure it is doing. 

 

And with that, I would like to just welcome again Governor 

Schafer. And I hope he has the opportunity to stop down at our 

office this afternoon. We got the right-sized sweatshirt for you 

this afternoon, sir, and we’ll be able to give that to you today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel’s Performance 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of 

SaskTel has proved once again that while the phone may be 

ringing, nobody’s home. 

 

Last week a SaskTel executive indicated that the Crown 

company was looking at a possible increase in local phone 

rates. When questioned about these statements, the minister 

categorically stated that SaskTel is not contemplating hiking 

local phone rates. Yesterday when asked if she could rule out an 

increase in ’97 the minister indicated, and I quote, “We can’t 

rule out anything.” 

 

What is it, Madam Minister? Are you contemplating a local 

phone rate increase this year, yes or no? And will you give us 

an answer that you can stick with for more than four or five 

days. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 

question so often I’m not sure whether the lines are open. You 

know, the phone rings and there’s nobody home. 

 

We have said, Mr. Speaker, that we’re always reviewing our 

rates. We are not at this time contemplating an increase in local 

rates. And based upon the financial results that were tabled in 

this House yesterday, I think that the members opposite would 

be able to understand the reason for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, if the minister would give us the same answer twice in 

a row we’d probably quit asking the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it odd that when SaskTel records a profit   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

such as it did with the LCL (Leicester Communications 

Limited) cable, there were glowing reports from the 

government. In fact SaskTel’s ’96 annual report goes on to 

speak about the deal at great length in spite of the fact that the 

sale of this investment took place in ’95. 

 

At the same time, the NST fiasco, which cost taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan $16 million, received only one line in the ’96 

annual report. And even then it hardly goes into specifics, 

stating that, and I quote: 

 

As a result of the increasing diversification opportunities 

elsewhere in the world, the corporation decided to 

conclude its involvement with NST Services in February of 

’97. 

 

Will the minister explain why the ’96 annual report contains 

such little information about the NST venture? Madam 

Minister, is it because you have something further to hide or is 

it merely because you’re ashamed of your past performance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, one could hardly be 

anything but proud of the performance that was posted by our 

telephone company last year . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  . . . with a return on investment to the 

owners, the people of this province, that it showed. 

 

And with respect to disclosure, Mr. Speaker, the member 

knows, having attended the Crown Corporations Committee 

hearings recently at which they didn’t raise any questions about 

any of the investments, that the year under review, the year that 

these decisions are taken is 1997 where we are not required to 

disclose or discuss those results until 1998. We’re a year early, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s open and accountable government. That’s 

open and accountable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of too many 

private businesses that would be proud of blowing $16 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members of this House are aware, a review of 

Saskatchewan’s family of Crown corporations is not yet 

complete. However, the minister in charge of SaskTel has 

apparently already made up her mind that the Crown will not be 

privatized. When questioned about this issue by the media, the 

minister responded, and I quote: “Why would we want to think 

about this at this juncture?” 

 

Will the minister explain if she has indeed ruled out 

privatization? And if so, why has this government wasted more 

than $3 million for a review that is merely a public relations 

exercise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer this 

question on behalf of the government because I’m prompted to 

do so by virtue of this Liberal opposition asking us, the 

government, to clarify our position on privatization when I note, 

Mr. Speaker, that on or about July 6, 1996 . . . I’m quoting now 

from the Leader-Post: 

 

Liberal MLA Gerard Aldridge said the people he’s talked 

with around the province say they don’t want any 

wholesale sell-off of their Crowns. 

 

Then two weeks later, Mark Wyatt, quoting in the Leader-Post. 

We see now quoting the Leader of the Liberal Party, as he then 

was, Mr. Osika, as follows: 

 

Osika said Friday the province is in desperate need of 

money and by selling off Crown assets, it could reduce its 

interest payments and put the proceeds toward health care. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, to finish my answer. Just a few days 

ago the University of Saskatchewan Commerce students put out 

a mock budget which was premissed on the privatization of 

SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance), quote, “But Melenchuk (referring to 

the Liberal leader) applauded the budget (the fiscal 

conservatives on the budget).” He said, “I like it better than the 

provincial budget.” 

 

Talk about confusion — which is it? Where do the Liberals 

stand — for privatization or against it? 

 

We stand for public enterprise in the province of Saskatchewan 

which is modern-day, efficient, and competitive in the 21st 

century. Where do you stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower’s Performance 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I’ve recognized the 

Leader of the Opposition and I can’t hear him. And I’ll ask all 

hon. members to allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know I am a year 

older and I will try to speak louder today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1996 annual report for SaskPower reports a 

$139 million profit for the last fiscal year, an all-time record for 

the Crown corporation. Mr. Speaker, two years ago, Jack 

Messer, the minister in charge of SaskPower indicated that, and 

I quote: 

 

If it’s going to operate in the best interests of shareholders, 

it’s going to have to generate something in the 

neighbourhood of $150 million. 

 

Mr. Messer appears to have forgotten that the shareholders of 

our Crown corporations are actually the taxpayers of   



864  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Saskatchewan, and they are questioning why the Crown is 

being driven solely as a money generating source. 

 

Will the minister explain why SaskPower has abandoned its 

primary responsibility to provide affordable, quality service to 

the people of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would be more than pleased to answer that question. 

The fact of the matter is, as the member knows, this corporation 

did generate a $139 million in profit, and I want to tell you how 

it did it. It did it by internal cost efficiencies and by the fact that 

we have strengthened the economy to the point where we’re 

selling a lot more electricity. 

 

With respect to the shareholders, the management of the Power 

Corporation clearly understand who the shareholders are, and 

that’s the people of Saskatchewan. This corporation will be 

supplying a $76 million dividend to the shareholders, the 

million people of this province. 

 

It’s been responsible for paying down $124 million of the 

provincial debt. And you want to sell it off? I say shame on you, 

Mr. Member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of 

SaskPower has brushed aside suggestions that the residents of 

this province are being gouged. As a means of cutting costs, 

Jack Messer took his axe to the RUD (rural underground 

distribution) program. He axed about 200 employees, many of 

whom provided front-line service to rural Saskatchewan. And 

there’s still the possibility that we will have dozens of rural 

SaskPower offices closing. 

 

At the same time, the Saskatchewan people were also on the 

receiving end of a 12 per cent increase last year, and a new 

monthly reconstruction charge, all of which helped the 

company increase its profits by some $36 million. 

 

As astounding as this may seem, Mr. Messer maintains that 

there is no connection between these increases and increased 

profits. Will the minister explain how he can possibly support 

the position of Mr. Messer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

that on behalf of this government we are very proud of the job 

that the people of that corporation and other Crown 

corporations have done on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member opposite if he feels 

through privatization that we could see a reduction of the 

provincial debt on an annual basis of $124 million? Could you 

see dividends of $76 million? 

 

I say to you, Mr. Member, this government has been 

responsible with the management of these Crown corporations. 

They will continue to serve the shareholders, the people of 

Saskatchewan, in their best interests. 

 

And I want to add that if you look at the envelope of utility 

costs, we are among the lowest in Canada with respect to 

telephones, insurance, with power, and energy. I want to remind 

the member that SaskEnergy, in case he might ask, was 

responsible for a decrease in rates of almost 12 per cent in the 

last two years. 

 

I say to the member opposite, open your eyes; quit playing 

politics, and act on behalf of the interests of the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

speaking on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan who consider 

that the fact that the RUD program has been cancelled, is 

discriminatory, and in fact $40 million of potential savings has 

now gone into profits. There is discrimination against people in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the private sector it is not uncommon for chief executive 

officers to have bonus clauses written into their contract based 

on the financial performance of their companies. Given the fact 

that some of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations are reporting 

massive profits, and they now appear to be more profit-driven 

than ever, one has to question if the same kind of provisions are 

built into Crown corporations executive contracts. 

 

Will the minister explain if such provisions exist in any 

contracts of our Crown executives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Minister, the answer is no, but 

let me describe to the member the way he can find out for 

himself. It’s available through the freedom of information. The 

contracts are tabled every year, and any time there’s a change, 

by every CEO (chief executive officer) in this province. And if 

that member, if that member and his caucus had made the 

decision, instead of hiring the Leader of the Liberal Party to do 

their research, to hire a qualified researcher to act on behalf of 

the opposition, they might be a much more capable entity. In 

this legislature you’re becoming a laughing-stock, Mr. Leader 

of the Opposition. Do your research, then come in here and ask 

the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that the Leader of 

the Opposition is done, I’ll take over. Just, Mr. Speaker, just 

when I thought and when I imagine the Premier hoped Jack 

Messer was done saying stupid things, Jack’s gone ahead and 

really outdone himself. Now he’s telling us there’s no 

connection between record high power rates and record 

SaskPower profits. 

 

If there’s no connection between power rates and profits, why 

doesn’t he cut the rates? In fact why doesn’t he just give it   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

away? The fact is SaskPower’s record profits are due to record 

high rates and everyone knows it. 

 

My question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. 

Minister, when are you going to see and pay more attention to 

the families of Saskatchewan rather than your family of Crown 

corporations? When are we going to see some reductions from 

SaskPower to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased 

to respond to the member’s question, but I want to begin by 

referring to some comments he made in the media the other 

night. He began by saying the $139 million profit is a gouge of 

the taxpayers of this province. Isn’t that what you said? That’s 

exactly what you said, Mr. Member. And then right shortly after 

you said, and a 1 per cent return on investment is simply 

inadequate. 

 

I say to that member, you know what we’re doing, we’re taking 

$124 million to pay down a debt that you were responsible for. 

We’re paying $17 million a week that you and the former 

administration were responsible for, and I want to tell you how 

this has happened. 

 

It’s happened because of the people who work in these Crown 

corporations. It’s happened because of competent management 

within those Crown corporations, something which you were 

never able to achieve or attain in the whole decade that you and 

your PC caucus governed this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskEnergy’s Performance 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskPower is not the only Crown corporation that’s gouging 

consumers. SaskEnergy’s profits were up by $15 million, so 

does SaskEnergy respond by cutting rates? No, in fact 

SaskEnergy is trying to gouge consumers even more by asking 

for a rate increase. 

 

My question again is to the minister responsible for 

SaskEnergy. Mr. Minister, in light of SaskEnergy’s increased 

profit levels over last year, will you announce that you are 

rejecting SaskEnergy’s request for a rate hike, and demand 

SaskEnergy present another proposal, this time calling for a 

further rate reduction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me respond 

with respect to the profits that SaskEnergy made. If the member 

would get up in the morning during 40 below weather, read his 

thermometer, he would then understand why he adjusts his 

thermostat, why he consumes more gas, which is what every 

person in this province did. That’s what’s responsible for the 

increased bottom line of the corporation. 

 

And if the member was being honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan, he would share with them the fact that 

SaskEnergy, over the last two years, has decreased natural 

energy costs in this province by 11.6 per cent, which delivers 

the lowest — the lowest — natural gas rates in Canada. So be 

honest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Jack 

Messer may have a monopoly on power in this province, but he 

certainly doesn’t have a monopoly on stupid comments. The 

chief financial officer for SaskTel says he found an amazing 

thing out — if you reduce the price of long-distance calls in 

Saskatchewan that drives up demand. This guy is the chief 

financial officer for SaskTel and he thinks it’s amazing that 

cutting prices increases sales — unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for years the NDP have told us privately owned 

companies would gouge consumers. But it’s SaskEnergy and 

SaskPower who are really doing the gouging in this province. 

While SaskTel rates may have dropped because of competition 

from outside private companies, this proves that before 

competition SaskTel was as well gouging the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) do anything to bring 

about competition in areas like power and natural gas so we can 

start seeing lower rates just like we’ve seen in SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite seems 

not to be listening to the answers that the individual Crowns are 

giving. The Crown corporations in Saskatchewan have served 

Saskatchewan well as was testified to by the people of 

Saskatchewan in the Crown review this summer. This report 

indicates how well . . . and how each of them has dealt with 

their own competitive circumstances and delivered efficient 

service delivery, amongst the lowest rates in Canada, and 

delivered profits accordingly, to begin to improve the rate of 

return on those corporations, having been undermined by the 

Tories opposite for 10 years. 

 

We should be proud of these institutions, and we will continue 

to work with them as the shareholders want us to to have them 

adapting to the change that’s necessary in the market-place and 

they will continue to be the best in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are to the minister responsible for SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, we can now clearly see how far you are 

prepared to go to cover up the fiasco with NST. And your 

answers to the member from the opposition party is not good 

enough for us. We expect more. 

 

  



866  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

You put out a 44-page annual report, Madam Minister, with 

page after page of financial statements of glowing rhetoric 

about how great SaskTel is doing. There is exactly one line, one 

sentence, about NST which tells us that you had time to put that 

in. You knew in time to put that report together that this was 

going to be a problem, so you put something in. You had lots of 

time. 

 

You said in there . . . it says: 

 

As a result of the increasing diversification opportunities 

elsewhere in the world, the corporation decided to 

conclude its involvement in NST Network Services in 

February, 1997. 

 

No mention that the company folded up like a cheap lawn chair, 

Madam Minister. No mention that you ripped off the 

Saskatchewan telephone users by $16 million. Madam Minister, 

clearly you were trying to cover up this disaster and it was only 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. The hon. 

member has been extremely lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask 

him to go directly to his question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Madam Minister, will you admit that this was 

a cover-up. Will you admit today that you intentionally 

deceived the people of Saskatchewan. Will you give us a decent 

answer, one that’s honest? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the interests of open 

and honest government, we put a statement in black and white, 

or whatever colour the page is, in the annual statement. This is 

hardly covering up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve answered this question before as well. I feel a little bit like 

Lily Tomlin, like, have I reached the party to whom I am 

speaking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  I’ve got a question for the minister of 

SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it looks like SaskTel’s 

approach in this matter is a simple approach — screw it up, 

cover it up, and then ask the taxpayers to cough it up. 

 

Madam Minister, if the CEO of any private company in this 

province or any place else botched up a deal this badly for the 

shareholders, they would be demanding that person’s head. Yet 

you have treated this thing as though it is a minor oversight. 

 

And the one line that there is in this annual report about the 

NST is not even true, Madam Minister. It says you concluded 

your involvement because of increasing diversification 

opportunities elsewhere in the world. 

 

Madam Minister, you ran this company into the debt of $16 

million. It had nothing to do with what was going on in the rest 

of the world. Your increasing diversification opportunities in 

the rest of the world were not there, and that’s a total fiasco. 

 

Madam Minister, when will you accept the responsibility for 

your department? When will you resign? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, never. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again 

that this is part of a diversified investment portfolio which has 

been successful to the tune of $300 million. If no risks were 

ever taken, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t have had that kind of a 

gain. So some you lose, some you win. 

 

But we are paying now $17 million a week, each and every 

week, interest on the debt that was accumulated through the 

fiascos that took place during the decade that that party 

governed this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Revenue Sharing 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister responsible for Gaming. Mr. Speaker, now we 

know why the NDP isn’t too worried about the falling profits at 

the casino in Regina. Only the NDP would make an agreement 

that includes a success tax, penalizing FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations) for making money while 

rewarding themselves for losing money. It’s too bad you didn’t 

have a clause like this in your NST deal. SaskTel would be 

making millions on that operation. 

 

Now the Gaming minister is admitting there was no scientific 

formula for the $40 million possible profits that they hoped to 

get in two years. That’s quite a way to run a business, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing about your so-called flip 

clause that rewards you for losing money, while penalizing 

Indian-run casinos for making money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m pleased to answer the question today. And I want to first of 

all indicate to the member opposite that in Saskatchewan we 

have probably one of the most, not probably but we have one of 

the most comprehensive gaming casinos agreement anywhere in 

Canada, to start with. 

 

And the arrangement that we have with the first nations people, 

Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that we have equity within the system. 

And currently what we have, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve arranged to 

have further discussions with our first nations people in respect 

to the particular issue that the member alludes to today. 

 

But I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, because the member 

opposite needs to decide where he wants to be. First of all he 

talks about not being in gaming at all. Then he tells us we 

should be getting out of gaming. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, about a year ago, we had a number of 

bus tours who were coming to Saskatchewan from the United   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

States, who were stopping in, stopping in the town of Carlyle, 

and you get up in this House and you tell us about how 

important that particular industry is to Saskatchewan. Where are 

you in terms of the gaming agreement, Mr. Speaker? Where are 

you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Domestic Abuse Policies 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Saskatchewan have heard this government’s claims that it is 

doing everything within its power to address social issues. 

However one prevailing, destructive, and very shameful issue, 

that of domestic violence, continues to be minimized by this 

government. 

 

The Minister of Justice has indicated that his department is 

consulting with various women’s groups across the province to 

determine an appropriate spousal abuse policy. However 

officials at Saskatoon’s Family Support Centre, people who 

deal with battered women on a daily basis, have not been 

contacted for input nor are they aware of any other related 

organization that has been in contact with the Justice 

department regarding this matter. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice explain which groups his 

department is consulting with and will he explain when battered 

women can expect some tangible results? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I can assure that member 

that consultations are happening continually with people in the 

field of prevention of violence against women, violence against 

children, violence in our homes. When she speaks of the family 

. . . (inaudible) . . . I know that she knows. There has been a 

long process of consultation over the last number of months 

with a group very closely associated with the family support 

centre. I have only recently just received their report, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when members of the Liberal caucus stand 

up in this House — and I don’t care which one of them it is — 

and talk about human services in the province, I wish they 

would turn their attention to their federal counterparts, Mr. 

Speaker. Now they roll their heads over. Well I’ll tell you they 

should roll their heads in shame, Mr. Speaker, in shame. 

 

Let’s take for example an institution in our province that has 

direct, direct impact on families and family violence. I speak of 

the Mobile Crisis centre in Saskatoon. Mobile Crisis in 

Saskatoon is threatened with closure. Why, Mr. Speaker? Not 

because we’ve changed our funding; in fact we’ve continued to 

support the Mobile Crisis centre. It’s threatened with closure 

because of cuts by the federal Liberal government, and this 

caucus remains silent, Mr. Speaker. Every one of them remains 

silent and that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker; that’s a shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Before orders of the day, to move a motion to 

substitute members on committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Cannington: 

 

That the name of Mr. Ben Heppner be substituted for that 

of Mr. Dan D’Autremont on the list of members 

composing the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  And before orders of the day, I wish to table, 

pursuant to section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act, the report 

of the Provincial Auditor on the financial statements of crown 

agencies for years ending . . . the fiscal year ended March 31, 

1996. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2 — Reducing Child Poverty 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, thank you very much. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure for me today to spend some 

time talking about the initiatives that our government has done 

to reduce child poverty in this province. 

 

Now I’m looking forward to what my colleagues will have to 

say on this issue, and at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s commitment 

to reducing child poverty, including the national leadership 

shown by our Premier on the development of a national 

child benefit, and the recent doubling of funding for 

Saskatchewan’s award-winning action plan for children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Now, Mr. Speaker, I think we would all agree 

that it is a tragedy that in a province as rich in resources as 

Saskatchewan, and in a country as rich in resources as Canada, 

that we have children who live in poverty. 

 

Now we have to work together as governments at all levels, and 

as communities, to eliminate child poverty. When we first took 

power, when we first were elected as a government in 1991, we 

had a lot of difficult choices that we had to make, Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



868  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The Chair is having some 

difficulty being able to hear the hon. member make her remarks, 

and I’ll ask the House to come to order and allow the hon. 

member for Regina Qu’Appelle to participate in the debate in 

an uninterrupted way. 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, when we were elected in 1991, we were faced with a 

situation which meant we had to make a lot of difficult and a lot 

of tough choices. And all of us in this Chamber will remember 

what those choices were. 

 

But what we decided to do as a government was, we decided to 

target our scarce resources to the things that mattered to us — 

to families and to children. So not once since 1991 — not once 

— have we cut funding to social services. Not once. We have 

told the people of this province that we value children and we 

value families, and what we have done is we’ve targeted our 

money to introduce programs which will support and which will 

help children and families. 

 

Now we can’t deal with the issue of poverty in isolation. It has 

to be dealt with as a community. Now we’ve given priorities to 

children and to families and we as colleagues have all supported 

that and we’ve recognized how important it is, but we’re not 

actually the only . . . it’s not just the people in this Chamber, but 

it’s also people outside this Chamber, and people in the 

province of Saskatchewan who have also appreciated and 

recognized what we’ve done. 

 

And what I’d like to do, Mr. Speaker, is just quote from an 

article by one Dale Eisler in an article he wrote in the Davidson 

Leader, and this is what he says: 

 

Moreover, if you look at the last five years, the one 

consistent pattern between Romanow’s government has 

been an approach where the weakest and most vulnerable 

were spared from the cuts in spending needed to bring 

financial stability back to the government. Unlike Ralph 

Klein’s Alberta, where people on welfare have been forced 

to take less, or given one-way bus tickets out of the 

province as part of the fight against the deficit, there has 

been no such treatment of the poor in Saskatchewan on the 

way to a balanced budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, something that this government has done of 

which I am very proud and of which I know all my colleagues 

are very proud, is we’ve introduced the child action plan. Now 

we did this beginning in 1993, and we took a leadership role 

and did something which was really very creative and very 

innovative. Because what we did was, we went out and talked 

to people in the communities and talked to people who work 

with children and with families and said, now what can we do, 

what are some of the things that we can do to address this issue 

of poverty, especially child poverty, which concerns us all? 

 

So what happened, Mr. Speaker, was that we came up with the 

child action plan. And this is a prevention plan and an early 

intervention plan, and it supports the idea that if you want 

productive and healthy members of society you have to start 

working with children. Many of us here will know Dr. Mustard 

and this is something that he puts forward as being crucial to 

developing a healthy and productive and valued society, is you 

have to look after your children. 

 

So what this action plan does, Mr. Speaker, is, what this action 

plan does is look at ways in which we can support children and 

families. And we’ve done that, we’ve done that in many ways. 

We pioneered this program in 1993 and one of the first things 

we did was we appointed a Children’s Advocate. Now no 

province has ever done that before. And this Children’s 

Advocate does not report to the government but she reports 

directly to this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the other things we did was we established a 

volunteer council, an advisory council on children, and this 

group is composed of 25 people, volunteers throughout the 

province, who report to the various ministers on initiatives that 

can be taken to deal with this issue of poverty. Now it’s not just 

one . . . it’s not just the Minister of Social Services who’s 

involved in the children’s action plan. There are several 

departments and secretariats and community groups that are 

involved. 

 

One of the other things we did which I think is very important, 

is we established integrated school link services. So in other 

words, we used the existing facility of the school to look at how 

we can support families and children in need. So we have 

established lunch programs for instance, and we’ve established 

programs for young teen mothers. And these are all . . . It seems 

a very smart way to me, Mr. Speaker, to do it this way because 

we have existing facilities, and rather than creating new ones, 

we just used what’s already there. So we’re using the school 

program that’s there. 

 

Now one of the new initiatives in the child action plan is a 

northern housing initiative. And this provides for funding for 

people in the North so that they too can work towards having 

comfortable and warm family homes. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Just like anybody should. 

 

Ms. Murray:  Just like anybody should, absolutely. 

 

I’ve already talked about hot lunch programs which are done 

through the school but there has also been more money set aside 

— I think $500,000 — for nutrition programs in the latest 

budget initiative. 

 

Now one of the other things that we’ve done in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is we started a street youth initiative. And this is in 

several cities and centres in Regina, including Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, and Regina. And this is dealing with 

young people who find themselves on the street for a variety of 

reasons; and giving them a point of contact with people who 

work with young people so that they begin to appreciate that 

they’re valued members of society, and that there are other 

options for them, other than going to the street. 

 

One of the other initiatives of the child action plan is of course 

the whole concept of community schools. And we certainly 

heard about some of the initiatives in Prince Albert and in   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

Regina where it’s not just the teachers who are involved with 

the schools, but it’s the communities as well. The parents are 

brought into the decision-making process — there’s a parents’ 

advisory council. And it’s just made the whole school more of a 

community, which I think is very important to not just the 

teachers and the students in the school but the community itself. 

 

Now because of the work that’s been done in this province by 

the child action plan, and because this plan is recognized 

nationally, even internationally, and because of the leadership 

role that our Premier has played in this plan, our Premier has 

been recognized and given a Champions for Children Award in 

Ottawa. 

 

(1430) 

 

Now this is a great honour, Mr. Speaker, and one I think that we 

should all be very proud of; as we are very proud of our Premier 

and the initiatives that he’s shown. This award was only 

presented to four recipients and only one of them was a 

province and that was the province of Saskatchewan. So we’re 

very proud of our Premier and of the departments that have 

worked together to make this action plan such a success. 

 

Now because this action plan is so important to our 

government, in this budget that we just introduced in March, we 

have doubled — over doubled — the funding for the child’s 

action plan, which I think gives a very, very clear message that 

this is all very important for us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  The things that we have to remember about 

the community . . . about the action plan for children, Mr. 

Speaker, is that it must be community based, government has to 

be seen to have a leadership and facilitating role, and also that 

all these programs have to help families in the long term. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, actually the one other thing that I wanted to 

say about the child action plan was that in the Children’s 

Advocate annual report she actually makes very positive 

comments about the child action plan. And I’d like to just read 

those to my colleagues in the House: 

 

Government, in Saskatchewan, has implemented a well 

recognized and highly respected Child Action Plan. 

Community advocates are being supported in their efforts 

to ensure that children are valued and protected through the 

provision of Prevention and Support Grants and other 

initiatives. There seems to be a sincere effort being made 

by politicians and community members to respect children, 

youth and families. 

 

And we’re very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’d like to just get back for a moment to the leadership that 

our Premier has shown by promoting and talking about the 

establishment of national social programs. Now this is very 

important when it comes to protecting children and ensuring 

that all their needs are met. 

 

Now when the Premier has been speaking at conferences across 

Canada and meeting with other first ministers, he’s been 

promoting the idea of a national child benefit. And I think 

initially when this was promoted I’m not sure that people were 

paying the attention that they should have been paying to this, 

but he continued to do this and he continued to keep this on the 

agenda. And it’s very gratifying to know, Mr. Speaker, that in 

January of this year when the first ministers and the ministers of 

Social Services met they agreed to establish a national child 

benefit. 

 

Now this is the first time in 30 years that both levels of 

government have agreed and developed a new, universal social 

program. 

 

Now the sad part about this, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal 

Liberal government has decided that they’re not going to 

provide any funding for this until July, 1998. Now that’s a long 

time. That’s a long time. It’s all very well to talk about it, but 

our government in its budget has not only talked about it but 

has put actions with their words. 

 

So what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve provided some 

transitional funding as a bridge. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

proud to say and very pleased to say that this government, this 

Saskatchewan government, values families, it values children, 

and it continues to develop more and more effective programs 

to support and protect them. 

 

And actually there is another quote here by our Premier that I 

would like to just read into the record, and the Premier says: 

 

This is just the beginning. The greatest rewards of this 

integrated, community-based approach, the greatest 

rewards are yet to come as those children grow and take 

their place in our community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to move this motion, seconded 

by my good friend, the member from Battleford-Cut Knife: 

 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s commitment 

to reducing child poverty, including the national leadership 

shown by our Premier on the development of a national 

child benefit and the recent doubling of funding for 

Saskatchewan’s award-winning action plan for children. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The child dressed in a threadbare winter 

jacket, holes in his runner, and no mittens arrives at school 

hungry and cold. A playmate offends him, and in anger he 

strikes out. The teacher intervenes. The child sullenly begins to 

talk about his problem. His mother went to work early and he 

could not find anything for his breakfast nor for his sister’s. The 

mother works part time and depends on Social Services and the 

food bank to subsidize their income. 

 

This is not the family of Tim Cratchit, Mr. Speaker. This is 

Saskatchewan, this is Canada, this is reality and this is poverty.   



870  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, one out of every five children live in poverty. This 

is one of the greatest social challenges facing Canadians in the 

21st century. 

 

Research shows that long-term poverty contributes to a number 

of lifelong disadvantages — poor education and life skills, poor 

health, poor employment prospects, and family problems. 

Problems of frustration, depression, hopelessness. Problems of 

dependency on social and health programs. Problems with 

violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of increased poverty to society can be 

huge. This issue needs to be addressed now. And the 

Saskatchewan government recognizes this and is leading the 

way. This government is investing in people, in our children, in 

our future, by providing 13 million more in benefits and 

services for Saskatchewan children, youth, and families this 

year. 

 

The Saskatchewan’s action plan for children funding continues 

to increase, enabling programs and services to develop and 

expand, addressing concerns and issues in our communities. 

Programs that provide our children with a positive lifestyle. 

Community agencies and schools who receive funding for 

nutrition programs, particularly in the North. Funding towards 

an immunization program to protect children against hepatitis A 

infection. Funding for another Children’s Advocate office on 

behalf of children who receive provincial government services. 

Funding to help kindergarten children with aggressive or 

anti-social behaviours. 

 

We are expanding our teen and young parents programs to 

vulnerable parents, particularly in rural areas. Last year my 

constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife received prevention 

support grants to fund the Battlefords Interval House project 

addressing family violence; the Cut Knife High School drinking 

and driving awareness project; the summer drop-in program for 

youth 12 to 18 living in Unity and area; the Battlefords 

concern-for-youth project to host mini-workshops on teen 

alcohol, drug use, and teen pregnancy. All innovative projects 

that are forward looking. 

 

For the past 5 years selected residents from the former North 

Battleford youth cottage have attended a developmental camp 

on the Poundmaker Reserve. Sweetgrass also has a provincially 

managed young offenders facility. And I wish to acknowledge 

the initiatives to teach youth about their cultures, their values, 

and their respect, basic life skills, and to develop meaningful 

relationships with elders and members of the community. Rates 

were increased for foster parents as we recognize the extremely 

important role that they play by caring for our Saskatchewan 

children and our young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are a start to address the problems 

that our youth encounter on a daily basis. But we recognize and 

acknowledge that more must be done. This problem did not 

begin yesterday, nor will it be solved today, but it’s a start. Our 

Premier has been recognized nationally, receiving on behalf of 

our province, the Champions for Children Award for the 

development and the implementation of Saskatchewan’s action 

plan for children. 

This year we are implementing initiatives which support and 

encourage low income families, assistance to allow them to 

provide meaningful benefits to their families. With our 

community partners, we are meeting the diverse challenges and 

coordinating effective solutions. 

 

Saskatchewan Justice, Social Services, and the police delivered 

training to more than 780 police and first-responders, increasing 

their awareness about child sexual abuse allegations. Justice 

also increased the funding for more RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) in the rural areas. Saskatchewan Health and 

Social Services directed resources to develop and implement a 

three-year pilot project for an adolescents sex offenders’ 

treatment service in two communities. 

 

Social Services targeted $106,000 for community-driven pilot 

projects to require non-violent young offenders to face their 

community, their victim, and their family, and to take direct 

responsibility for their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being dependent on Social Services is a 

continuing cycle. We all have dreams and goals. We all want to 

be warm and not hungry. We all want to be secure. And in order 

to achieve these goals, we must continue to strive to provide 

protection to our vulnerable. We must continue to provide a 

good education, not only to our children but to their parents, so 

that they can be employed. And we must continue to work with 

our partners to have effective, community-based programs that 

will provide positive solutions. 

 

We cannot do it alone. And in order for us to implement and 

deliver these solutions we must also have federal support — 

support financially to enhance the lives of all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to close my remarks with this: the seeds of 

today and yesterday are the flowers of tomorrow. A Chinese 

proverb that reflects the initiatives we have begun and 

encourages us to continue with hope for a better future for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to second the motion by the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first off I 

would like to say that I am extremely surprised that the 

members opposite would put forward this motion for debate 

when it highlights a glaring broken promise made by the 

Premier. Back in 1990 when the Premier had his sights set on 

government, he pledged to eliminate child poverty in his first 

term in office. 

 

If his government had diligently worked to keep that promise, 

had taken meaningful, concrete actions, we would not be 

standing in this House today debating the government’s effort 

to reducing child poverty because, theoretically, child poverty 

would be wiped out in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  It is for this reason that I will be introducing an   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

amendment to this motion after elaborating on a few of my 

thoughts on this issue. 

 

Now I’m not making light, Mr. Speaker, of some of the work 

that is being done to reduce child poverty. Because I do believe 

that child poverty is one of the worst injustices in this world. 

We all must do what we can to improve the situation. 

 

It is tragic to know that thousands of Saskatchewan children are 

worried about where their next meal will come from in this 

province. And these children are suffering through no fault of 

their own. Children are some of the most vulnerable members 

of society. 

 

As elected officials, I truly do believe that we all must work 

together to make this province the best place for them to live. 

Unfortunately, that is certainly not the case right now. 

According to the most recent figures, Saskatchewan has the 

fourth worst child poverty rate in Canada. As recently as 1995, 

our child poverty rate stood at 21.6 per cent. Now that is simply 

not acceptable, and not acceptable for a government that 

determines it’s going to be working hard on child poverty. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, that means that over 57,000 Saskatchewan 

children are possibly suffering from hunger, lack of proper 

clothing or shelter, and many are also afflicted with a wide 

range of social problems that are often linked with depressed 

economic conditions. These children must not be further 

victimized by ill-thought-out election promises that are casually 

tossed aside by this government. But we all know that keeping 

election promises is not this NDP government’s strong point. 

 

In October of 1991 the now Minister of Education pledged, and 

I quote: “If elected, the New Democratic Party will work to get 

rid of food banks.” Now any of the members opposite who need 

to refresh their memory can refer to that quote in the October 3 

issue of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 

 

But here we are in 1997, when the issue of food banks is 

steadily increasing, and it follows a trend that was established 

since this NDP government first came to power in 1991. Right 

now there are 10 food banks operating throughout 

Saskatchewan. There are food banks, underground food banks, 

that are operating throughout rural Saskatchewan. The use of 

food banks was a problem which the NDP so conveniently 

hollered about in the late ’80s and in early 1990s, and now the 

use of food banks is at its most shocking level ever in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem of child poverty is not restricted to any one region 

in Saskatchewan, and it’s not restricted to urban areas, and it’s 

not restricted to rural areas. Children are common clients at 

food banks in Saskatoon, Regina, Biggar, Melfort, Manor, 

Melville, Moose Jaw, Outlook, and Prince Albert. 

 

Statistics we receive from the Regina and Saskatoon food banks 

show that about half of the clients using these services were 

children. Every day hundreds of children across Saskatchewan 

are forced to rely on the generosity of others in order to eat. The 

sheer numbers of children who are relying on food bank 

services point to a blatant failure in economic and social 

development policy by this NDP government. 

 

Poverty, Mr. Speaker, is not simply a physical state. Poverty 

affects the bodies and minds of these children. Study after study 

shows that the level of nutrition children receive directly affect 

their performance in school. Children living in poverty often 

find it extremely difficult to focus on their studies, not to 

mention the social challenges that they face trying to fit in with 

their classmates. 

 

Dozens of community groups across this province of ours, 

across Saskatchewan, are helping these children by offering 

localized lunch programs — that is true. But the Canadian and 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association point out the need 

to recognize and work towards province-wide school nutrition 

programs. They have submitted many, many proposals, many 

recommendations and ideas. Yet the government seems to think 

a few localized school programs will replace them . . . or rather 

will place them in good political standing. The truth is, Mr. 

Speaker, children in many schools throughout this province 

suffer from hunger and are in need of support. 

 

So there it sits. I am extremely frustrated by this government’s 

lack of action on several issues that directly impact children. On 

one hand, the ministers of Social Services, Justice, and 

Education are constantly asking for better suggestions from the 

community and from us, the Liberal opposition members. But 

when we do submit tangible suggestions, this government’s 

common response is no response at all. 

 

Case in point, Mr. Speaker, the tragic problem of child 

prostitution. Many of the children that are selling their bodies 

on the streets are also subject to impoverished conditions at 

home and they are often physically, emotionally, and sexually 

abused. 

 

Now I have asked the minister to help change social services, 

justice, and health systems so that these child prostitutes are 

treated as the victims of pedophiles. To his credit, the minister 

did agree that child prostitution is a serious problem that must 

be looked at. And he agreed that child prostitutes are indeed 

victims, not criminals. 

 

But that is where his help ends. At this point it is nothing more 

than lip-service. I raised this issue several times last session and 

I have pursued it even further this session. Through my private 

member’s Bill I have introduced some concrete suggestions for 

the government to help combat child prostitution. I introduced 

that Bill weeks ago and still have yet to get a concrete response 

from the minister. 

 

If you won’t accept my proposals or the dozens of proposals 

you have received from community groups across 

Saskatchewan, then it’s about high time that you offered a real 

plan of your own in this regard. One of the reasons that so many 

children in Saskatchewan are suffering from child prostitution 

and poverty is because of lack of leadership by the government. 

This is not something on which to be commended. This is not 

something to praise. 

  



872  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s lack of action on these 

important issues is something of which the members opposite 

should be ashamed. I am bitterly disappointed in this 

government’s unwillingness to take swift action on the child 

prostitution issue. If the children of Saskatchewan are forced to 

wait seven more years for legislative changes concerning the 

treatment of child prostitutes, more young lives will needlessly 

be lost. These children have nowhere else to turn and we as 

elected officials need to provide some solid leadership in 

effecting positive change for them. 

 

The communities out there are doing their part. I’ve offered my 

legislation and I really, really would like to know when the 

minister and this government will do their part. I fear another 

seven-year wait on this issue because that is exactly how long 

it’s taken this government to make any real movement on the 

issue of child poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I offer this quote contained in the most recent 

report submitted by Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate. In bold 

print on page 3 she says, and I quote: 

 

We cannot afford to delay our responses to our children — 

they have only one childhood and that childhood is 

expiring day by day. 

 

Now I’ll repeat that once again for the NDP members opposite: 

 

We cannot afford to delay our responses to our children — 

they have only one childhood and that childhood . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order, order. Now . . . 

Order, order. The Chair does not need advice from either side of 

the House. And I’ll ask all hon. members . . . all hon. members 

will know that it’s not appropriate to be shouting across the 

floor, and I’ll ask all members to provide the opportunity for the 

hon. member for Humboldt to continue with debate. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

children of Saskatchewan need real and significant, tangible, 

concrete, immediate action on child prostitution and poverty. 

 

What is also disturbing to me is the way this NDP government 

uses empty propaganda to try and give the appearance that it’s 

looking out for the best interests of our children. Mr. Speaker, 

the very people suffering from poverty the most are also the 

ones suffering from policies implemented by this very 

government. 

 

Many people living below the poverty line are the same ones 

who are receiving aid from social assistance. The minister 

himself told me that in 1996-97, there are nearly 81,000 people 

living on social assistance. As for a snapshot of who exactly 

these recipients are, the most recent figures available are from 

February of 1997, which shows that nearly 35,000 of social 

service recipients are children. It’s a sad fact that 43.6 per cent 

of social service case-loads in February was made up of 

children, children that oftentimes, besides that, Mr. Speaker, 

don’t seem to get a cheque on time from the department. 

 

It is also no coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that single parents 

represent 15 per cent of social assistance recipients. That means 

that over 12,000 single parents in Saskatchewan rely on some 

type of government assistance. Most of these people are looking 

to the government for assistance because they have no other 

alternative. Many of these people have abandoned the labour 

market because they have been shut out of any opportunity to 

earn their own income. 

 

The high number of social assistance recipients in 

Saskatchewan is directly related to this government’s failure to 

achieve its job creation targets. This, Mr. Speaker, is another 

broken promise. Once again we see how Saskatchewan children 

are suffering as a direct result of another broken government 

promise. 

 

If this government were truly committed to real and effective 

job creation, it would be boasting about increasing the labour 

market. This government desperately needs to create a 

provincial environment that will encourage industry and private 

business to create thousands of new, full-time, permanent jobs. 

Only then will we have true economic growth and a reduction 

in child poverty. 

 

Statistics Canada and reports by Saskatchewan’s Women’s 

Secretariat show that Saskatchewan women and children are 

suffering from depressed labour market conditions. 

 

The statistics show that 70 per cent of all part-time jobs are held 

by women. In fact 30 per cent of all women who are in the 

labour force work part time. The number one reason that these 

women work part time is because they cannot find full-time 

work. Thousands of single mothers across Saskatchewan are 

really struggling to properly provide for their children because 

they are stuck in low wage and part-time jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another frequent concern I have heard from single 

parents who are receiving social assistance is that they are 

having additional deductions on their income support payments. 

This provincial government is imposing a wage deduction 

related to the federal child tax benefit. When these clients asked 

Social Services officials about the provincial deduction on their 

federal benefit, Social Service officials told them it’s to offset 

the old baby bonus allocation. When I questioned the Minister 

of Social Services about this practice during estimates, I still did 

not receive a satisfactory answer. 

 

The facts here are simple. The provincial government is 

penalizing Saskatchewan social service recipients for receiving 

federal child tax benefits. Now as one woman told me: 

 

I just can’t understand that. Because of the funding the 

federal government is providing for my children, the 

provincial government is taking more money away from 

my total income support payment. So where is the 

government’s compassion here? 

 

That’s a good question, Mr. Speaker. Where is the 

government’s compassion? She went on to say, this woman 

went on to say that “The people who are really suffering from 

the NDP’s shell game are my children.” 

  



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

I received several calls relating to the same complaint. How can 

the provincial government penalize people by way of wage 

deductions because of federal funding that is provided for their 

children? The child tax benefit from the feds is not a wage, and 

nor should it be considered one. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that the 

federal Liberals giveth and the province’s NDP taketh away. 

Perhaps this is the question that’s something the members 

opposite should carefully consider and ask their Premier. 

 

The recent report by the Children’s Advocate also points out 

some glaring failures of this government’s policies as they 

relate to children and the depressed economic conditions in 

which many of these children live. 

 

Data compiled by the Children’s Advocate shows that more and 

more children are reaching out to her for help because they are 

having problems with this government’s policies. 

 

In 1995 about 5 per cent of the calls received by Children’s 

Advocate were directly from children. That number grew to 

about 20 per cent in 1996. Also, the total number of files 

opened by the Children’s Advocate last year was 502. That’s up 

from 477 in 1995. That increased number is undoubtedly partly 

due to increased awareness about the Children’s Advocate 

office, but the high numbers also point to some serious 

problems with the Social Services, Education, Justice, and 

Health departments as they relate to children. 

 

I do believe that the Children’s Advocate is doing some 

outstanding work, but she has commented several times in her 

report that she is somewhat frustrated with the slow process of 

legislative changes on matters that directly relate to the interests 

of children. When the Minister of Social Services proudly 

quoted from the advocate’s report last week in question period, 

he conveniently skipped over the quote on page 23 that says: 

 

Government officials are themselves frustrated by delayed 

resolution to issues that impact on children and their 

families. 

 

However when I suggested that the minister apply a section of 

The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act that would help 

set up an all-party committee to deal with matters related to 

troubled youth, the minister sloughed it off. He constantly 

invites us to work with him in order to improve programs for 

Saskatchewan’s children, yet when I and others make important 

suggestions, he does not want to listen. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now this arrogance is at the expense of Saskatchewan people 

and, more profoundly, at the expense of Saskatchewan children. 

Of course we do appreciate any sincere effort that the 

government is now making in helping our federal counterparts 

develop and implement a beneficial and effective national 

program related to child benefits. There is absolutely no reason 

that children should go hungry in a province that is as 

developed as Saskatchewan, or supposed to be as developed as 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But the minister and his counterparts must not stop here. He 

must begin to listen and to seriously consider the concerns, 

suggestions, and even detailed proposals that community 

leaders, other governments, and the children are making 

regarding all government policies that directly affect the lives of 

Saskatchewan children. 

 

This issue of child poverty, child prostitution, and other abuses 

of children are not pleasant to think about. It is not pleasant to 

think about Saskatchewan children who are suffering. But while 

this government seems to talk a lot about what should be done, 

myself and the people of Saskatchewan are equally interested to 

know when improvements will be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the inaction of this government in the area of child 

poverty is nothing short of a travesty. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

move an amendment to this motion, seconded by the member 

from Athabasca. The amendment will read as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

All the words after “Assembly” be deleted and replaced 

with: 

 

“condemn the government’s failure to fulfil its promise to 

eliminate child poverty.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. There’ll be plenty 

of opportunity to engage in debate. Order. Not while the 

Speaker is in the Chair . . . or on his feet. 

 

I find the amendment in order and debate will continue. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

enter into this debate and I do so on behalf of the children of 

our province, especially those children who don’t have warm 

clothes to wear in the winter or those who often get out of bed 

hungry in the morning and return to bed at night still hungry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one child living in poverty in our province is too 

many. And in Saskatchewan we have a whole lot more than one 

child in poverty; we have thousands of them. According to the 

latest statistics available to us, 21.6 per cent of Saskatchewan 

children live below the poverty line. That’s 57,000 children, 

Mr. Speaker. Is that a record we should be applauding? I don’t 

think so. It’s a record the members opposite should be ashamed 

of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government wants us to slap their leader on 

the back for working towards a national child benefit, and we 

are thankful to the federal government for implementing such a 

plan. It’s a very real commitment they’ve shown, and it’s a 

start. I’m not surprised the members opposite want to steal 

some of the credit that those actually belongs to, because 

progress in the area of reducing child poverty is certainly not 

something this provincial government deserves any credit for 

whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the other members opposite are 

very good at making all kinds of promises when it comes to 

child poverty. But just as this . . . with this case so many . . .   



874  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

they have made so many promises, they are proven in the end to 

be just what they are — hollow words that sound wonderful at 

election time but prove to be very empty, utterly devoid of any 

substance whatsoever. 

 

I think it’s only right that we continue to remind the Premier 

and the other members on that side of the House of the current 

Premier’s words when he was leader of the opposition. From 

the Star-Phoenix on November 20, 1989, I quote: 

 

Roy Romanow capped off the NDP annual convention 

pledging to eliminate poverty in his first term in office. 

 

That was his promise, Mr. Speaker, that he would eliminate 

child poverty. But he did not. He was going to eliminate all 

poverty in Saskatchewan in his first term and that ended nearly 

two years ago. It was a big promise to make at the time, Mr. 

Speaker, and I guess it proved to be too big. 

 

Just last year, the same Premier stated in this House: 

 

It’s a promise that has to be made and it’s a promise that 

has to be kept. Whether it can be achieved and kept, I don’t 

know. 

 

What a strange statement to make, Mr. Speaker. According to 

his own words, the Premier got caught up in the branches while 

reaching for the stars. My question is: why would a Premier 

make such a promise when according to his own statements, he 

doesn’t know whether he can keep it or not? Isn’t that the very 

essence of a promise, a commitment made to the voters to do 

what you say you’re going to do? 

 

There are no shades of grey when it comes to promises. You 

either do it or you don’t do it. And the Premier fully admitted 

that he made this one without knowing whether he could keep 

the promise or not. It not only shows a lack of commitment to 

the people of this province, it also shows dishonesty regarding a 

very important issue. 

 

While the government opposite chooses to play political 

ping-pong with children in poverty, the simple fact remains that 

they are still going to school cold and hungry. 

 

I can already hear the members chirping about the federal 

government. Well somehow six other provinces have a better 

record than Saskatchewan when it comes to child poverty and 

the last time I checked they have the same federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, children are in poverty because their parents are in 

poverty. On average during the 1996-97 fiscal year, there were 

80,747 Saskatchewan people on social assistance. That means 

one in every twelve people in this province was on welfare. 

That’s simply too many. The total Social Services budget has 

climbed from 390 million in 1991 to 511 million in the coming 

fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason why they had to climb is because 

there’s more people on welfare. Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the 

reasons behind a high welfare rate —simply put, it’s the lack of 

opportunities in our province. People faced with unemployment 

quickly lose hope, Mr. Speaker. Those who don’t leave 

Saskatchewan for opportunities in other provinces stay behind 

and they end up on welfare rolls. There is no greater killer of 

hope and drive than for able-bodied individuals who want to 

work not being able to find a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is not the only one that said . . . that 

stood in the House and made promises that he can’t keep. The 

current Minister of Education is also pretty good at getting 

caught up in the branches. 

 

I quote from the Star-Phoenix on October 3, 1991: “If elected, 

the New Democratic Party will work to get rid of food banks.” 

So what happened? Six years later we now have more food 

banks in Saskatchewan than ever before. And that’s because 

there’s never been a greater need. 

 

In 1997 there are 10 food banks operating in our province. They 

are located in Biggar, in Manor, in Melfort, in Melville, Moose 

Jaw, Outlook, Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, and Unity. It 

seems this is one of the few growth industries we have in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m saddened by the increased need for food 

banks, I certainly congratulate those hard-working, 

community-orientated people who have been instrumental in 

stepping in and filling what they saw as a great need in their 

community. It becomes clear that with the coming of food 

banks in smaller centres in our province, the issue of poverty is 

not just an urban issue, and the government has got to 

remember that when it sets up the hot meals program. 

 

The problem extends out to our smaller rural communities now 

and programs have got to be tailored to meet that need. 

Programs that are used in Regina and Saskatoon may not 

necessarily be right for our smaller towns, and I hope the 

government keeps this in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about food banks we have to talk 

about those who are using them. Accordingly, the Regina and 

Saskatoon food banks in 1996, about half of all those coming 

for their basic necessities in terms of food were children. In 

1996, Regina Food Bank saw over 43,000 children, 

three-quarters of which were under the age of 12 years old. 

 

What kind of life can they be leading, Mr. Speaker? When one 

looks at these kind of statistics, we can quickly figure out at 

least one of the reasons that Saskatchewan leads the way when 

it comes to youth crime. When our children have no hope about 

their future, when they see no light at the end of the tunnel, it’s 

all too often that they turn to a life of crime. 

 

And as we’ve argued in this House on many occasions during 

session, once kids do turn to that life of crime this government 

disavows any responsibility for them. Simply because it is a 

provincial responsibility to set up effective and workable 

rehabilitation and punishment programs for young offenders, 

this government sees that as no reason to take away any 

responsibility. The Premier simply says that the legislature has 

simply too much on its plate to deal with an issue like this. 

 

  



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

It doesn’t matter that people are demanding something has to be 

done. It doesn’t matter that people’s property and their safety 

are threatened by the upswing in youth crime. It doesn’t matter 

that a policeman was almost run down and a young offender 

was accidentally nearly shot in Saskatoon. All that matters to 

the members opposite is ensuring none of this is put on their 

shoulders, even though that’s where a great deal of the 

responsibility should lie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, child poverty is one of those issues where all 

political parties have got to work together in order to find 

solutions. It cannot be simply used as a political poker chip. 

We’ve got to do something for our youth because they are our 

future. And so far I haven’t seen this government do anything 

concrete in this province when it comes to this problem. 

 

So if you want me to give them a credit for a child poverty rate 

of 21.6 per cent, I will. If those members want credit for 81,000 

people on welfare in Saskatchewan, they can take the credit. 

And if those members want the credit for 43,000 children 

visiting food banks last year, they can have credit for that as 

well. If that’s the credit the members opposite want to take to 

the people of Saskatchewan as a sign of their accomplishments, 

they can be my guest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to the banter back and forth across 

the floor and really it does make me sad. I guess maybe politics 

is our job, something that we’re expected to do. But when it 

comes to child poverty, it should be out of the bounds of 

politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The children in poverty in our province do not 

gain from this controversy. What we need is not politics, we 

need action. We don’t need paper or reports, we need action. 

We on this side of the House implore the government to use 

their majority, to use their mandate, and to use their money — 

our money — to make a difference in the lives of the children in 

this province. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I scarcely know 

where to begin, Mr. Speaker. As one of my colleagues says just 

a few minutes ago, the spectacle of what we have heard from 

the member from Humboldt and now the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena is almost such to immobilize a person. I 

say I am scandalized by this shameful and dishonest spectacle 

of rhetoric about child poverty in this Assembly, the deliberate 

twisting of the truth — intentionally twisting the truth and the 

facts of the matter — the sanctimony in which it’s done, and the 

political grandstanding that accompanies it. 

 

And the member from Humboldt can smile, but it’s sickening to 

watch this spectacle today. And it’s shameful. And I dare say if 

any of your constituents are watching on the televised Hansard, 

you are a discredit to this institution. I say that. 

 

(1515) 

 

The truth really hurts, the member from Humboldt says. It must 

hurt her painfully to deal with the truth, to perpetrate the kind of 

misinformation that she has this afternoon. The member from 

Kelvington-Wadena says we don’t need politics, we need 

action. And then has the gall not to even mention the child 

action plan in her remarks — does not even deign to mention a 

doubling of funding for the child action plan in this budget. 

 

And in fact the members opposite in this Assembly voted 

against the child action plan here in Saskatchewan. And then 

they have the gall to get up today and indulge in rhetoric, 

attacking the government for doing nothing. I say that actions 

speak a whole lot louder than words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  And I say that the people of Saskatchewan 

only have to look to this budget, this most recent budget, to see 

actions and not words when it comes to child poverty. 

 

I want to make the point that in this most recent budget, funding 

for the child action plan here in Saskatchewan has doubled from 

more than $11 million last year to $24.7 million this year. That 

is action — that is not rhetoric; that is fact — that is not fiction 

or fantasy. 

 

A colleague says send them a copy of the child action plan for 

this next year. I say, it wouldn’t do much good based on the 

spectacle of the performance we’ve just seen because they 

would ignore the facts of the plan. 

 

I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, about the . . . another measure in 

this most recent budget, and that’s the way in which this 

provincial government here in Saskatchewan is going to invest 

$6 million as a bridge to the child benefit plan. 

 

Now people have to understand, first of all, the fact that it was 

the Government of Saskatchewan that has led the nation in the 

call for a child benefit plan for this country — a national plan. 

And it isn’t just that the Government of Saskatchewan is calling 

or talking about the need for a national plan; the Government of 

Saskatchewan is putting that plan into action this next month. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan in fact is going it alone 

because the federal government is unprepared to move on a 

child action plan or a child benefit until 16 months, at the 

earliest, from now. This is really unbelievable, but not so 

unbelievable when you consider that there’s a federal election 

in the air. And maybe that federal election might just have 

something to do with the evasion of reality from the members 

on the opposite side. 

 

I have here an article from the February 20 Vancouver Sun 

written by columnist Barbara Yaffe. And I want to quote from 

this article rather extensively because it gives a perspective on 

the issue that isn’t restricted simply to Saskatchewan but is . . . 

makes reference to the circumstances in another province, 

British Columbia, as well. 

 

Ms. Yaffe begins her article by writing of the federal budget, 

and I quote: 

  



876  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Depending on your politics, this week’s federal budget is a 

brilliant political document or a manipulative bit of 

sophistry. 

 

And then she goes on to talk about the impression that the 

Chrétien Liberals have given that they remain the protectors of 

Canadians’ social programs and guardians of the poor. And she 

writes, and I quote: 

 

A program for low-income families with children. And 

expanded tax credits for post-secondary education (are 

included in this budget). 

 

But closer scrutiny of the dollar side leaves a different 

impression of the Grits — a government determined to 

clean up Canada’s finances even if social programs are 

sliced and diced. 

 

And this is precisely what is happening. And Ms. Yaffe goes on 

to talk about the fact, and I quote again: 

 

Since 1993 when the Chrétien government took office, it 

has drastically slashed funding to provinces for social 

programs — from $30 billion a year in 1995-‘96 to $25 

billion in 1997-‘98. B.C.’s . . . (Minister of Finance) 

calculates the 10 provinces are down nearly $9 billion to 

date and will have lost $22.4 billion by (the year) 2000. 

 

Now Ms. Yaffee goes on to talk about the flotilla, what she 

refers to as a flotilla of new initiatives on the social side from 

the federal government, and then comments that there is little 

cash, relatively speaking, involved in this flotilla of new 

initiatives. And she says, and I’ll quote again: 

 

New money is carefully targeted to select groups. It’s to be 

spent, in some cases, over four years. And the sums for 

each program are small by government standards. 

 

All the initiatives — for the four fiscal years, 1996-‘97 

through to ’99-2000 — will cost 34 billion. 

 

Meanwhile, spending cuts . . . for the coming fiscal year 

will total 4.4 billion. 

 

This is really quite incredible that we can have members on the 

opposite side of the House speak to the issue of child poverty in 

this province, and admittedly it is a problem, but not speak to 

the facts of the matter in terms of the larger context as to why 

we have the scale or magnitude of the problem that we do here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite, in her earlier remarks, would lead people 

to believe that it’s because Saskatchewan hasn’t dealt with 

unemployment, that that’s the reason we have so many people 

on social welfare, and totally ignores the fact of federal 

offloading of status Indians onto the provincial welfare roles — 

not one mention of that fundamental problem. 

 

Neither does the member opposite — either of the members that 

have spoken on this issue — mention Unemployment Insurance 

cuts and what effect that has had on the province. It’s 

almost as if these problems have nothing to do with the reality 

of poverty in Saskatchewan. And that is what I find so 

reprehensible about the representations that have been made on 

the opposite side this afternoon. They have fundamentally failed 

to tell the truth. And I think that the opposition has a 

responsibility to tell the truth about poverty in this country and 

in this province, and give more than a one-sided, sanctimonious 

I might say, attack on the government. 

 

This is not what the people of Saskatchewan want after all. I 

think that the people of Saskatchewan are really looking for 

their elected representatives to work together on the problems 

that affect the people of the province, and not to engage in 

political grandstanding and rhetoric and sanctimony. I think the 

people of Saskatchewan that I talk to are concerned about the 

issue of poverty in our province and are concerned to see that 

something gets done, and not that sanctimonious speeches are 

made. 

 

I think that the people of Saskatchewan are looking for 

concrete, tangible, palpable help for children in poverty. And if 

that means an increase in family income plan benefits of $3.3 

million this year, so be it. It may not be enough. It may not be 

enough for the members of the opposition, it may not be enough 

for the members of the public, but something concrete and 

tangible and palpable is happening in this province in relation to 

poverty. 

 

We have a long road to travel in this regard, but to get to our 

destination of eliminating poverty in our province isn’t helped 

when members of the opposition ignore reality. We need to 

work together. I will acknowledge that there’s poverty in this 

province. I will acknowledge that it’s a problem in this 

province. But I will tell the truth about it as well, which you 

haven’t done, Madam Member from Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  I will acknowledge the fact that I personally 

have not done enough on the government’s side to fight this 

problem and this evil. I’ll acknowledge that. But I want to know 

what you’re going to do in concrete terms, other than to get up 

and blather about the problem in rhetorical terms, especially 

when you don’t tell the truth about it. 

 

And now you can giggle about it, as if it is somehow funny. 

What a spectacle we see this afternoon. This is shameful. This 

isn’t what the people of Saskatchewan expect from their elected 

representatives. They expect the truth. 

 

I’m going to talk for awhile this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

about the Canadian council for social development. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Now are they credible? 

 

Mr. Koenker:  The member from Saskatoon Eastview asks 

if they’re credible on the issue of poverty. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well I think so. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  As the former minister of Social Services, he   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

says he thinks they are credible on the issue of poverty. One 

would think that by virtue of the fact that he was a former 

minister of Social Services in this province, from the remarks 

we’ve heard this afternoon of the members of the opposition, 

his words can’t be believed in any effect. 

 

I urge the people who might be listening to either contact me at 

the Legislative Building or the government caucus office or to 

directly contact the Canadian Council on Social Development 

to secure some of their perspectives on poverty, because I find 

them to be some of the most unbiased, helpful perspectives on 

poverty that are available in our country today — extremely 

well researched, very thoughtful, task-oriented in terms of 

trying to deal with the issue of poverty and not score political 

points. 

 

The Canadian Council on Social Development talks about some 

of the measures that need to be taken by all levels of 

government in this country to establish a national child benefit, 

to build a more coordinated approach to child poverty on the 

national and the provincial and the local level. And they make 

the point that there’s an enormous amount of work that needs to 

be done. And I would agree. 

 

There’s an enormous amount of work that needs to be done here 

in Saskatchewan. And in that respect, the members opposite are 

right. I don’t have any quarrel with that. Lord knows there’s too 

much poverty in this province; there’s too much poverty in this 

country. And we as elected members have a responsibility to do 

something about it. And here’s what the Canadian Council on 

Social Development has to say by way of some positive, 

proactive suggestions toward establishing a national child 

benefit system. 

 

(1530) 

 

To start with, the Canadian Council on Social Development has 

called on governments to protect child benefits currently in 

place. There are some child benefits currently in place. They 

say these benefits need to be protected. For a moment let’s 

forget about new benefits, let’s just protect the benefits we have 

so there’s no further erosion — no further erosion by virtue of 

the power of inflation. Protect the current child benefits that are 

in place in this country. 

 

Each year total spending on the child tax benefit, they point out, 

nationally falls by 170 million because income thresholds and 

benefits levels are only partially indexed to inflation. Here’s 

something positive we can do: to protect the child benefits 

currently in place. 

 

The 1996 federal budget recognized the need to protect benefits 

for seniors against inflation. We haven’t done that for children 

yet in this country. We need to do that. The Canadian Council 

on Social Development recommends that we need that same 

protection against inflation that’s been afforded to seniors 

afforded to poor families with children. Here’s a positive 

suggestion that I haven’t heard from the members opposite. 

Here is a suggestion that needs action here in Saskatchewan and 

nation-wide, protecting current child benefits against any 

further erosion. 

A second suggestion from the Canadian Council on Social 

Development, they call for more substantial, multi-year 

financial commitments to the development of a national child 

benefit system in our country. And we’re making a start on that 

here in Saskatchewan this year with $6 million in a transition 

bridging program, that we’re going it alone, starting next 

month. A Saskatchewan child benefit plan that bridges the road 

to the national child benefit plan, still to come some 16 months 

hence. 

 

The members opposite say we’re doing nothing. This is 

something. This is something to address child poverty. A 

multi-year financial commitment, starting now in this most 

recent budget, to try to bring stability to poor families. 

 

The Canadian Council on Social Development notes that the 

600 million that was announced earlier this year in the federal 

budget, when distributed among poor families across Canada, 

makes an important but ultimately only a small drop in the child 

poverty statistics. 

 

When people are living in poverty, any pittance you throw their 

way is important. But we need to do more than throw pittances. 

We need to start with positive programs, and as they say, 

making multi-year financial commitments to child poverty in 

our country. 

 

In fact the Canadian Council on Social Development says that 

you really need an additional investment of $2 billion in 

addition to the 600 million that has been announced by the 

federal government — we need a commitment of $2 billion to 

reduce the number of children by 20 per cent. Even the 20 per 

cent reduction is going to cost us $2 billion. 

 

And I’ll say parenthetically here, this is one of the reasons why 

we in Saskatchewan are working so hard to reduce our debt. So 

that we can redirect that money that is really being squandered 

on interest payments, based on that mountain of debt, so that we 

can redirect that money to social programs and begin to make 

multi-year commitments to child benefit programs. We can’t do 

it right now with $14 billion worth of debt, paying $17 million a 

day . . . a week — in interest payments. 

 

Rome wasn’t built in a day, but we’re starting down the road on 

a multi-year financial commitment. 

 

A third element to the Canadian Council on Social 

Development call for policy change, is to continue to press both 

federal and provincial and territorial governments to set realistic 

targets and timetables for reducing child poverty in our country. 

Just as we have done on all levels of government with reducing 

the deficit, we need to do that in terms of the human deficit as 

well — the deficit created by poverty. 

 

And they note that in 1997, we’re nowhere near meeting the 

lofty commitment made by parliamentarians in Ottawa to 

eradicate child poverty by the year 2000. This is a resolution 

passed in the House of Commons by all parties a number of 

years ago — to reduce poverty in Canada by the . . . to 

eliminate, eradicate child poverty by the year 2000. We’re 

nowhere near that. 

  



878  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Realistic targets need to be set, matched by substantial financial 

commitments, growing financial commitments over the next 

years to demonstrate that all levels of government are serious 

about dealing with the problem of child poverty. And again I 

say we have not done enough. I readily admit that. We need to 

do more. We have to do more. We will do more. And we’re 

committing to that in this most recent budget issued last month, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally the Canadian Council on Social Development has noted 

that in the past a single child benefit, even if it’s a substantial 

one, will not in and of itself adequately deal with the problem of 

child poverty. A child benefit plan is not the be-all and the 

end-all in terms of poverty. This requires a much more 

comprehensive strategy, they point out — a job strategy, a 

training strategy, a redesign of the whole social services system. 

We’ve announced that a year ago, a redesign of the social 

service program. 

 

Tomorrow in fact the Minister of Post-Secondary Education 

will announce a new training strategy aimed particularly at 

putting those in poverty, living in chronic dependency on 

welfare, back into the workforce. Because ultimately a job is 

one of the best guarantors against living in poverty. And that’s 

one of the other measures we’re going to be attempting to 

implement here in this province. 

 

It won’t happen overnight but we’re making a start on it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Tomorrow we’re taking some of the first steps 

down the new road to a new training strategy now that the 

federal government has eliminated manpower training from 

their vocabulary. 

 

A more comprehensive strategy. Basically because children are 

poor because their parents are poor. Children don’t earn 

incomes. Parents earn incomes. We need a more comprehensive 

strategy. 

 

And finally I’d like to quote a paragraph from the Canadian 

Council on Social Development position paper of March, 1997, 

their response to the 1997 federal budget. And I’d like to read 

this into the record, and I quote: 

 

The . . . (Canadian Council on Social Development) calls 

on both levels of government to demonstrate continued 

leadership and to make a commitment to an open policy 

development process, so that families, community groups 

and other interested parties can help shape the future (of) 

child benefit system in Canada. Furthermore, we are urging 

governments to design and implement changes in a way 

that improves incomes and services for both working and 

non-working poor families. 

 

I think this is where the action is really at, Mr. Speaker: a 

realistic plan to deal with poverty on both levels of government, 

provincial and federal, urging cooperation and partnership in 

this endeavour; calling for a commitment for ongoing policy 

reform; calling for concrete, tangible action to deal with these 

problems; and a long-term plan calling for the protection of 

those benefits that are already in place before we expand 

benefits to new programs. This is realistic. This is the kind of 

approach that we’re attempting to use here in Saskatchewan to 

deal with child poverty. 

 

That’s why I take great exception to the fact that the members 

opposite simply attack the government for its failure to 

eliminate child poverty, as the words of the amendment read, 

and they don’t recognize the need for a common partnership 

and a common endeavour on behalf of Saskatchewan people to 

attack the problem of poverty and work together in eliminating 

it. 

 

We’re not going to eliminate poverty if we engage in rhetorical 

political wars with one another. We will eventually eliminate 

poverty, I’d like to believe someday, if, Madam Member, we 

can join hands and work together and deal with some of the real 

problems that Saskatchewan people have and not engage in 

flights of rhetoric simply to score political points. 

 

So with those remarks I will certainly not be voting for the 

amendment and I certainly will support the amendment . . . the 

motion acknowledging the efforts that are being made here in 

Saskatchewan to eliminate child poverty. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am very 

pleased also to stand in support of the motion. Mr. Speaker, as a 

parent, as a teacher, as an elected representative, I am proud of 

our Premier. I am proud of our government on putting our 

children first. Our children are a priority, not only in words but 

in action. 

 

And to think that almost one Canadian child in five lives in 

poverty in one of the richest societies in world history is not 

acceptable. And our government has recognized this and we’ve 

made a commitment that we will improve on this. And we’ve 

taken it to the national agenda. It is a national disgrace that 

there are Canadian children living in poverty. 

 

We’ve taken two approaches to fighting child poverty. One is to 

take a lead in convincing the federal government to implement a 

national child benefit. Well the federal government now has 

agreed to this and this will be the first new national social 

program in 30 years, and that’s good, and the provinces have 

agreed to this — but they are waiting, waiting, waiting until 

July of 1998 to begin. That’s unconscionable; that’s not 

acceptable. How do you ask hungry children, people living in 

poverty, to wait, wait another 18 months. We’ve got words in 

our budget, but we have no money in our budget. 

 

I think we need to take a little bit of time to go back on some of 

the background. Saskatchewan has been working hard on a 

broad . . . on trying to put together a broadly based, 

income-tested children’s benefit to replace social assistance for 

children and to support low income working families. 

 

We worked with other provinces, we put a redesign in place, 

and when we do have this accepted right across Canada, as I 

said, the federal government says, well we like the idea but   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

we’re going to wait; we’ll give it words but no money. 

 

(1545) 

 

The objectives of a national child benefit are to help prevent 

and reduce the depth of child poverty. It’s to promote 

independence by ensuring that families are better off working 

than on welfare, and to reduce overlap and duplication between 

federal and provincial benefit programs. 

 

Now when the federal government put the words in their budget 

but didn’t put the money in their budget, did our provincial 

government say, well we’ll wait then too till July of 1998? No. 

No. We said no, we can work on this, we will adjust on this, 

and we will put funding in place now in this year’s budget. 

 

So we redefined our programs. We redefined the programs 

because we weren’t going to wait. Child poverty is a priority, 

should be a priority of not only New Democrats but also should 

be a priority of Liberals and even Tories. 

 

So we redefined it and we worked on it and we put in transition 

funding. We will have now a Saskatchewan child benefit which 

will provide enhanced benefits to low income families on a 

monthly per-child basis, and a Saskatchewan employment 

supplement which will provide benefits to low income families 

receiving employment or child maintenance support income. 

 

We are putting the money where the words are. We won’t wait. 

 

This new funding includes, in our budget, $3.8 million to 

enhance the Family Income Plan. What’s in the federal 

government’s budget? What do the feds have? They have a 

promise, and they have cuts to all the health care, social 

programs, and education programs right across this country. 

 

You know, and then we have money for the child care centre 

capital grants. Because it’s important for people to have child 

care spaces for their children. We put a million dollars in our 

budget — a million dollars. But what’s in the federal Liberal 

budget? Promises and cuts. 

 

We have one-time child nutrition and development projects, a 

half a million dollars in our provincial budget. What does the 

federal Liberals have? Zero. They have promises and cuts to 

programs. 

 

We have money in our budget for school supplies for social 

assistance families, a half a million dollars — action for 

children in poverty. What do we have in the federal budget? 

Promises. Cuts. Words, but no money. 

 

We have $200,000 for northern community development in our 

budget. Real money, new money — this is all new funding — 

to address child and family poverty. What does the federal 

Liberals have? They have zero again. They have promises — 

wait till 1998. No new money, no action. 

 

We have a commitment of a total of $6 million of new money, 

new transitional funding, in our budget. We have action. We 

also have new funding for northern housing initiatives of $3 

million. We have new money for national child support 

guidelines, $1.1 million. There’s new funding to support youth 

at risk, street youth, youth prostitution, to develop 

community-based outreach projects as a measure of helping 

children get off the street safely — $250,000 — a quarter of a 

million dollars. What’s in the federal budget? Nothing. Words, 

promises; no money — there’s cuts. 

 

We have a half a million dollars for restorative youth justice 

strategy — a half a million dollars for that — for the 

development of alternative measures for youth in conflict with 

the law. We have a half a million dollars for coordinated 

behaviour management initiatives to help services for youth 

with challenging behaviours. We have put money into our 

budget for action to help children at risk. 

 

We also have in our budget new funding for supporting 

vulnerable children. Proper nutrition, good health, are critical 

factors in childhood development. We have additional money of 

$.6 million for nutritional programs, new hepatitis A 

immunization program, and enhanced public education. This is 

all new money for children in poverty and to help address 

family poverty. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also know the very, very importance of 

early intervention. We are strengthening, putting more money 

into, early childhood development. There’s an additional $1.3 

million being put in for children and families through early 

childhood development initiatives — real, new money; 

$150,000 for early skills development program — help for 

young children, ages three to five years, with aggressive or 

antisocial behaviour. 

 

We’re putting $170,000 in for a successful mother support 

program; $120,000 of new funding for a fetal alcohol syndrome 

strategy; $60,000 for an early childhood intervention program; 

$160,000 for teen and young parent program; $150,000 for teen 

infant centres; and half a million dollars for support for child 

care workers, enhancement of their wages of a very valuable 

service for the people of Saskatchewan, for the children of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is new money. What has the federal Liberals done? What 

does their budget say? What did they say? They said some 

promises, and they had cuts. 

 

When we want to deal with child poverty, what I have gone 

over right now is a specific strategy right on child poverty and 

to help those families at risk. But we also have a larger strategy, 

because we all know — we all know that investing in children 

is investing in people, and our budget and our Speech from the 

Throne in this session has made a commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan as one of our top priorities is jobs. And the jobs, 

and good jobs for our people of Saskatchewan, will help the 

children and the families of this province. 

 

Now again if we look at our priorities and what we’ve done in 

this province and we compare it to what the Liberals say and 

what the Liberals do — well what they don’t do — I think . . . 

it’s just I’m very proud of the government. What we offer is 

hope, we offer vision, and we offer action — action, real action. 

  



880  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Jobs is a priority. And of course we would like to have a lower 

unemployment rate, but we do have the lowest unemployment 

rate right now right across Canada. What do we see at the 

federal level? A high unemployment rate, and their budget is 

still cutting jobs. 

 

We have a balanced budget and we’re paying down the debt 

because we don’t want to mortgage the future of our children in 

this province any longer. Because that’s what happened when 

the Tories were in power, and that’s the Liberal policies that we 

now see at the federal level. They’re mortgaging the future of 

our children in this country. They not only are still running 

deficits, the Liberal government financially, they are deficit of 

ideas. 

 

Our federal leader, who was here just recently in Saskatchewan, 

put forward a platform of hope, optimism, and future for the 

families of this country. The Liberals are now scrambling 

around in back rooms trying to figure out their platform yet. 

That kind of tells me this is a government that lacks ideas, lacks 

hope, lacks vision for the country. 

 

Our debt is reducing; the federal Liberal debt is increasing. 

 

Taxes. Taxes. In our provincial budget, we’ve been able to 

reduce taxes from 9 per cent to 7 per cent. But not only that, we 

have a narrower scope of taxation than any other province right 

across this country. And we also have acknowledged our 

children in our taxation. We don’t put taxes on children’s 

clothing. We don’t have taxes on home heating. We don’t have 

taxes on books, prescription medicine. 

 

Now what does the federal government say and what is the 

federal government and Liberals doing across this country? 

They’re expanding the tax base. Tax more, take more money 

from individual families so there’s less money for children — 

but more money for business, but less money for the families 

across this country. Expand the taxation base. That really helps 

to attack child poverty. 

 

Now also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting, another little 

piece of legislation that the federal Liberals are looking at — 

good Liberal policy — some tax credits for people that really 

need to have some tax exemption. This is if you donate your 

money to American charities. Very interesting concept. Or to 

support American education programs, universities. Then you 

can use it as a write-off, so you don’t have to pay tax here. 

 

Now that’s a good idea, to give a tax break for our Canadian 

taxpayers to put their money in American institutions and 

support American charities. That sounds like a good, good plan 

to help attack child poverty in this country. 

 

There’s been social programs, health . . . social programs, 

health, and education are a priority. And we have said that in 

our budget. That’s investing in children. Health, education, and 

social programs — all priorities for the young people of our 

province. 

 

What do we see in the federal Liberal policy? And actually our 

provincial Liberals too, they’re always supporting this. So cuts, 

$7 billion worth of cuts right across this country. Now this last 

budget they put a few million dollars back in, after they’ve cut 

billions of dollars. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Must be an election coming. 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Yes. And not only that, I mean we’ve had to 

back-fill every one of those dollars in this province, and we’re 

proud we have. And we’ve put additional money in because we 

believe in the strength of social programs, health, and education 

for our families and for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Another piece of legislation that I know 

Liberals like to support which is a drain — and all of this ties in 

with poverty because if these are your priorities then you don’t 

have priorities for social programs. You don’t have priorities 

for children at risk — the drug patent piece of legislation. 

That’s a really helpful way for us to spend our health care 

dollars; so that the drug companies can have unbelievable 

profits, and that we cannot then provide and not have enough 

money for the kind of health care services that should be right 

across this country. Trying to again rip apart . . . to have a 

two-tiered health system in this country. Try to destroy the idea 

of a national drug plan, which they say they support, but is it in 

their budget? Is it in their legislation? No, it’s not. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these parts are part of the 

picture of a government . . . of Liberal governments not, not 

caring about children and poverty — not setting it as a priority. 

 

I even want to look at transportation issues — and this might 

seem a little odd in this kind of a debate, but it’s not. Because 

the impact of the transportation, or the lack of a transportation 

policy across this country, affects our communities, especially 

in rural Saskatchewan. It affects us — $380 million, Crow rate, 

gone. Abandon the railways, and it has such an impact. It has an 

impact on every community and on our farmers. 

 

(1600) 

 

Who do they care about? Who does this Liberal government 

care about? They care about the railroads — deregulate, oh yes, 

they can get a bigger increase. Oh, when they can’t get the grain 

to port, who should pay? The farmers. The families of 

Saskatchewan should pay; not the railroads, oh no, no. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have put a child benefit plan together 

now, a child action plan now, and of course the Liberals have 

said wait till 1998. We have put together an agenda that’s 

bringing us into the 21st century by investing in people but 

investing in children. And it is one of our priorities — of our 

very top priorities. 

 

And all of the factors around it of a good, balanced government 

that knows how to balance a budget; knows how to reduce our 

debt; knows how to invest the money in the priorities of the 

people and the families of this province. That’s how you attack 

child poverty. You don’t just have words; you take action. And 

you make sure that you’re a good government, and that a   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

government that’s not mortgaging the future of our country, our 

families, and our children. 

 

We need a government that offers hope and optimism. And I 

believe in the motion that we’ve put forward here, is part of that 

hope and optimism for this province, for the children of 

Saskatchewan. We have to continue to work on poverty in all 

aspects of our governing. That is so very, very important. We 

all must pull together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, I know that we will be able to do 

this by working together with the communities across this 

province because in Saskatchewan we know how to work with 

cooperation, with compassion; we believe in working together. 

 

Many, many problems we still have to solve and work on, but 

we will work with the people of Saskatchewan. We have an 

action plan that we’re taking on now, and we must continue to 

pursue that so that one day, one day that we can say that we 

have solved this problem. And we will continue to work on that. 

And I support — support the motion. I do not support the 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to enter this 

debate, although I am saddened to say that I was offended last 

week when in this House, the Deputy Premier demeaned 

himself and his position by accusing my friend and colleague, 

the hon. member for Humboldt, of playing petty politics on the 

issue of child poverty and only being concerned with child 

poverty when an election was looming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I say that if there is any single member of this 

House who has shown a continuing commitment to youth 

issues, it is surely the member for Humboldt. If there is any 

member of this House who can say that her commitment to 

children is not something she simply drags out on a quadrennial 

basis for election time, it is surely my colleague from 

Humboldt. 

 

As for the provincial government, may I say in the words of a 

book which I believe the hon. member for Sutherland has some 

acquaintance with, “By your works shall ye know them.” And I 

respectfully submit that those words condemn our provincial 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been told so many times in this session 

that Saskatchewan leads the way. Saskatchewan is the general 

in the army in the fight against child poverty. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that is the case then I would 

assume that our record on child poverty and youth issues would 

be considerably better than other besotted provinces who don’t 

have the same enlightened government that we are blessed with. 

I would assume if that was the case, that our child poverty 

statistics would be so much better than the national average. I 

would assume, I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan’s child poverty rate would be far 

lower than those provinces that do not have an NDP 

government. Then and only then could we claim to be a beacon, 

a beacon, Mr. Speaker, for which other more backward 

provinces are striving to catch up. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I look over the statistics, I have to say 

that’s not, unfortunately, the story that the facts paint. Instead of 

us being in the vanguard, instead of us being the general leading 

the way in the fight against child poverty, what the statistics say 

is that we are camp followers, straggling somewhere in the rear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see on child poverty, the nation’s second 

highest level. We see considerably more child poverty in this 

province than in any other western province. Our level of tooth 

decay — the highest in western Canada among our children 

ever since the government cancelled the dental program. 

 

What is the commitment here, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well, we 

have been challenged all through this session by a government 

that wants to use this forum to fight the federal election, and we 

are told that we should be in there fighting the federal election 

in this Assembly. And then we’re even accused of maybe being 

ashamed of our federal counterparts if we don’t turn this into a 

federal election campaign on a daily basis. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not a question of pride or shame. 

It is our view, it is our view that the people of Canada and the 

people of Saskatchewan will soon have the opportunity to make 

a judgement on who will be the best government for this nation. 

And I believe that the voters of Saskatchewan and Canada are 

quite capable of making that judgement without us trying to 

interfere. I think we can go about our work, I think we can go 

about our work in this Assembly of working for the betterment 

of this province and its people. And the citizens will make their 

judgement, ultimately. 

 

Do they think that Jean Chrétien and Paul Martin and Ralph 

Goodale are better people to entrust with their affairs? Or do 

they think, no, we should shove them aside; that what we really 

need to clean up all the problems is we need Alexa McDonough 

and we need John Solomon, we need Svend Robinson and we 

need Chris Axworthy to run this nation. They will do a better 

job than Prime Minister Chrétien and Paul Martin and Ralph 

Goodale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I have enough confidence in my fellow citizens 

to think that they will be able to make a right judgement on 

these matters. And I think that I and my colleagues can go about 

doing our job for which we were elected, serving the people of 

Saskatchewan, without trying to turn this Assembly into a soap 

box to run a federal election campaign. 

 

And I believe too that we are saying that we are a beacon that 

other Canadians should follow. It just could be that other 

Canadians will look at the Saskatchewan statistic and ask 

themselves, hmm, is that really where we want to be; do we 

really want to run ahead to try and catch up to Saskatchewan so   



882  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

fast that we end up being at the back of the pack where they 

are? 

 

Well my friends, well my friends, my friends opposite, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are fond of saying, well what are your plans? 

You know, you’ve pointed out how Saskatchewan is bringing 

up the rear in their fight against child poverty, that the beacon is 

way back there. You know we’ve got a government here that’s 

trying to find the future by looking in the rear-view mirror. 

 

Okay, so what’s our plan? Well okay. My colleague, my 

esteemed colleague, the member for Humboldt, has come out 

with a plan to end the blight of child prostitution. We know that 

the worst form of prostitution, the most destructive form of 

prostitution is the street prostitution problem. We know that 

street prostitution so oftentimes involves girls and boys of 

extremely young age. 

 

Now my colleague has suggested and brought forward a Bill to 

try and address that problem. We’re still waiting for some word 

from the government as to whether or not they will accept that 

Bill. 

 

Now again, I say I’m not here as an apologist for Ottawa; I 

might say I’m also not here as an apologist for Alberta. But that 

reactionary right-wing government in Alberta, that backward 

reactionary government, they have taken these steps on child 

prostitution, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now why can’t our 

government, why can’t our government do the same? They’re 

saying they’re so much more progressive than the Alberta 

government, Well how is it that the Alberta government has 

moved on the issue of child prostitution and they have not? 

 

Well what are some other suggestions? Well again I have the 

honour to sit behind my colleague from Kelvington. And my 

colleague from Kelvington-Wadena has brought forward a Bill 

in this House to address the issue of fetal alcohol syndrome. 

 

Now I heard . . . I heard, yes I heard the hon. member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy say that they were going to put money 

into the fetal alcohol syndrome problem. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the suggestion of the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena made far more sense, and I’ll tell you why. 

The sad thing about fetal alcohol syndrome is there is no 

treatment, there is no cure, there is no counselling. Once it has 

happened, it has happened. The only way, the only way . . . 

tragically and unfortunately the only way to deal with the issue 

of fetal alcohol syndrome is to stop it at source. And my 

colleague from Kelvington-Wadena recognized that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fetal alcohol syndrome or course 

occurs during gestation, during pregnancy, and from what we 

know in fact in the early stages of pregnancy. Consequently 

spending money on children born with fetal alcohol syndrome 

unfortunately will not, will not reverse the damage done. The 

only way, the only way you can address it is to try and catch it 

before it happens through education of expectant mothers. 

There is no other way. 

 

So here are two suggestions. They maybe won’t turn the 

province upside down, but here are two suggestions, practical 

suggestions, suggestions that won’t cost fortunes but concrete, 

practical suggestions to try and deal with these pressing social 

problems — one on child prostitution, one on fetal alcohol 

syndrome. 

 

My friends opposite say, well what are the Liberals saying? 

Well this is what we’re saying. Why is it so difficult — why is 

it so difficult for them not to simply accept the intelligence of 

these practical Liberal proposals and put them into effect? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . well we’re coming up with a few 

million, we’re coming up with a few million for child poverty; 

isn’t that wonderful. The VLTs (video lottery terminal) took in 

100 million last year. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the reactionary, backward 

province of Alberta, since the introduction of VLTs, they have 

had two studies to ascertain what are the social impacts of the 

VLTs and who’s putting the money in them. 

 

We don’t know that about Saskatchewan. The reason we don’t 

know is because we haven’t done any studies. Now the 

reactionary Government of Alberta has had two studies. Our 

progressive government refuses to even look at where the VLT 

money is coming from. 

 

(1615) 

 

Is it possible that it is coming out of welfare cheques? Is it 

possible it is coming out of food budgets from poor families? Is 

it possible that it is in part responsible for child hunger in this 

province? 

 

I see them shaking their heads. Well then why don’t you do a 

study to find out? But you refuse to. Ralph Klein will do that 

study to find out where this money is coming from; you won’t. 

Do you prefer fact finding tours of Amsterdam to find out the 

effects of these policies? 

 

So now we have got to, we have got to do some studies on this, 

as I say. Alberta’s done two of them, Alberta’s done two of 

them. Why can’t we do a study on this to find out what the 

effects of the VLTs on poor families has been in this province? 

 

I would also like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in our 

attempts to help, we must always be cognizant of the necessity 

to try and empower and try and uplift as opposed to enforcing 

dependency. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the case of feeding programs, we 

agree here that it is terribly important, it’s terribly important 

that young children not be left hungry because of the 

shortcomings or perceived shortcomings of their parents. We 

understand that we cannot expect youngsters to be able to 

properly learn in school on hungry stomachs. 

 

But as we introduce feeding programs we must do so in such a 

way so as not to undermine the fundamental parental 

responsibility to feed their children. Our responsibility, our 

responsibility as government, is to aid parents to feed their 

children. And to the extent that we send out the message that it   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

will now become a governmental responsibility to feed children 

or a school responsibility to feed children rather than a parental 

responsibility, we are not helping the problem, we are making it 

worse. 

 

Now how do we have feeding programs that empower parents? 

How do we have feeding programs that will empower parents? I 

believe that we can assist without undermining, we can assist 

without reinforcing dependency. But I submit that in all of our 

efforts we must keep in mind always that we are not here to 

reinforce dependency . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now 

members opposite say, what is your program, what are your 

proposals? 

 

I’ve given two proposals of my colleagues. Well I’d be happy if 

the government would say that they will accept the hon. 

member’s Bill on fetal alcohol syndrome and I’m sure that we 

could come up with it immediately. Unfortunately, you know, 

she found last time it was a waste of time because the 

government just wasn’t prepared to listen to any of her 

practical, concrete suggestions. 

 

Now what about, what about the federal government? Well 

we’ve seen the child support guidelines that have been 

introduced which are to put in some consistency and 

standardization in child maintenance and payment by 

non-custodial spouses. I’m pleased to see that our Minister of 

Justice is adopting this federal initiative. That’s a step forward. 

That’s a reform. And I think that any time that our 

Saskatchewan officials pay attention to some of the progressive 

initiatives of Ottawa, they certainly are to be congratulated, and 

I do so. 

 

Now we have the child action plan — members opposite 

pointed out the first major, the first major social initiative in this 

nation in a generation. Now of course, of course friends 

opposite will tell me that actually Ottawa was definitely 

opposed to this, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Ottawa didn’t 

want to do anything for hungry children. They were dragged. 

They were dragged kicking and screaming into this initiative by 

the most progressive province on child issues. And that most 

progressive province was guess where in the pack? Was it 

number one out of ten on child issues, or was it number two out 

of ten, or three? Well, Mr. Speaker, this progressive 

Saskatchewan of ours was number nine out of ten. But 

notwithstanding the fact that we’re well back in the rear, it was 

Saskatchewan, friends opposite will tell me, that forced Ottawa 

to come up with the child action plan. 

 

And the hon. member opposite, that’s incredible, it’s nonsense 

to claim that Ottawa came up with the child action plan because 

of agitation from Saskatchewan. I agree with him, what an 

incredible, what a bizarre statement to make. And I think that 

the people of Canada say when they make their judgement in 

the federal campaign, they will be able to make their own 

judgement on that; they don’t need my say so on that. 

 

Well members opposite have also pointed out that the full 

effects of the child action plan won’t be felt until next year, 

when nearly a billion dollars will be spent by our federal 

government for poor children. However this year, this year 

fortunately, contrary to what some members opposite have led 

us to think, this year $195 million to enrich the child 

supplement for working income families . . . for low income 

families. So as of July . . . so Canada Day 1997 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Members of course 

have an opportunity to engage in this debate. A number of 

members of the legislature have already, a number have not, 

and I know that are anxious to participate. I know those 

members are anxious to participate in this debate, and I can 

assure you that you will be given an opportunity. In the 

meantime let us do the courtesy to the member from North 

Battleford of listening to his remarks. Order. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thank the 

Deputy Speaker for your intervention, but I accept when you 

tell the pure, unvarnished truth, you are bound to hit some 

sensitive nerves somewhere, so, you know, I accept that. And 

obviously that’s the case here, because when I talk about the 

child benefit plan, $195 million from Ottawa this year; 850 

million next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada Day — Canada Day, 1997, I predict, will 

be a day of celebration throughout our country for many 

reasons. This Canada Day will dawn bright and warm and 

sunny. It will have the child benefit plan in place — the first 

social program in this nation in a generation. It will see the 

government of Jean Chrétien and Paul Martin and Ralph 

Goodale safely re-elected so we know we have another four 

years of good government ahead of us, and we will indeed have 

cause to celebrate. 

 

So the interim plan, yes, is only going to be 195 million. But 

that’s only a down payment on what the federal government is 

giving. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, though of course, as my 

colleague from Humboldt has pointed out, the federal 

government will be paying for all poor children, all poor 

families. And in the case of the working poor, they will actually 

get that money. In the case of the poor who are on social 

assistance, that will be clawed back by the provincial 

government. That’s how they’re showing their commitment to 

poor families. 

 

So they’re showing their commitment to families on welfare by 

saying they’ll just claw back that money from Ottawa, which 

means that our welfare costs in Saskatchewan will fall because 

the welfare that doesn’t go into the VLT machines will go into 

Regina’s pocket because they will drop the welfare payments to 

poor families. 

 

So this will be good news for the provincial treasury. How 

much of that money will get back into youth and child programs 

is something that we will be watching. Certainly I know my 

colleague from Humboldt will be watching very carefully and 

closely to see that some of this money makes its way back into 

services for our young people. 

 

I said it a few minutes ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we 

attempt to help the least privileged in society, we must ensure 

that our help empowers them and does not reinforce 

dependency. In that regard we have to always keep in mind that   



884  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

the best strategy is a good job for mom and dad. The best way 

to feed a hungry child is to provide for the parents. 

 

I was once at a Save the Children banquet where the president 

of Canada Save the Children made the comment that we do not 

consider it as our job to feed children. It is the parents’ job. It is 

our job to provide parents with the tools whereby they can feed 

their own children. 

 

Now he was saying that from the perspective of a volunteer 

agency, but surely it is equally true of government. 

 

Now I would say that as well as it being our role as government 

to see that parents have the jobs and the income and the stability 

to provide for their children, it is also our job in government to 

bequeath a debt-free Canada to them. 

 

Now friends opposite tell us that the federal government is 

sinister and evil and perverted because they have tried to bring 

down the deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The fact that our present federal government 

came in with a $42 billion a year deficit and of course a debt of 

half a trillion dollars — now I believe 600 billion — and if we 

are looking at the youth of Canada and the youth of 

Saskatchewan, I would submit that one of the best and the most 

important things we can do for them is to make sure that when 

this is their country, when we have passed from the scene, that 

they do not inherit a crushing debt load. 

 

And so to suggest, as Alexa McDonough suggests, that we can 

balloon the national debt in order to help children is perverted 

logic. How do you help children by guaranteeing an indebted 

future for them? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that just simply doesn’t work. You help 

children by ensuring that when they enter the workforce, they 

get this country debt-free. And that is what our government is 

trying to do. And Alexa McDonough’s recipe for bequeathing 

our children a country a trillion dollars in debt is no help at all. 

 

Now I’ve told you some of the initiatives of Liberal members of 

the legislature, some of the initiatives of the federal 

government, and we know that there’s the issue of the curfew 

too that is coming about in many Saskatchewan municipalities. 

 

Many Saskatchewan municipalities are concerned about 

curfews, which again points up the problem of young children 

who don’t seem to be getting the guidance and the home 

stability that they need. 

 

Now in the United States where curfews have been brought in, 

they have required safe houses. And I know this is something 

again that my colleague from Humboldt has spoken of. One of 

the problems we have is that when young tykes are picked up 

off the street at 2 in the morning, where do you take them? And 

we tragically know that when young tykes are on the street at 

all hours of the night, there may or may not be a family at home 

in a proper state to receive them. That’s why they’re on the 

street in the first place of course. 

 

(1630) 

 

So simply picking up these children and taking them home 

unfortunately is not an option. I would hope that all members of 

the House would agree that taking them down to the cells of the 

police detachment is not an option for any of us. And so we 

have to look at the issue of safe houses. And again it is the 

member for Humboldt who has mentioned these issues. And 

contrary to what the Deputy Premier has suggested, she has 

been concerned about these issues and has raised these issues 

whether or not we’re in the middle of an election campaign. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on about some of 

the issues of child poverty in this province but I do have some 

sympathy for my friends opposite. But I do think though that 

there are special issues in regards to child poverty as it relates to 

the North. And I think my friend and colleague from Athabasca 

is in a better position than I am to address the House on those 

issues. 

 

The one thing I will say, we know in the North that we have by 

far the highest provincial birth rate, is in northern 

Saskatchewan, and so the issues are even more crucial there. 

The poverty rates are higher, the birth rate is higher, and so 

whatever social problems we see in the South in our cities are 

that much amplified when we go to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But as I say, I think that my friend and colleague from 

Athabasca is in a better position to describe these difficulties to 

us than I am, and I will now be seated and defer to him. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

know I, like other members on this side of the House, have 

listened to the opposition members speaking and especially to 

the member from Kelvington-Wadena and from Humboldt who 

have referred to days past when our Premier talked about 

eliminating child poverty here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that an absolutely incredulous statement. 

Had the federal Liberals not cut hundreds of millions of dollars 

in transfer payments, our government would surely have been 

much better positioned to eliminate child poverty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  When our Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

made the commitment to eliminate child poverty, I believe that 

he surely also believed that the federal Liberal government 

would honour their financial commitment. 

 

I listened also to the member from Battleford who said that . . . 

referred to the money from Ottawa, the 680 million that was 

going to be in place by this July 1 — July 1, 1997. Now I don’t 

know how much influence that member has on the federal 

Liberals — I wish that he would exert that in other areas as well 

— but it’s my understanding when I listened to the federal   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that money wasn’t coming 

until July 1, 1998. And I think that is what the problem has 

been. 

 

This 680 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is as well — and I point 

out to listeners — is not solely for the province of 

Saskatchewan. This is for the entire country, all of Canada, and 

I think it is woefully inadequate. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the member from Battleford also alluded to 

the fact that the Saskatchewan child benefit proposal was not 

. . . that is being purported now by the federal Liberals was not 

an idea of Saskatchewan’s. Well I don’t know how long he’s 

. . . I know he hasn’t been involved in politics very long, but 

had he been around in 1994 and 1995, his federal colleague, the 

federal Liberal minister, Minister Axworthy, at that time when 

he was minister responsible, went around the country talking 

about Saskatchewan’s child benefit proposal and how 

wonderful it was. So I would think it logical that they have 

developed the policy that they now have from the Saskatchewan 

benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to support the motion made by the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley: 

 

That this Assembly applaud the government’s commitment 

to reducing child poverty, including the national leadership 

shown by our Premier on the development of a national 

child benefit, and the recent doubling of funding for 

Saskatchewan’s award-winning action plan for children. 

 

And I’ll surely be voting against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, child and family poverty is one 

of the greatest social challenges facing Canadians today. The 

way in which we address this issue will test our commitment to 

the economic and social future of this country. 

 

Judith Maxwell has observed that the economic and the social 

are interdependent. Social capital is the foundation of economic 

success, but today fewer and fewer dollars that we spend as a 

nation go towards social programs. In fact the social safety net 

which once defined us as Canadians has now been virtually 

totally eroded. 

 

The Liberal government in Ottawa has allowed social 

programing to slip to the bottom of their priority scale. Its cuts 

to these programs have had a serious impact on the services all 

across the country. It’s a damning indictment, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of our nation, that we live in one of the wealthiest 

countries in the world and yet we allow so many to go hungry 

and without. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had family members that have spent years of 

working in underdeveloped countries in South Africa and the 

most difficulty they’ve had in coming back to Canada was the 

transition back into this country. When they came back to 

Canada my sister told me often that the difficulty she had was 

seeing around her a country that was so wealthy and yet seeing 

so many families and so many children that were living in 

poverty. And it was something that she and her husband at that 

time just couldn’t adjust to. And in fact they even went through 

a fair bit of counselling to adapt back to this way of life again. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we all need to be 

concerned about because it has implications for all aspects of 

society and for future generations. 

 

Studies show that poverty contributes to numerous lifelong 

disadvantages such as poor education and life skills, poor 

health, poor employment prospects, and family problems. This 

can have a significant financial impact on society as a whole. 

Poor health and education and a disconnection from society can 

result in dependence on health and social programs and 

involvement with the justice system. Each one of us will be able 

to attest to evidence of that within our own communities. And 

this dependence can become generational. 

 

Poverty is a complex issue and an issue that many governments 

and provinces are afraid to tackle. But I am pleased to say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan is not one of those 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has taken a leadership stand 

on the issue of child and family poverty. Three years ago, in 

partnership with communities across this province, we 

developed Saskatchewan’s action plan for children. The action 

plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an innovative concept. It not only 

partners community groups, agencies, individuals and 

governments, it also links activities and initiatives between 

Saskatchewan’s human services departments. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ministers responsible for the 

Department of Social Services, Education, Health, Justice, 

Municipal Government, and the Women’s and Metis Affairs 

secretariats oversee the action plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of the action plan, we have seen 

developments such as the children’s council made up of 

volunteer representative agencies and individuals; the 

Children’s Advocate; a community schools program; a 

community-based youth justice initiative; an integrated school 

link services strategy; a recreation strategy for youth at risk; 

housing initiatives; and much more. 

 

The action plan has been recognized nationally for the work it is 

doing for children. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, its most important 

recognition will come when these children and youth are our 

community leaders. 

 

Funding for the action plan has increased each year over the last 

three years. Today nearly 25 million has been targeted to 

programs and services for children under the plan. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t all we’re doing to address 

poverty in Saskatchewan and across Canada. Our Premier has 

taken a leadership role in raising the issue of family and child 

poverty to the national stage and has been instrumental in the 

development of the national child benefit. 

  



886  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  While the federal government has said that 

the national child benefit will come into effect in July of 1998, 

we’re not waiting. We’re going to take immediate action, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  In the recent provincial government . . . in the 

recent provincial budget, I should say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

announced $6 million to assist families to support children and 

to help communities develop programs and services which 

enable their citizens to remain independent. These initiatives 

will build on the programs and services we have and ensure a 

smooth transition into the national child benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you how pleased I am that 

Saskatchewan has taken such an important and strong stand on 

this issue. What we are doing in partnership with the people of 

this province is already having a significant impact on 

numerous individuals and communities. And this impact will 

increase over time. 

 

But we can’t be satisfied with this alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There is still so much that we must do to adequately address 

this issue if Canada as we know it is to exist in the next 

generation. In many ways, the nation’s children are the heart; 

they are the conscience; they are the future of Canada. It is 

because of them that we cannot let ourselves be lulled into 

apathy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask my Liberal colleagues across the 

floor to work with us on this very important initiative. And I 

urge them to call on their federal cousins to stop the continued 

erosion of Canada’s social safety net. No Canadian can be 

proud of the rate at which children are now growing up in 

poverty. 

 

Gro Harlem Brundtland, the former prime minister of Norway, 

said, “Poverty is still the gravest insult to human dignity. 

Poverty is the scar on humanity’s face.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will wholeheartedly 

support the motion made by the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley and I’ll be voting against the amendment. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. First of 

all, I am pleased to enter into this debate and second the 

amendment by the . . . to the motion put forward by the member 

from Humboldt. 

 

And I just want to point out, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that the fact 

that the member from Humboldt, throughout my involvement 

with her and my experience with her in this Assembly and in 

other lives, has shown to me to be a very compassionate and 

kind and caring individual. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  There are many days, many, many days in 

which we sit and ponder the merits of living in Saskatchewan. 

And there’re many, many other days when we believe that 

we’ve begun to have a breakthrough. She comes along and she 

explains to us what exactly a breakthrough is when we have a 

number of other serious problems and other serious social 

injustices happening in Saskatchewan every day of the week 

and every day of the year. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I think it’s very important that we 

understand that the member from Humboldt, his intentions are 

pure . . . her intentions are great, and certainly her commitment 

to social justice in Saskatchewan cannot be matched by 

anybody in this province. 

 

So continuing on with some of the comments that I have. I think 

it’s very, very important that we as legislators in this Assembly 

rise above the banter when we talk about social programs, we 

talk about poverty, and we talk about all the problems of 

Saskatchewan. We must rise above the silliness of some of 

these political games and the politics associated with this issue. 

 

My Lord, Mr. Speaker, there are problems now. This is not a 

political debate — this is really about life. And throughout time, 

as we speak about some of the issues, we’re not here to debate 

whether the provincial government match the federal 

government or whether our federal cousins are indeed poor 

managers of our economy. We are now debating the fact, where 

are we going to go from here as a province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  We are not federal Liberal representatives 

across the floor. They shouldn’t be federal New Democrats 

across the floor. This is the province of Saskatchewan — this is 

the province of Saskatchewan. These problems are ours, these 

problems deserve our attention, and these problems do not 

deserve banter, silliness, and silly politics. There’s no way that 

we should ever, ever get to this level of discussion and this level 

of exchange. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no time in dealing with this 

problem. Political life is short — it is really short. And in 

general, life is too short to politicize the whole process of 

dealing with poverty rates. 

 

As Liberals, we extended a hand across the floor to the New 

Democrats. We’ve given them ideas. And yet again the 

problems come across saying, well hold it here —this problem 

here with poverty and with children, well that’s your federal 

Liberal cousins. What’s the point? What’s the point here? 

What’s the whole point here? The whole point is, while . . . 

because we’re not doing anything about it, we’ll blame 

somebody else. Is that the point? Well there is no point in that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a great problem in northern   



April 15, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

Saskatchewan. When I travel in northern Saskatchewan 

communities, as many members from across the floor may 

travel in inner-city communities or may travel in rural 

Saskatchewan, you can see firsthand, especially in northern 

Saskatchewan, some of the devastation that’s happening when 

we refuse to depoliticize the process of social justice. That is 

the problem. 

 

We’re not here about power and control. We’re not here to 

debate whether it’s a federal or provincial responsibility. We’re 

here today to make a difference to the many people in 

Saskatchewan. Not in Ottawa, but in Saskatchewan. This is 

where we govern, this is where we live, and this is where we 

must drive that change — that change for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan residents. And many, many of those 

Saskatchewan residents include families and include children. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talk about a lot of ideas here. A lot of 

ideas. And constantly we always try and strive, how can we best 

deliver these ideas? And I can say with a lot of pride, from 

some of the families and some of the people I’ve seen in 

northern Saskatchewan, that there is a lot of effort being made 

by people in my communities to become better parents. There 

are many of them that are trying to build a better life for their 

own children. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll talk about a lesson that I’ve 

learned from my own father, who’s raised a great number of 

kids, some of them successful, some of them not. But all 

through his life he’s always told us as we go along: I’m 

working for you and when you get to be my age you must work 

for your children. And a lot of us didn’t understand what he 

meant by that, but to this day we begin to understand. And as a 

legislator, I urge members from all parties — the Tories, 

Independent, the Liberals, and the NDP — that we must work 

together for the children. We have no choice. Whether we’re 

right or wrong or whether we make a good speech or a better 

point than one another, that’s not the point here. The point is 

not well taken by the people living in poverty. They say, here 

we have politicians once again playing a game. Here we have a 

debate of who’s worse for the people that are living in poverty. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re the problem, we’re at fault 

here, because we refuse to rise above the silliness; we refuse to 

rise above the politics. We have to begin to understand that 

poverty is not a political issue. Poverty is about life, and that’s 

the important thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talk about the whole idea of speaking of poverty. 

And many people in this room sometimes romance the notion 

that we understand poverty — we don’t and we shouldn’t 

pretend to be. We shouldn’t pretend to understand poverty, 

because many people in this room don’t understand poverty. 

We see it, we see it in the little kids running around in the cities, 

we see it in our backyards some days, we see it in the crime 

that’s happening throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and 

yet as long as it’s out of sight in this building it should be out of 

mind. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no way that it’s out of my 

mind, and I know it’s not out of Arlene . . . the member from 

Humboldt’s mind and certainly the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. We deal with this stuff almost every day, 

and we deal with problems with Social Services and problems 

with housing and problems with social injustice in general. 

 

I guess one of the things you want to speak about today and 

certainly I want to talk about it, is in essence of what we feel is 

important to Saskatchewan. And I am reading from an article in 

the Star-Phoenix dated today where we talk about . . . it says, 

“Crown corporations post record operating profits.” — record 

operating profits. And we have SaskPower, 139.2 million; 

SaskTel, 84 million; SaskEnergy, 73.3 million; Saferco, 31.2 

million; SGI CANADA, 21.6 million; and the list goes on and 

on. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t the point of owning Crown 

corporations designed so we’re able to provide benefits to 

Saskatchewan people? Would not a truly socialist government 

take the profit to some of these organizations that they own to 

develop a really solid community development model in which 

we can begin to address economic and social injustices 

happening to any community, no matter how small, how large, 

how prosperous, or how poor. We should be one for all and all 

for one. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see evidence of that. 

 

Instead, we get up and we stand here and we talk about, well 

who’s worse — your federal cousins. But we have not once 

mentioned their federal cousins, because this is not a 

federal/provincial issue. This is a provincial issue which we 

make responsibilities and the federal government does their 

contributions. The decisions that we make here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are provincial decisions, and it’s time we started 

owning up to that responsibility. The Saskatchewan government 

will do their work when it comes to revamping and supporting 

our policies in reference to the poverty and the problem we 

have with many families in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now when you walk throughout your constituency, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, or any of the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) walk through their constituency, when you walk to a 

young child that’s in trouble with the law or a young child that 

may be out playing all day with nothing, no food in their 

stomach, what do you think? What do you think? 

 

Do you think that this child’s going to grow up to be a 

successful person? Do you think that this person is going to be a 

contributing member to our society? Well the answer obviously 

is no. That person will not be a contributing member to society 

because they will not contribute to a society that has not 

contributed back to them. It’s just common sense, no politics. 

 

So in Saskatchewan again, you go back to the same old saying, 

is we reap what we sow. If we do not begin to address some of 

these problems for some of these children, then we will reap 

what we sow. And as time goes on and on . . . And we’re all not 

perfect parents. I’ll admit that openly that I’m not a perfect 

parent. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can almost guarantee you 

that if we do not begin to address these problems of social 

development, of poverty, then 10, 15, 20 years from now, we’ll 

continue to care for these people, but it’ll not be through   



888  Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1997 

welfare, it’ll be through the jails. It’ll be through the prison 

system. 

 

So my point is, always remember when it comes to the issue of 

poverty, when it comes to the issue of children and families, the 

notion that every government should take is we reap what we 

sow. And if we’re going to sow politics on this issue, you’re 

going to end up with no results. 

 

So I urge the members across not to get up and try and chastise 

one member of our caucus for expressing her opinion. We have 

a freedom of speech in this Assembly. We can present our 

views. We have that right to do. We don’t have to necessarily 

agree with their views, but we don’t get up and chastise them 

for their views. So all of a sudden we’re being chastised that we 

believe in certain ideas when it comes to social justice and 

poverty and children. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very important we begin to 

look at our role, and once again we talk about ideas. You 

Liberals are always ranting and raving about all kinds of ideas; 

well let’s hear them. Well okay, I’ll tell you about them. I’ll tell 

you about these ideas. 

 

Well first of all in northern Saskatchewan, let’s get rid of some 

of the disincentives associated with living in northern 

Saskatchewan. Did you know that if you’re a working couple 

living in a social housing program, that if you got a job and got 

off welfare and your wife got a job and got off welfare, started 

instilling pride and a work ethic with their young children, all of 

a sudden the government comes along and says, oh, hold it, 

because you’re both working, we’re going to charge you 30 per 

cent of your gross income. And then we’re going to also up 

your power rates and up your SaskTel rates and up every rate 

that you can find. 

 

And all of a sudden that couple says, well what the heck’s the 

use? Why should we begin to work? Every time we try and 

build ourselves up we get knocked down. So what’s the issue 

here — are we addressing poverty or are we addressing control 

over people? 

 

And again this is not about politics — this is about life. And if 

you want to make a difference, a difference to the people of 

northern Saskatchewan, then what you do is you don’t say, well 

we have these grand ideas. You use ideas like this idea I hold in 

my hand, an idea that came from them. Let the people make the 

difference in their own life. Don’t use politics. Don’t come 

along and say, well your federal cousins . . . That’s demeaning. 

That’s insulting the intelligence of every voter our there. 

 

Why is it that we haven’t had a good turnout in voter elections, 

the last elections? Two thirds of the people voted, one-third 

stayed home. It’s because we have come to a point where we 

haven’t got any innovative and exciting government. And when 

you lack excitement and innovation, then this is where you 

begin to lose people’s support and people’s participation. This 

is very apparent, and this is the same attitude we should take 

when it comes to poverty. 

 

And when I hear members across the floor yelling, oh you 

Liberals, you Liberals are so bad, well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

was this Liberal caucus that contributed well over $41,000 back 

from our personal pockets to the Saskatchewan people as a 

result of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) being 

overpaid as was the media’s interpretation. 

 

Did we hold that back? Did we hold that back? No. We paid it. 

Every one of us paid $4,100 back to the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that money would be used, as we all say, for 

everybody. And was it paid? Eleven members of this Liberal 

caucus paid it back, and I want to commend them for that and 

they should be recognized for that. And enough said. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very important that we . . . 

There’s a lot more issues we want to talk about. I never spoke 

about my idea, but I know the community development model 

is a model we have to look at. A model in which the people are 

empowered to make decisions affecting families, and in 

certainly addressing the poverty issue. If we empower them, 

they will come up with their own ideas. We can simply support 

them. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you and I now adjourn . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I now will have my seat. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know 

the member would like to go on for ever, but the grass will be 

green — very, very green — if we let him go on. So I think it’s 

time we move that this debate do now adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 859 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 859 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 859 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Twinning of the Yellowhead 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 859 

 Horizontal Drilling Activity 

  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 859 

 Leader of the Opposition’s Birthday 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

 Record Oil and Gas Land Sales 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

 Good News on the Rafferty and Alameda Dams 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 860 

 New Pelleting Plant 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 

 Memorial Curling Bonspiel 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

 Broomball Teams in Odessa 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskTel’s Performance 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 862 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 862 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 

 SaskPower’s Performance 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 864 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 864 

 SaskEnergy’s Performance 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 866 

 Gaming Revenue Sharing 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 866 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 866 

 Domestic Abuse Policies 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 867 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

MOTIONS 

 Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 867 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Reducing Child Poverty 

  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 869 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 870 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 878 



 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 881 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 886 

  Upshall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 888 

 

 


