



















































Hansard: May 21, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1897 

 May 21, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise today to present petitions on behalf of residents 

in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

some responsibility for the ill effects of its gambling 

expansion policy, and immediately commission an 

independent study to review the social impact that its 

gambling policy has had on our province and the people 

who live here. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition today are from the 

city of Melville. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I’d like to present a 

number of petitions from injured workers in Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

amend The Workers’ Compensation Act so as to allow 

injured workers to bring legal action against health care 

professionals in the event of alleged negligence or other 

misconduct by health care professionals in the treatment of 

injuries covered by The Workers’ Compensation Act. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Hudson Bay. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

also like to present a petition to do with the problem of youth 

crime. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from the town of 

Kamsack. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway No. 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road, including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, Pinehouse, and an access 

road to Garson Lake. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners humbly will ever 

pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed this 

petition are from Ile-a-la-Crosse, they’re from Saskatoon, 

they’re from Tisdale, and they’re from Green Lake. And I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned about the 

unjustifiably high levels of farm input costs. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to stop 

contributing to rising farm input costs and begin using its 

influence to hold farm input manufacturers accountable for 

their decisions. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are from communities of Crane Valley, Chaplin, the Moose Jaw 

district, Gravelbourg, Regina district, Ponteix, just to name a 

few. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions on behalf of people in Saskatchewan 

that were affected by big game damage. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take controlled 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 

are from the community of Oxbow. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

as well this afternoon. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to take whatever action 

necessary to ban stripping in establishments where alcohol 

is sold; including the appealing the recent court decision  



1898  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

striking down the existing law banning stripping and 

invoking the notwithstanding clause of the constitution to 

enact legislation banning stripping in establishments where 

alcohol is served. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from all areas of 

Saskatchewan, numbering into the hundreds of people that are 

concerned about this issue, and I’m pleased today to present 

them on their behalf. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 

petitions also from the people of Saskatchewan. The petition 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to force 

hunters to pay the entire cost of big game damage in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and instead once again offer 

big game damage coverage through the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Lipton, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Wolseley, Regina, Saskatoon, Balcarres, Melville, 

Churchbridge, Lintlaw, Yorkton, Caron, Lebret, Springside — 

across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have a petition I wish to present to the Assembly as 

well, and this petition is addressing the problems that have 

arisen as a result of changes to The Labour Standards Act. And 

I would like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to recognize the fiscal reality 

faced by Saskatchewan people and immediately follow the 

lead of other provinces and make an exemption under The 

Labour Standards Act for Saskatchewan parents and 

seniors so families and care-givers together can decide 

what is best for that individual family and not have 

additional costs imposed on that agreement by government. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a number of 

individuals from the Weyburn and surrounding area, as well as 

individuals from Oxbow and Glen Ewen. I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 

present a number of petitions. And I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the municipal 

revenue-sharing reduction and commit to stable revenue 

sharing for municipalities in order to protect the interests 

of property taxpayers. 

 

And these petitions come from Turtleford, from Mervin, from 

Livelong, from Edam, from Eastend, from Moose Jaw, from all 

over Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to do the following: 

 

To recommend to the provincial government that it keep 

the Big River Forest Nursery in operation and implement a 

buy-Saskatchewan seedling policy; 

 

Petitioning the Assembly to develop a program to 

compensate people who are affected by the government’s 

failure to properly inform parents and babysitters of 

changes to the labour standards regulations; 

 

To establish a task force to aid the fight against youth 

crime; 

 

To enact legislation banning all striping in establishments 

where alcohol is served; and 

 

To cause the government to develop a plan that will 

address the housing needs of northern residents. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 

through you I’d like to introduce a number of guests, some very 

important people from way on the other side of the province, 

and we’re talking the far northern part of Saskatchewan. And I 

know it’s quite a journey from Ile-a-la-Crosse, which is eight 

hours away in from Stony Rapids. You can almost guarantee 

it’s quite a trip from that distance away. 

 

However, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery we have a number of 

students from grades 4 to 8; I believe there are 11 students. And 

they’re here with their teacher, Renee Palmer. And Renee, of 

course, put a lot of effort in bringing her students out here and 

that effort most certainly appreciated. As well, they’re 

accompanied by a number of chaperons and a guest. Chaperons, 

Suzanna Waldner and Rick Thibault, and of course, Otto Fietz 

is also with them today. 

 

So I’d like to ask my colleagues in the legislature to make a 

special welcome for a group of guests that come a long ways to 

view the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members in the 

Assembly, 24 students from grade 4 and 5 that are students at 

St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in my constituency. They’re 

seated in the west gallery and they’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Yvonne Reding, and chaperons, Brenda Betz, Murray  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

Ross, Rita Werapitiya — I hope that’s right, Rita — Shirley 

Eger, and Janet Francoeur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have come to see the proceedings in the 

gallery for awhile, go on a tour, and I’ll be meeting with them 

later to answer any questions they may have. So I’m sure on 

this, our last day, we’ll want to impress the students with our 

behaviour during question period. I ask all members to give 

them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to have guests to introduce. And I think it’s a particular 

pleasure today to introduce, seated in your gallery, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, guests from Mandan, North Dakota — people who are 

visiting us, our American neighbours to the south. 

 

We have with us today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 11 students from 

grades 7 to 9. And they are here, as I said, from Mandan, North 

Dakota, from the Immanuel Christian School. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Linda and Jerry 

Scheitel. And I know that they will enjoy spending some time 

here in the chamber, and after that they look forward to a tour 

of this fine building. 

 

So please join me in extending a warm welcome to our 

American neighbours. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to 

introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 22 

students from Athabasca School who are sitting in your gallery, 

along with their teacher, Mrs. Joann Freisen. 

 

And they’re here to learn more about how our system works, 

and then have a chance to see this building which is located not 

very far from their school. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Bond Rating Increased from BBB High to A Low 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today 

to bring some breaking good news about Saskatchewan’s 

financial turnaround. 

 

We’ve been to the bank, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about the 

mortgage, and we’ve brought the percentages down on the 

payments on the mortgage. 

 

The Dominion Bond Rating Service upgraded the provincial 

credit rating to A low from BBB high. Saskatchewan’s credit is 

now ranked in the A bracket by all four major North American 

credit rating agencies — independent proof again that 

Saskatchewan is on the right track. 

Mr. Speaker, in making its announcement, the DBRS 

(Dominion Bond Rating Service) cited the provincial strong 

economy, economic performance, and sustainable fiscal 

program, and the falling provincial debt. But the credit today 

truly belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  It is their hard work and their dedication 

that makes this possible. Because of this their children are 

facing a brighter future — a future not weighted down by the 

millstone of debt. Mr. Speaker, that’s what gives Saskatchewan 

people hope and optimism. 

 

In March we brought down a budget that delivered the benefits 

of good financial management — investing in our social 

programs, cutting taxes, and paying down the debt. And today a 

budget well received by the financial community as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, thank you to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pothole Patroller Invitation to the Minister 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Over the 

last few months we’ve impressed upon the Minister of 

Highways just how worried people are about the state of our 

highways. People remain concerned despite this government’s 

promised highway strategy. As people travel across the 

province on their summer holidays, they’ll be patrolling our 

highways and locating countless potholes. Hopefully your NDP 

(New Democratic Party) candidates’ “bump” and “danger” will 

be there to warn those who aren’t driving our highways just for 

the exhilarating off-road experience. 

 

While this legislature might be done, school still won’t be out 

for the summer for a few weeks, and I have an invitation from 

one of our pothole patrollers I’d like to extend to the minister. 

A bus driver who counted 207 potholes on a 40-kilometre 

stretch between Kayville and Avonlea says, and I quote: “I 

drive this four times a day. I welcome you to come ride the bus 

with me someday.” After question period I’d like to give the 

minister the name and phone number of this person and 

encourage him to come for that ride. 

 

In closing, while the government might miss the rough ride of a 

legislative session, due to the lack of priority they place on our 

highways they’ll at least have plenty of rough rides facing them 

anywhere they drive on Saskatchewan’s highways this summer. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Youth Job Record 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Another 

day, another favourable article in the press. Today written by 

Bruce Johnstone is an article which says that Saskatchewan 

leads the nation in the “good youth job record.” Saskatchewan,  



1900  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

the story says, “ranks No. 1 in the country in employment 

conditions for people aged 15 to 24.” Not only that, this is the 

second year in a row that we are the leader. 

 

As the article says, one reason our youth employment record 

looks so good is because Ontario’s and Quebec’s numbers are 

so low. Also by comparison, Johnstone notes that the Tory 

record in the ’80s was also very poor. 

 

Where are the children, we hear our opposition cry. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the children in Saskatchewan are working — working 

in Saskatchewan. Roger Sauve, noted statistician and 

demographer, says it’s so and wants our young people to 

understand this is true through the release of his recent report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of our young people and we’re 

extremely proud that they’re now working, and working in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pothole Alert 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Over the 

last couple of months I’ve received pothole reports from all 

across Thunder Creek. Today I’ll be sending the Minister of 

Highways a pile of pothole reports from my constituents. 

 

According to Thunder Creek pothole patrollers, the plentiful 

pothole prize goes to Highway No. 334 from Corinne to 

Avonlea. Combined with Highway No. 339 from Briercrest, 

this highway provides suspension-shattering access to tourist 

sites like the Claybank brick plant and Long Creek golf course. 

If you can’t make many holes on the golf course, rest assured 

you’ll hit more than enough on the way there. 

 

The second most riddled road, according to patrollers, is 

Highway No. 363, the bulk of which is down at 52 of 128 on 

the government’s priority list of repairs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my sincere hope that the minister will 

read these pothole patroller reports and take action. If he 

doesn’t, one of our patrollers offers this final solution, and I 

quote: 

 

Saskatchewan’s highway conditions show government’s 

lack of ambitions. 

Don’t get out the tar — much better by far, dumping 

negligent politicians. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Starting tomorrow and carrying on through Saturday, 

film buffs from all over North America will be treated to the 

best available short films and videos. 

 

The 50th annual Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival is 

ready for launching, which is the oldest film festival anywhere 

on the continent. 

 

For this festival, a national jury reviewed more than 400 

submissions and made 131 nominations in 28 categories. Many 

of those nominees are from Saskatchewan, which is further 

evidence that the film industry in Saskatchewan is increasingly 

viable and that the talent to fuel this industry is largely 

home-grown. 

 

The winners will be announced at the Golden Sheaf awards 

ceremony Saturday night, and before that there will be constant 

showings of quality short films and videos to the public. 

 

I invite you all to join us in our fine city and share the film 

festival with us. And I want to once again congratulate all of the 

organizers and volunteers who worked behind the camera to put 

this event together. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Wondrous Beauty of Northern Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Canada is 

often referred to as the best place to live in the world, and 

Saskatchewan is often referred to as the best province to live in 

the whole country of Canada. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is especially 

positively beautiful. And I want to share with the members 

opposite and the members within my own side of the House, 

some of the virtues of visiting northern Saskatchewan and 

northern communities. 

 

The far northern communities are also part of this great 

province, and I would encourage all members to visit and tour 

some of the northern Saskatchewan communities and see 

firsthand some of the beautiful sights. 

 

There’s the Athabasca Sand Dunes, there’s fishing, and there’s 

also the people of the far northern communities that really 

appreciate visits from people in southern Saskatchewan and 

across the land. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would encourage and I would really 

extend a hand in friendship to all members of the Assembly to 

tour and visit the far northern communities to really appreciate 

northern beauty and Saskatchewan hospitality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Treaty Day on Little Pine Reserve 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A week ago I 

was pleased to attend Treaty Day on the Little Pine Reserve, a 

day which commemorates the signing of Treaty Six of the Little 

Pine Reserve on July 2, 1879, and the founding of a new 

partnership between aboriginal and non-aboriginal 

Saskatchewan people. 

 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

This year Treaty Day was an opportunity for the people of Little 

Pine to celebrate the grand opening of Little Pine’s new 

community hall. This beautiful hall is a first for the people of 

Little Pine, and its construction is a testament to the hard work 

of a lot of people. 

 

Chief Marianne Stoney, who is the first woman ever elected to 

be chief at Little Pine, deserves a lot of credit for all of this, as 

do the members of the band council, including Lawrence 

Kennedy, Blair Sapp, Victor Schekosis, Leslie Schekosis, and 

Shirley Thunder. 

 

Other events on Little Pine Treaty Day included an outstanding 

performance by some young first nations dancers and a number 

of individual achievement awards. 

 

All in all I feel privileged to have been able to share this 

important day with the people of the Little Pine First Nation, 

Mr. Speaker, particularly since it gave me an opportunity to 

recommit myself to a successful partnership with the first 

nations community of this province. 

 

I ask other members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Chief Marianne Stoney and the council on the 

grand opening of their new community hall. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Day Poster Challenge 

 

Ms. Bradley:  We all have a vision of what Canada 

represents. Sometimes we take what we have for granted. We 

become complacent with this wonderful country and our vision 

may become blurred. Each year there is a Canada Day Poster 

Challenge for youth 18 years and under. This poster contest, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, challenges our youth to convey their 

vision of Canada. 

 

In Saskatchewan over 3,000 posters were submitted from 141 

schools, each depicting a vision of this country. I am proud to 

say that Jessica Peterson of Ogema high school in Ogema won 

first place in Saskatchewan. With over 37,000 entries from 

across Canada, Jessica and her vision of Canada as depicted in 

her Saskatchewan work will now compete in the national 

competition to be held on July 1 — Canada Day — in Ottawa. 

 

I want to congratulate Jessica for her achievement. I’m certain 

that her vision of this great country will encourage others to 

take the time to reaffirm their commitment to Canada. I’d also 

like to congratulate all the participants in the competition for 

believing in our great country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is sadly ironic that 

the four-year anniversary of the NDP government’s Health 

Districts Act falls on the same week that we are preparing to  

wind down this legislative session. How sadly ironic it is that 

the initial fears many Saskatchewan residents had at the onset 

of this so-called reform process have come true — and then 

some. 

 

It’s no coincidence that four years after this government began 

its version of health care reform our chronically ill and our 

elderly continue to fall victim to the wellness model. Mr. 

Speaker, during this four-year period more than 50 hospitals 

have been converted to wellness centres; many of those have 

been downgraded again to health clinics and are now threatened 

by closure; 2,200 nursing positions have been eliminated; 

16,000 hospital beds have been closed and 500 long-term care 

beds no longer exist. 

 

Will the minister tell this House what analysis his government 

has undertaken to measure both the positive, and especially the 

negative, aspect of health care reform? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I find sadly ironic 

is that it wasn’t too long ago in this legislature — and everyone 

here would have heard this — that that member was on his feet 

saying that in this province we have the best health care system 

in the world. He said that twice within the last few weeks. 

 

But I think that the good news, Mr. Speaker, from the point of 

view of the people of the province, is that this session has made 

some things very clear. It has made clear that they believe, in 

that party, in going back to 450 separate health boards with 

4,000 members hand-picked by the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

We believe in moving forward with 30 democratically elected 

health boards, less administration, more coordination and 

integration. 

 

There’s a big difference from what they believe and we believe, 

Mr. Speaker, but we’re going to stick with the democratic, 

public medicare system that we have in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the Premier 

summed it up two or three years ago. I think it was just before 

the last provincial election when he said, regarding health 

reform: the train is leaving the station and anybody not on it 

will be left behind. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the sick and the elderly have been left 

behind — that’s what’s happened. 

 

The members opposite talk about two-tiered health. Well they 

indeed have created a two-tier health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

Take a trip to some of our rural and northern communities and 

compare the level of health care there to our urban centres. 

 

Furthermore, this government’s gutting of the prescription drug 

plan by some $3.3 billion, or 37 per cent, makes it virtually 

impossible for many people to afford much needed medication. 

For example, diabetics; those who need oxygen to survive; our 

MS (multiple sclerosis) sufferers; and of course there are those  



1902  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

forced to go to Alberta to receive eye surgery because of the 

huge waiting-lists that have been created due to the wellness 

models. Mr. Minister, clearly what is needed is a review of our 

health care system. Will you swallow your pride and make a 

commitment to review a system that is clearly in trouble? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why that 

member is talking about two-tiered health care because on STV, 

on STV a year ago, on May 1, 1996, this is what that member 

had to say. He said, he said, Mr. Speaker: if there are people 

that are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them pay. 

That’s what he says about health care. 

 

Then he said . . . Then his leader said, Mr. Speaker, in response: 

private hospitals — I don’t have a problem with that. That’s 

what they said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we say is, we are going to keep the public medicare 

system. We don’t want a two-tiered system; we don’t want to 

make people pay. But I repeat again, Mr. Speaker, what the 

Canadian Medical Association says, which is that Ottawa fails 

to protect medicare. Ottawa and the Liberals may fail to protect 

medicare, Mr. Speaker, but we’re going to protect medicare, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when our Crown corporations were created 

their mandate was to provide quality, affordable utility service 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Who would have thought their 

roles would have changed so much? 

 

As we have highlighted during this session, our Crowns today 

are little more than a source of back-door taxation for the NDP 

government. Our Crowns are recording record profits on the 

backs of Saskatchewan people. Our Crowns are cutting cheques 

and throwing away precious tax dollars in risky ventures like 

NST and Guyana electrical company. Our Crowns are even 

purveyors of pornography. 

 

To make matters worse, the government refuses to be open and 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. When legitimate 

concerns are raised about the reporting practices of our Crowns, 

as the Provincial Auditor did, he is attacked. 

 

As a show of faith to the public, will the minister in charge of 

SaskTel waive the confidentiality clause in the NST deal as its 

private sector partner from Vancouver is prepared to do? Will 

you open this investment up to the public scrutiny as it should 

be? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s passing strange 

that that member, a member of the Crown Corporations 

Committee, had every opportunity to ask every question that he  

wanted an answer to in that context. I think it maybe was 

because there wasn’t any media there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also find it passing strange that the Liberals in Ottawa 

spend over a billion dollars on the boondoggle Pearson airport 

deal. And these are also . . . these are the members . . . the 

Liberal Party wanted us to sell the Cameco shares, — in the 

press, with letters, in this House — sell the Cameco shares 

when they were at less than book value. 

 

We didn’t listen to that advice. We waited until they went up 

and this province is almost a billion dollars better off because 

of it. And so you would single out one enterprise out of $300 

million of successful enterprises. We have no apologies to make 

for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporations Review 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 

Minister, I think the word you were looking for there for a 

minute was grandstanding — that’s the word your 

government’s been using all session long to get away from 

answering the questions properly. 

 

Obviously you just answered any question the Saskatchewan 

people might have about the honesty and the accountability of 

this NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this House is aware, a review of our Crown 

corporations has been taking place for some months. A final 

report is expected next month, and the Premier has indicated 

that decisions related to the future of our Crowns will be made 

this fall. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Crown Investments portfolio tell 

this House if the NDP government plans on honouring the 

recommendations of this final report even if that report includes 

privatization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, note the question that 

the hon. member poses in the light of various competitive 

questions and themes that the caucus has been posing to us over 

the session. 

 

All the while they say, we’re too arrogant and we don’t listen to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Now what does he 

say? Take the report’s recommendations prepared by experts 

and implement them regardless of what the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan say. How contradictory can you get? 

 

What is it, Mr. Member? What is it, Liberal Party? Do we 

listen, and do we consult with the people of Saskatchewan, and 

then rely on their advice? That’s what we’re going to do. We’re 

not going to follow yours, which is to simply say, down come 

the recommendations and, black or white, we’re accepting them 

because some experts tell us we should accept them pure and 

simple. 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve known for some 

time now that there is an agenda over there to ram 

amalgamation down the throats of our villages and RMs (rural 

municipality). As long ago as October 26, 1993 there was a 

report circulated in the NDP caucus which reads as follows: 

 

It may eventually prove desirable to politically 

amalgamate the towns and villages with their adjacent 

rural municipalities. This would create larger units to more 

effectively support local government, while normalizing 

the population. 

 

Would the Minister of Municipal Government be kind enough 

to explain to us if her savage cuts — 29 million from revenue 

sharing to municipalities — is an attempt to starve the 

municipalities into submission and force them into the 

amalgamation she has been pushing for since 1993? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of what 

the member is reading from. But we have agreed with 

municipalities and municipal associations that any change to the 

governance structure of local government in this province 

should be done at the local level on a voluntary basis. We are 

doing absolutely nothing to encourage municipalities to change 

their governance structure. That’s the answer that I would give, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Madam Minister, if I 

may continue, I’d like to read to you if I may, a portion of your 

party’s 1991 election platform as the party that always keeps its 

promises, always abides by its commitments: 

 

The New Democratic Party will work to keep down 

property taxes by working with municipalities to develop a 

fair and stable revenue-sharing program — a program they 

can count on — by providing an increased share of school 

costs from municipal grants. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I know that in public you claim to 

believe that all is well in municipal land. But I’d like you to tell 

us how your actions are in any way connected with your 

promise in 1991, how your actions of cutting 29 million from 

municipal grants, cutting the futures program, promising 10 per 

cent VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues to the municipalities 

and taking it away . . . What’s your own private report card? 

How do you think you’re really doing in municipal land to keep 

your 1991 promise? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, municipalities are not 

institutions. Municipalities are made up of people. And when 

we asked the people of Saskatchewan what their priorities were, 

they say health care, education, and social programs, highways. 

What did we do? We put more money into health; we put more  

money into education; we put more money into highways; and 

we retained the social safety net for the least fortunate among 

us. Those are the priorities that the people of Saskatchewan has 

identified for us, and that is what we’re responding to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  

Social Justice Policies 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, currently 

children in this province as young as eight are being forced to 

sell their bodies on the streets. Over 55,000 young people a year 

don’t get enough to eat. Residents are worried about their safety 

because of crime. And more and more people are fighting an 

addiction to gambling. 

 

With the escalation of these social justice problems, one would 

think that the government would do more, and it’s not as 

though they don’t have the means or the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. We suggested a private members’ Bill to fight child 

prostitution; they refused. We suggested a youth task force; they 

refused. We called on the government to address the social 

consequences of gambling; they refused. These are clear 

examples of the NDP administration abandoning its social 

conscience for the almighty dollar. 

 

Will this government give hope to the children on the street, to 

those with empty bellies, to gambling addicts, and to those who 

are victims of crime, by constructing a comprehensive social 

justice policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, that was a wide-ranging 

presentation. Mr. Speaker, when that member or any member of 

the Liberal caucus in this House or any Liberal in Canada talks 

about a wide-ranging social program, they should immediately 

— immediately — get on the phone to their counterparts in 

Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is the political party — and I never thought 

I’d say this, remembering Mulroney and the Conservatives — 

but here is the political party that has done more to destroy the 

social fabric and the social safety net in Canada than any other 

party in this nation’s history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the provincial . . . Well it’s little wonder that the federal 

candidate in the Palliser riding, Mr. Tony Merchant, got up last 

night and said that they’re headed for a minority government. 

That’s what they’re saying in Moose Jaw last night, the 

Liberals. And is there any wonder, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, this government’s total 

incompetence has been revealed once again when the Minister 

of Social Services refused our call for a public inquiry into 

child deaths. 

 

By the minister’s own admission, seven children under his  



1904  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

department’s care died from violent abuse or neglect. At least 

that’s what he said last year. This year he said there were no 

deaths due to abuse and neglect. It is evident that in order to 

determine the circumstances that led to these deaths, to prevent 

further tragedies, and to allow for public input, a public inquiry 

is essential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in B.C. (British Columbia) an inquiry was held 

with the death of just one child. The deaths of these 

Saskatchewan children are tragic and the member opposite 

dishonours them by refusing to investigate. 

 

I am asking the Minister of Social Services to forget that we are 

on opposing sides and to forget our political stripes. I am asking 

him to think of the children who have died and those who are at 

risk, and please launch a public review. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, that’s a reasonable 

question. Mr. Speaker, here again are the facts of the matter. 

 

Last year the member asked for some information about abuse 

and neglect and violent death in the province. We provided that 

information accurately without reservation. This year she asks 

questions about children under the care of the Department of 

Social Services. Mr. Speaker, the information has been 

provided accurately. There is no contradiction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the member did just yesterday in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

was to in some ways belittle the work of a sincere group of 

people in this province who are looking at these issues in 

cooperation with government — chaired by the coroner, chaired 

by the child advocate — who are reviewing all of these 

circumstances and will be coming with recommendations. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to say this. We will listen very carefully to 

any recommendations that are made by that group of 

responsible Saskatchewan citizens, leaders in their field, 

professionals, before we will listen to recommendations that are 

made at the close of a session in some effort to gain headlines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Open Government 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, throughout this session we have seen an 

increasing arrogance from your government. On one hand you 

put forward very little substantial legislation to debate. On the 

other hand you refuse to allow any real debate on the failures of 

your government, like the health care crisis, the NST fiasco, the 

Guyana deal, your broken promises on VLT revenues, your 

ministers attacking the Provincial Auditor, and most recently 

we’ve seen three of your members demonstrate their arrogance 

and intolerance by characterizing one of your political 

opponents as a Nazi. 

 

Mr. Premier, what happened to your promise of an open and 

accountable government.? Why have you become so arrogant 

that you’re refusing to answer questions about your failing  

promises and your failing policies here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, surely the Hon. Leader 

of the Conservative Party is living in a time warp. He must be 

thinking of his party when it was in office. I remind the Leader 

of the Conservative Party that this government — I won’t go 

through the litany — that this government and this party has 

made so many reforms with respect to the legislative 

proceedings, with respect to tabling of documents, the activities 

of committees, the answering of questions. And nobody limits 

the debate. 

 

You, sir, have the right to debate any one of those issues that 

you’ve raised. In fact you’ve raised them. You may not like the 

answers for your own political reasons, but we provide the 

answer to them as best as we can and as honestly and as 

truthfully as we can. 

 

This is a government which has exhibited a high degree of 

honesty, and even in the words of the Provincial Auditor, has 

opened up the books in such a way that they are unprecedented 

in terms of openness in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is also for the Premier. Mr. Premier, your government 

is about to spend 31 million taxpayers’ dollars on a crumbling 

third-world power company, and yet you refuse to answer the 

most basic questions about this deal. 

 

You keep saying, trust me; I’m from the government and I’m 

here to help you. Mr. Premier, if this is such a good deal, why 

won’t you lay the letter of intent on the table before you go 

running off to South America with a suitcase full of money? 

What are the terms? What are the risks? What is the value of the 

company? How much are you going to have to spend to fix up 

this crumbling company? 

 

Mr. Premier, why should we trust you after the NST deal? Since 

being in this Assembly I’ve learned that this is question period 

and not answer period. But, Mr. Premier, get off your arrogant 

high horse and answer these basic questions before the deal is 

consummated. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me say in the 

closing days of this session that member has really asked I 

think, what is a pertinent question: why should the people of 

Saskatchewan trust this government? And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan should trust this government because of the 

commitments that we made to them in ’92 that were reaffirmed 

in ’95 and that have been kept. 

 

We promised an open government; we promised sound fiscal 

management; we promised to balance the budgets; and we 

promised to reduce taxation; and we promised to reduce the  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

debt of this province. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that member 

asks why this government should be trusted. Those are the 

answers as to why this government should be trusted. 

 

They should be trusted because before Public Accounts, the 

government of this province brings openness with respect to the 

expenditures of the executive arm of government. Before the 

Crown Corporations Committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we bring 

before this the Crown corporations, where the scrutiny and the 

expenditures of those Crown corporations are open and debated 

openly with members of that party. 

 

So they ask why they should trust us, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

the people of Saskatchewan do trust us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

Saskatchewan people continue to give failing grades to your 

handling of health care. Nearly two-thirds of the people in this 

province expect our health care system to deteriorate over the 

next 10 years. Yet you are too arrogant to listen to any 

alternatives. 

 

Yesterday your government voted to defeat our health care bill 

of rights and your member of Saskatoon southwest told us that 

everyone in Saskatchewan already has access to 24-hour 

emergency care. Mr. Premier, one has to ask, what planet are 

you and your members living on? 

 

People in rural Saskatchewan do not have access to 24-hour 

emergency care, a direct result of your attacks on the health care 

system. Mr. Premier, why are you too arrogant to admit that 

health care reforms are failing and why won’t you listen to any 

alternatives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Conservative 

member — Conservatives and Liberals — those in the province 

of Saskatchewan who work so hard to destroy medicare never 

wanted to see it live. 

 

You remember the KOD? Were you a member of the Keep Our 

Doctors committee or were you not a member of the Keep Our 

Doctors committee? Which of you Conservatives, which of you 

Conservatives were out there at the doorstep with the Liberals 

fighting the implementation of medicare? And you now have 

the audacity to get up right now and say you’re in defence . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, he pretends that he wasn’t 

there; he pretends he wasn’t in the fight against medicare. 

 

You are to this day. You and the Liberals are for two-tier 

medicine. You and the Liberals are for private hospitals. You 

tell us to keep on looking for Premier Klein as the example. 

He’s setting up a private, for-profit hospital in Alberta. That’s 

what you’d do. And you have the audacity to ask us? 

 

Tell us why are you so arrogant that after a 35-year love affair 

with medicare in the province of Saskatchewan and in Canada, 

you Conservatives and you Liberals want to destroy it while we  

want to protect it? Tell us that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 

municipalities have also been hurt by the arrogance of your 

government. You continue to cut revenue sharing. You’ve 

botched reassessment. You broke your election promise to share 

10 per cent of VLT revenues — just like Jean Chrétien and the 

GST (goods and services tax). 

 

Mr. Premier, two weeks ago your government voted to defeat a 

PC (Progressive Conservative) Bill to share VLT revenues with 

municipalities, a Bill that would have simply honoured your 

election promise. Since that time, about 20 towns, villages, and 

RMs have written to us supporting our private members’ Bill. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you’re too arrogant to listen to us, at least will 

you listen to the municipal councils? Will you honour your 

promise to share 10 per cent of VLT revenues with the 

municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I followed everything 

the member opposite says until he got to the point where he 

compared us with Jean Chrétien. That hurt. Yes. That made me 

angry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have, in the context of the municipal round 

table and the memorandum of understanding, been working 

with the municipalities on these issues and we will continue to 

do that with a positive attitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

New Democratic Party Government’s Record 

 

Mr. Boyd:  My final question is for the Premier. Mr. 

Premier, it is clear what the plan was in this session. You were 

going to just wheel in here and have a nice, quiet little session. 

You’d just simply refuse to answer any controversial questions, 

and this would translate into what you thought was going to be 

tons of seats for the federal NDP. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, what’s happened? The NDP no longer has 

any credibility on health care because people have seen what 

you’ve done in health care. Instead of . . . Your members going 

around have been making intolerant remarks in this Assembly. 

Instead of talking about jobs, your federal leader is ranting 

about civil war, and as a result your party is going to get a 

thumping in the federal election. 

 

Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, the arrogance of your government 

has obviously backfired. The question is, have you learned 

anything from all of this, sir? Are we going to see you put an 

end to the arrogance in your government or are we going to see 

the voters put an end to your arrogance by voting you out of 

office in the next provincial election? 



1906  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, first of all I’m very 

pleased that what might be the last day of this current session 

— I don’t know, but what might be the last day of the current 

session — I’m at last being asked a question or two by the two 

official opposition parties. I thank both of you for giving me the 

courtesy of doing so. Nothing prevented them for the preceding 

55-odd days or whatever we’ve been sitting here. 

 

But I’m also very pleased to say that unlike, unlike the 

Conservative leader who arrogantly, arrogantly proclaims that 

our party is going to get thumped, unlike him, unlike him and 

his Conservatives, none of our party members on this side have 

been hiding under a bushel afraid to be associated with our 

party nationally, like you have been with respect to your party 

nationally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Or like the Liberals have been hiding 

under a bushel being afraid to be associated with their 

candidates as well. I don’t know what, I don’t know what’ll 

happen on the evening of June 2, but I have one fair bet — the 

NDP will get a higher vote than you will get, that’s for sure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Chief Electoral Officer Report 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise under rule 46 to 

request leave for an emergency debate for an urgent and 

pressing necessity. And if I may ask the indulgence of the Chair 

and of hon. members to briefly explain why I think an 

emergency debate is required this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact this is probably our last 

afternoon in session, this is also the last chance that the people 

of Saskatchewan have to see the Kuziak report into provincial 

fund-raising prior to the June 2 election. 

 

We’ve been told already in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that the Justice department has recommended the report be 

suppressed because of a policy. The elections minister says 

there is no such policy. 

 

We’ve been told that the Chief Electoral Officer is an 

independent officer, but the Chief Electoral Officer himself has 

said that he’s acting under advice of the Justice department. 

And in view of this, I’m requesting leave to bring a motion, if I 

may read it at this time; if I may read the motion: 

 

That this Assembly call upon the Minister of Justice to 

withdraw and retract the advice which his officials gave to 

the Chief Electoral Officer to the effect that he should 

delay the release of the report arising from his  

investigation into the provincial political parties’ 

fund-raising practices until after June 2, 1997 federal 

election, and replace such advice with advice that the said 

report should be released immediately. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The hon. member from North 

Battleford has requested leave for emergency debate. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Debate on Bill No. 67 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Before orders of the day, the Deputy 

Speaker has two rulings that he would like to bring before the 

House. 

 

Yesterday the member for Saskatoon Southeast raised a 

question of privilege regarding statements made in the House 

by the member for North Battleford. And I have had an 

opportunity to review the verbatim record of the exchange in 

question on Bill No. 67, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997. 

 

The words used were as follows, and I quote page 1820 of the 

Debates and Proceedings for May 20, 1997: 

 

So here we have an NDP that not only stood up for 

single-desk marketing, but opposed a vote, and actually 

opposed the exercise of freedom of speech. Freedom of 

speech was going too far when you had people with the 

gall to stand up and say they didn’t think there had to be a 

monopoly. How outrageous. Those people should be in a 

concentration camp. 

 

It is evident from the transcript that the member did not state 

that government members belong in a concentration camp, but 

indicated that certain members believed others should be. 

 

I find this matter does not constitute a question of privilege but 

is rather a matter of order. While the orders themselves . . . 

while the words themselves may not be unparliamentary, the 

effect of the type of allegation is to cause disorder and adds 

nothing to the debate. Beauchesne’s 6th edition, paragraph 486 

states in part the following: 

 

It is impossible to lay down any specific rules in regard to 

injurious reflections uttered in debate . . . much depends 

upon the tone and manner, and intention, of the person 

speaking . . . 

 

I caution members to be more temperate in their remarks and to 

avoid exaggeration, which can tend to diminish respect for this 

institution by trivializing the effect of historically abhorrent and 

anti-democratic events. In this vein — order — in this vein, I 

ask the member for North Battleford to withdraw the remarks  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

and apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to 

apologize. I would point out I retracted the remarks yesterday 

and I’m certainly pleased to confirm that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  And apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Ruling on Bill No. 229 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The second ruling that I have before 

this House, standing on the order paper for second reading 

under private members’ public Bills and orders is Bill No. 229, 

The Education and Health Tax Amendment Act, 1997 (Indians 

off-reserve). 

 

This Bill was introduced by the hon. member for Kindersley on 

May 20, 1997. This Bill seeks to repeal an exemption from the 

tax provisions contained in The Education and Health Tax Act 

granted to aboriginals living off reserves. The effect of this Bill 

will be to increase the incidence of taxation and thereby create 

additional revenue for the Crown. 

 

Bill No. 229 is essentially identical to Bill No. 116 introduced 

by the hon. member for Moosomin during the last session. On 

June 4, 1996, Bill No. 116 was ruled out of order on the ground 

that it required a recommendation from the Lieutenant 

Governor. At the time, the Speaker referred members to 

Beauchesne’s 6th edition, in paragraph 601 where it stated that: 

 

The recommendation of the Crown is needed for such 

measures as bills relating to . . . the repeal of an exemption 

from an existing duty, as the burden of duty is (therefore) 

. . . augmented . . . 

 

Accordingly, I find that Bill No. 229 contravenes the 

parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative in financial 

matters because it requires a recommendation from the 

Lieutenant Governor. The member for Kindersley is not a 

member of Executive Council and cannot obtain such a 

recommendation. 

 

Therefore I must rule Bill No. 229 out of order and direct it be 

removed from the order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 34  The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment 

Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ll be assisted 

this afternoon by Mr. John Labatt, who is the director of 

community youth services, and the family youth services of the 

Department of Social Services. 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I might say that 

certainly the Liberal opposition has no difficulty with this Bill. 

However it has of course been pointed out that although there 

are some youth justice committees informally functioning in the 

province, there have in fact been no formally appointed ones 

pursuant to the Young Offenders Act. 

 

I assume that this amendment is an indication that formal 

appointments of justice committees are to take place. And I 

would invite the minister, and request that he outlines some of 

his plans in this regard for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member I think essentially 

has put his finger right on the plan. Once this legislation is 

through, then we’ll be in a position now then to go to the 

existing committees working . . . and this would actually 

happen through the Attorney General under the Young 

Offenders Act of the federal parliament. 

 

We’ll be going to the existing committees, working with them 

to get them formally established as youth justice committees as 

defined by the federal Act. And then as we look to expansion of 

this kind of programing across the province, we’d be looking to 

new groups. But the first thing will be to get this passed, get all 

of our legislative framework in place, and then go out and work 

as soon as we can with those committees. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, some significant steps have 

been taken in the last two years to establish justice committees 

on our reserves, and I think of course these are important steps 

forward in bringing first nations people into the system. 

 

While I appreciate that there is a desire to encourage 

voluntarism, the Young Offenders Act appears to preclude 

paying remuneration for people on youth justice committees. 

And I’m wondering if the minister thinks that that will hamper 

the sort of dedication and work that we would hope these 

committees would do, or if he considers that to be an issue here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I am informed that in fact yes 

it is a provision of the Young Offenders that there should not be 

a salaried circumstance here. But there apparently is provision 

that one for instance could provide some honorarium to an elder 

or elders who may be involved. So we’d want to be looking at 

whatever honorarium provisions might be available to us and 

the ones that might be applicable on any given circumstance. 

But there is not the opportunity to use a salary kind of a 

situation. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Could the minister indicate to us how many 

justice committees are out there waiting in the wings that you 

would be in a position to formally appoint as soon as this Bill 

goes through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I don’t want to . . . first point, 

I don’t want to mislead the member in any way, that it’s not 

quite as immediate as passage of the legislation that we could  



1908  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

then go and appoint, because there are a number of steps, 

including doing some orientation, training of members and so 

on, before we’d actually move to the formal appointing. 

 

Currently we have two — the Shaunavon committee which 

we’ve talked about; there’s a committee on the Onion Lake 

Reserve which I’ve had the privilege to visit and sit in with. 

We’ve had an expression of interest from Nipawin and an 

expression of interest here from Regina. So that would be four 

initially. But it will take some time to work with the committees 

and do the orientation process. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. My colleagues and I are content for 

this Bill to move through committee. I thank the minister and to 

Mr. Labatt. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The committee will start by having the 

Minister of Justice introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to have with 

today, Madeleine Robertson and Andrea Seale, who are Crown 

solicitors with the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve made clear in some of 

my submissions earlier on this Bill that the Liberal opposition 

doesn’t oppose it. Living wills are a reality of modern society 

— something that we do need. And they are coming in in other 

provinces and indeed in some respects this Bill merely 

formalizes a process which is already going on. 

 

My concern however, is to know the extent to which we have 

consulted with various groups. And when the minister answers 

this, I would request that he also address the issue of members 

of the general public. Because while clearly there are some 

experts in this field, in the health care field and the palliative 

care field, it strikes me that this is legislation which affects each 

and every person in the province, at least potentially. So it’s not 

just a, quote “experts’ Bill;” it’s a people’s Bill. 

 

And I think that it does require broad consultation of the 

population generally to know how they feel about living wills. 

And I would encourage the minister to tell us what sort of 

process has been undertaken by the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d be very pleased to do that. This 

legislation was brought forward at this time as a result of 

extensive consultation throughout Saskatchewan. And if I could 

characterize the initial groups that wanted to proceed with this, 

were seniors and people who did work in hospitals — they 

identified the need. 

But from there we have gone to many groups. And if you’ll 

bear with me, I will advise you of the various groups that have 

been consulted with respect to this legislation: the Saskatoon 

Council of Churches, Regina Council of Churches, Catholic 

Health Association of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, 

Saskatchewan Palliative Care Association, Saskatchewan 

Ambulance Association, Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, Regina Health District, Saskatoon Health 

District, Santa Maria Senior Citizens Home, Saskatchewan 

Action Committee for Death with Dignity, Saskatchewan 

Seniors Mechanism, Saskatchewan Seniors Association, 

Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities, Saskatchewan 

AIDS Network, Canadian Mental Health Association, 

Saskatchewan Branch, the Alzheimer Association of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, Canadian Bar 

Association, Saskatchewan Branch, the health law sections in 

both north and south Saskatchewan; the Provincial Interagency 

Network on Disabilities, the Saskatchewan Pro Life 

Association, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

the Hospital Liaison Committee for Jehovah’s Witnesses. 

 

And in addition to all of those groups, there have been requests 

and attendances at public meetings by staff within the 

Department of Justice to discuss this. I’ve personally also met 

with all of the Catholic bishops in Saskatchewan to discuss this 

legislation and explain what we’re doing. And I think that there 

is broad-based support throughout the province for the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I thank the minister for that list, and I 

think he’s certainly satisfied my colleagues and I that a lot of 

significant groups have been contacted for their input. 

 

But again I have to make a point that this is a Bill that affects 

just plain people; it affects each and every one of us. And I’m 

wondering what opportunity there has been for simply members 

of the general public to understand and appreciate what is being 

done here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the best way of answering 

that question is to talk about the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Mechanism and the Saskatchewan Seniors’ Association. 

 

These people have presented a number of times over the last 

years — based on working with their members, who are seniors 

in Saskatchewan — that they would like to have some clarity in 

this whole area. And in many ways the legislation that’s come 

forward has been a response to some of their concerns. 

 

And I would say that the people that are part of all of the groups 

that we mentioned . . . We’re talking with people; we’re not 

talking with organizations. And my own sense is that there’s 

been broad consultation throughout the province and the point 

that we want to make is that there are many, many people who 

want this legislation and we’ve come forward with the proposal 

which we think meets the needs of most of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s one specific issue I  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

do wish to raise with the minister. I realize that, you know, 

times are changing and our culture is changing, particularly in 

regards to the issue of common-law relationships — far more 

couples today are living together without having been formally 

and legally married. 

 

Now in clause 15 the Act gives priority and precedence in the 

naming . . . the appointment of a proxy to a common-law 

spouse, who of course is defined there as someone who has 

cohabited in a relationship of some permanence — cohabited as 

a spouse in a relationship of some permanence. 

 

I certainly recall from my own legal practice, and I’m sure the 

minister does too, that there can be a lot of family wrangling 

over whether there is a common-law relationship here or not. 

Have you got two older people sharing a house? Or is it 

something more than that? And oftentimes I have found that the 

“common-law spouse” doesn’t necessarily have the same 

understanding as the children. 

 

Now what concerns me here is that it may be very difficult to 

say whether there is in fact a common-law relationship of some 

permanence existing or not. And this will have to be determined 

presumably by the doctors and health care providers at a time of 

extreme crisis and emotional high point. And the possibility that 

the family will be fighting seems to me to loom very large. And 

this is going to make it very, very difficult for the health 

authorities to know from whom they are to take their directions. 

 

Now I realize the purpose of this Bill is so the health care 

professionals will know from whom they get their directions. 

But my fear is this particular clause is going to create more 

problems than it solves in that the health care professionals now 

have to make a determination. They have to make a decision on 

whether or not this is a common-law relationship of some 

permanence. And they’re not going to get always agreement on 

that point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the first thing I should do is 

point out the section that you referred to is a fall-back position. 

The ideal position would be that the person would name a 

proxy and it would be quite clear. 

 

And actually the wording that we have here is wording that is 

more in use now, and it does come out of the consultations that 

we did with the various groups. Because they did identify this 

as an area where somebody who was significant and living in a 

relationship would participate in care and then all of a sudden 

would be excluded. 

 

And I think in many ways what we’re trying to do here is 

provide some flexibility to allow for those situations where 

there are common-law relationships that might not fit into a 

one-year living together or two-year living together definition 

like we used to use or where we still use in some older 

legislation. 

 

So I take your point. I respect your comments about this 

because you’ve identified an area where there could be some 

concerns. But I guess what I would say is that ideally there  

would be a proxy, but we wanted to leave some flexibility if 

there isn’t a proxy for those situations. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I guess I still have to put to the minister, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, though, what is the doctor in practical terms 

supposed to do when he has a patient in crisis and an older lady 

comes forward saying, I’m his common-law wife, and the kids 

come forward to say, well she’s mooched off dad but she’s 

certainly no common-law wife of my father. What is the poor 

doctor supposed to do in that sort of situation? And I don’t 

think I’m putting a bizarre, off-the-wall hypothetical to the 

minister. I think I’m putting something that’s very, very real. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that that question can be 

answered by saying two things. The first thing is that this 

definition is right out of The Department of Health Act, section 

18, so it’s already an existing provision. The second thing is 

that the hypothetical situation that you’ve described creates 

dilemmas in many ways, and it’s not always easy to answer to 

the doctor exactly what they should do, or to the health care 

professionals. 

 

But I think practically, what we are doing in this legislation is 

providing many, many more guidelines than they have now. 

Because even proxies or the health care directives have a 

standing at this point which is unclear. What this legislation 

does is clears up the role that those documents have, and this 

particular point may still have some ambiguity. But I think it’s 

. . . a better way to describe it would be to say it’s flexibility 

that allows for some of those difficult situations. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — One small question of the minister, if I may. I 

understand the province of Alberta has placed this legislation 

under the administration of the public guardian. That would 

seem to be a natural place for oversight of this legislation. Has 

that been considered by the department as say a natural place to 

house this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that you should note that 

there’s a difference between this legislation and the legislation 

in British Columbia and Alberta, because they have many more 

personal-care decisions that are included in their legislation. 

And so some of those things are dealt with I think, in our 

dependent adults Act, which is different legislation. But 

practically, we’re not in a position where we think that that 

makes sense at this point. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The last issue I would like to raise with the 

minister is that in the event that a proxy puts unfair pressure on 

a critically ill person, is the legislation provides for a fine of 

$1,000 and the disentitlement, and the disentitlement of that 

individual. Now The Wills Act provides for the disentitlement 

of that individual’s spouse as well. 

 

Now the concern, which I have flagged before in second 

reading debate in this matter, is that if say a son-in-law puts 

undue pressure on a critically ill person, then that son-in-law’s 

spouse would presumably not be disentitled from inheriting, 

and the only penalty I see coming up here would be a $1,000  



1910  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

fine. I understand in the province of Alberta the fine is $10,000. 

And I say, under The Wills Act, it’s my understanding that the 

disentitlement extends to spouses as well as the individual 

exerting the undue influence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well what I can respond is that 

Saskatchewan, with this disentitlement clause, goes further than 

any other jurisdiction in this kind of legislation. The other thing 

is that there are quite a number of checks and balances in the 

legislation to deal with the particular concern that you’ve 

raised. 

 

The first one is that the maker can revoke that directive orally. 

The court is able to supervise the proxies. There are some 

restrictions on its use, and also there’s a requirement that if 

there are no specific directions in the proxy, then the person 

who is acting on the proxy must act in the best interests of the 

person who is requiring the treatment. 

 

So I guess what I would say is that there’s a . . . first we have 

the disentitlement clause in our legislation and then we also 

have these other checks and balances. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — But I take it the minister did consider that the 

disentitlement under The Wills Act you say covers spouses as 

well as the person exerting the undue influence. I only point this 

out because I think it’s obvious that in most cases the proxies, 

we expect, would also be the beneficiaries. 

 

So I realize that the legislation is trying to ensure that decisions 

are made in the patient’s best interests. But I say there is the 

reality that a proxy is in all likelihood also a beneficiary, or at 

least the spouse of a beneficiary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I didn’t hear any question so I’ll . . . 

 

Mr. Hillson: — This is not parallel with The Wills Act. I mean, 

did you consider that issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, we did not make it parallel to The 

Wills Act. This was what was requested in consultation so this 

is what we put in. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Just a couple 

of comments, Mr. Minister. Just quickly going through the Bill 

and looking at its intent, I recognize what you’re trying to do, 

and I think it’s something that’s appropriate. I think we’ve 

heard about this for a number of years. 

 

We’ve heard situations where individuals have been . . . As a 

result of the changes in the technology and the ability to sustain 

life, a number of people, certainly many people, are quite 

concerned that if they reach a stage where in some cases, while 

you can basically keep a body functioning but it really doesn’t 

mean quality of life to an individual, that a person should be 

able to indicate in their will what they feel is sustainable. And I 

think that’s what the Bill does. 

 

But I do have . . . And one other point I was also going to make 

out. I think it’s also appropriate that you’ve acknowledged the 

fact that there . . . As in all walks of life, there may be places  

where someone would take advantage of and maybe conceal, 

damage, falsify, or forge directives. And in clause 24 I see 

where you’ve put in a clause that basically deals with this and 

holds people accountable. You put some responsibility . . . and 

holding people responsible for their actions. 

 

But there’s one comment I just . . . and one question I want 

clarity . . . I want one thing clarified. In clause 2 you talk about 

adult as being a person, meaning 18 years of age or older. But 

then under the directives, in clause 3, you talk of: “Any person 

16 years of age or more who has the capacity to make a health 

care decision may make a directive.” 

 

And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, whether or not that should 

be reading 18 as well. I’m wondering why you’ve chosen 16, 

when I think in most cases as far as adult decision, we still look 

at the age of 18. And I’m wondering if you can give me an 

understanding as to why you’ve added the age of 16 into this 

one directive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the way it’s set up is that only 

an adult can give a proxy. And with the health care directives, 

we looked at that issue and ended up choosing the age of 16, 

after consultation. 

 

And part of the issue relates to those younger . . . people 

younger than 18 who are involved in various medical situations 

and are able to give instructions to their doctors at that point. 

And so we ended up using the age 16 as the particular age, after 

some consultation, and I think practically because we wanted to 

recognize that there are some 16- and 17-year-olds who are in a 

situation where they give directions to their doctors. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, is that 

you did consult in . . . through consultation . . . and you gave 

quite a list of different groups you consulted with. And most of 

the groups, if I’m not mistaken, basically would be comprised 

of individuals over 18 — 18 and over. 

 

Mr. Minister, in your consultation process, did you talk to 

persons that would be, say 16 or 17 years old? Or what . . . how 

did you arrive at the use of the age of 16? Was it because 

someone a little older in life looked back at a circumstance that 

they were involved in and suggested that that might be an 

appropriate age to certainly give the ability to make a directive 

to? Is that how you arrived at that — at the age of 16 versus the 

age of 18? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think it was a combination of 

things. One of the issues became, would we allow the health 

care directives to be used by the definition under common law, 

which was basically people who are old enough to give 

independent directions for medical treatment. And that ends up 

then having an age that’s not entirely clear. 

 

So what we did do is we looked at other jurisdictions to see 

what they did. And in Manitoba they have a clause that they use 

where there’s a rebuttable presumption in favour of a person 

being 16 and over, that they can actually do this, with the ability 

to challenge that if somebody has questions about it. And also 

there’s the ability of a person under age 16 to make a  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

health care directive if they can show that they have the 

capacity to do that. And that’s the same definition that’s 

actually used in Ontario. 

 

Prince Edward Island uses the age of 16. Newfoundland uses 

the age of 16. British Columbia uses the age of 19, Alberta the 

age of 18, and in Nova Scotia and Yukon it’s the age of 

majority, which I presume is age 18. 

 

So there’s a bit of an array. We ended up, I guess, in a sense 

taking something that’s somewhat in the middle, like we 

usually do here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m very pleased to thank 

the officials I have with me today for their hard work on this 

Bill, and also to thank at least one member in the gallery who 

has worked on the consultation process, and that’s Rev. Bill 

Portman from here in Regina. Through those people I would 

like to convey thanks to all of the people in Saskatchewan who 

have assisted us in preparing this Bill. 

 

And with those thanks I’d like to move that we report this Bill 

without amendment. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I wish also to thank the minister for the way he 

answered our questions this afternoon and for the assistance of 

his officials and their attendance this day. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. And I too 

wish to extend my thanks to the minister and his officials for 

their presence and for their response to our concerns. Thank 

you. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to have with 

me today Doug Moen, who is the executive director of 

community justice; John Baker, who is the executive director of 

law enforcement services branch; and Darcy McGovern, who is 

the Crown solicitor in the legislative services branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. In second 

reading, I believe, my colleague from Saltcoats and I both 

indicated that the principle that all residents of the province will 

have to make some contribution to policing services is a fair 

and reasonable one and one which the Liberal opposition 

supports. 

 

However we have also made it quite clear that we cannot and 

will not support this Bill until there is at the very least some 

ministerial statement as to what rural municipalities and  

villages are going to be forced to contribute now. I think it 

would be negligent on our part to pass this Bill, not having the 

slightest idea of what we’re actually approving on behalf of our 

rural municipalities and our villages. 

 

So I ask the minister if he is prepared at this time to publicly 

indicate what’s going to happen the day after this Bill is granted 

Royal Assent. And I hope that he is prepared to indicate what 

the situation will be for our villages and rural municipalities 

and then we can debate that. But if it is a case that this House is 

still being asked to approve some sort of formula, some sort of 

payment from your rural municipalities and we don’t have the 

slightest idea what it is, then I have to say that the Liberal 

opposition cannot support this legislation in its present form. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well as I set out in the second reading 

debate, this legislation in its present form is to provide us with 

some of the tools so that we can enter into the negotiations with 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association ) and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

around the report which was a joint report that came from 

SUMA and SARM and government officials as it relates to a 

fairer way of sharing police costs across Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’re in a position where we haven’t completed those 

discussions and so what we are doing here is preserving the 

status quo but providing the ability to make the changes when 

some consensus is reached — so that we can then proceed with 

the changes that are necessary. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, if the discussions are not 

completed, the plan has not been formulated, the policy is not 

here, would it not make some sense to do that and then come 

back to this House and we can discuss that? But to simply pass 

permissive legislation and we don’t have any idea what we are 

approving on behalf of our villages and our rural municipalities 

would, as I say, I think be a gross dereliction of our duty here in 

the opposition and we simply cannot do that. 

 

And may I also say this, that the tragedy, as I see it, is not that 

rural municipalities will have to make some contribution to 

policing services, that’s fair enough, but that it’s coming at the 

same time, at the same time as their revenue-sharing grants have 

been chopped, their road grants have been chopped. They’re 

facing one pressure after another all at precisely the same time, 

and it’s just all . . . (inaudible) . . . One factor after another is 

imploding on our villages and rural municipalities and now 

we’re asked, in effect, to sign a blank cheque. 

 

Now I don’t know if my colleague from Saltcoats has any 

specific questions, but with that I will say that the Liberal 

opposition is not prepared to put their signature on a blank 

cheque. And I will be moving an amendment to clause 12 that 

this Bill will not come into effect until the Assembly has seen 

the plan and had an opportunity to debate and approve it. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I would just like to respond briefly 

to that comment. Under the present legislation, all of the costs 

and all of the expenses related to policing are not set out in the 

Act, and the reason for that is very practical. 



1912  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

These costs change from year to year, sometimes from month to 

month. And what we are doing is setting out an overall 

framework and we’re looking at a sharing of the policing costs 

across the total population of Saskatchewan in a way that hasn’t 

been done before. But we would not, in any event, have all of 

the kinds of things that the member has referred to in the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Minister, I just have one or two things, and I’d like to concur 

with what the member from Battleford has said here too. I think 

we find this Bill has the appeal that we would like to support it, 

but being that the numbers are not included there is no way that 

we can. 

 

Go back to the provincial round table talks I believe you have 

had with SARM and SUMA. And I believe you know, Mr. 

Minister, that SARM, it’s no news to either one of us that 

SARM is really not all that happy with having to pick up some 

of the cost of policing. 

 

But they feel that at some point here they’re going to have to. I 

think what scares them so badly was exactly what we’ve been 

saying, that without the numbers how do they really say yes we 

can agree to this or no we can’t. 

 

Where SUMA comes in I believe, they are also kind of torn 

between . . . over this issue because they represent towns, as 

you know, over 500, and towns under, and so on. But I believe 

SUMA has the same position, that really how can they take a 

look at the Bill that you’re presenting here and agree or disagree 

with it when there is no numbers involved. 

 

An Hon. Member:  A blank cheque. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Yes, a blank cheque. 

 

Mr. Minister, I did think at one time, and I know as a taxpayer 

of a rural municipality that we felt — and I’m not sure if it was 

last fall but — at some point we felt that we did know really 

what was . . . we were going to pay as rural people out there. 

And an understanding we had, and not that we had to agree 

with it, but that it would be $15 per capita for rural residents in 

Saskatchewan. At least what that told us is we knew what we 

would have to pay. And I guess my question is, Mr. Minister, 

did I not know what I was hearing here or was there at some 

point when you were sitting with SARM and SUMA, was there 

numbers like that at one point, on the table? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think that I can say quite clearly 

that that report had a recommendation based on the costs at that 

time of $14.80 per capita. And it’s anticipated that that’s the 

range that we’re talking about as it relates to this legislation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I was sure I 

had an understanding that that was right. And I think if, Mr. 

Minister, if you’d had included those numbers — and I realize 

they will change in time, that nothing will stay the same — but 

we would have had a basis to judge this Bill on. And I honestly 

think you may even have had our full support on this because 

we know at some point everyone has to share with policing. 

Although being MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

that represent, as well as yourself and members on that side . . . 

we represent both sides of the coin. And it is not a popular 

thing for any politician to, on one hand, say yes you’re going to 

pay and on the other hand, help the towns over 500 — which by 

the way my hometown is caught in, of 540, and it’s been a bone 

of contention with them. I think they pay upwards of $40,000 a 

year. 

 

So I know where you’re coming from. I know how contentious 

an issue we’re dealing with, but I would have liked to see the 

numbers in. And I believe you may have had our full support on 

this, or least we could have judged it by that and decided 

whether we could support the Bill. 

 

With that, I’ll pass it back to my counterpart from North 

Battleford. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve heard over the past few weeks some real 

concerns regarding this Bill, and we’re not hiding the fact that 

there are a number of individuals, and certainly rural 

governments more so than urban governments, that are taking 

some issues with the Bill; although I would gather that there’s 

been a fair bit of debate, having been at some of the SARM 

conventions and SUMA conventions. 

 

Certainly SUMA delegates have been arguing that some of the 

policing services and costs should be shared more so with . . . 

and rural residents in smaller communities and rural 

municipalities should have part of that cost. 

 

Of course SARM has taken the other view. They feel they’ve 

already had enough of a cost and in many cases they just don’t 

feel that they really have the . . . Well they may have access via 

telephone line to police services to meet a specific need. 

Visibility, I think, is an issue that they feel . . . What they’re 

asking at the end of the day, what visible presence will we have 

for the monetary dollar we’re being asked to contribute. 

 

I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give an indication 

what discussions have taken place in regards to that? What 

commitment is there? Is there a commitment to a visible 

presence, or what is intended by the sharing of funds and 

moving that . . . making sure that there is some visible presence 

for the costs that will be incurred by rural residents in policing 

services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not sure if you’re wanting me to 

reiterate what I’ve said during the second reading speech about 

service but, practically, some of the things that I said then 

which do relate to this question of the presence in the rural 

areas — there’s an addition of a million dollars to the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) provincial policing budget 

base which will provide additional RCMP staff for 12 rural 

detachments. And that’s effective April 1, 1997. 

 

There’s also a new radio system that will allow for greater use 

of laptop and mobile computer terminals by the RCMP, which 

therefore means they won’t have to go back into the office to  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

write up reports, do things like that, or check for information. 

And we know from what the police have told us that that will 

actually increase the ability of the police to be out in the rural 

community throughout the whole territory that they cover. 

 

We’re also looking at some other ways which will allow for 

reduction in the paperwork that the RCMP have to do in their 

policing, which will also increase the presence of the RCMP in 

the community. 

 

So I think that that’s part of this adjustment that we’re making 

within the RCMP. It also dovetails with this fairer sharing of 

the cost of the RCMP throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 

did acknowledge, I think, the other day as well some of the 

comments you just made and some of the changes in direction. 

 

One of the issues that crops up continually is especially when 

detachments are in specific locations and they’re serving 

communities. And I’ll just for example, I’ll use an example in 

my area because I’m quite familiar with it. 

 

The Broadview detachment serves the area of Grenfell and 

Whitewood communities at the same time. And communities 

like Whitewood and Grenfell feel that they’re putting a fair tax 

dollar into policing services but they don’t have the visible 

presence, if you will, or a police officer living within their 

community. And they feel they’re paying for that or that should 

be part of it. 

 

Now I think they have in the past, and I’m not sure, it may not 

be there right now . . . but if I’m not mistaken, certainly in 

Grenfell one of the officers was more than willing to reside in 

the community. And I’m wondering what . . . or if any 

discussion has taken place as far as where officers reside and 

the area they cover, whether or not suggestions have been made 

that maybe the RCMP and different detachments should look at 

a member . . . a major community in the area may not have the 

visible presence as of an office, that with the changes, with the 

access to computers, that an officer would be encouraged to 

look at residing in a community that’s part of that whole 

policing area. Was there any discussion along those lines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you’ve asked a very good 

question and I can answer it by saying that there has been quite 

a great deal of discussion about residency. There is a residency 

policy now that requires the officers to live within the area of 

their detachment. 

 

The other thing I would say is that the proposed policing cost 

document that I have referred to previously has in there a 

differential for those communities that actually have the officers 

living within their town as opposed to down the road a few 

miles. And that there may be some discussion again about 

where exactly the office is located because of the fact that there 

will be a differential in cost that relates to that. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Just a couple more comments and questions. In  

the original Bill, Mr. Minister, I understand the minimum size 

was specified. There was a minimum size specified. And under 

the amendments, clause 6 in section 23 amended, the minimum 

size has been moved to the regulations. 

 

And the view here is that whenever something is moved to the 

regulations, the question, the concern, the question is why? For 

the simple reason that we always have a concern because when 

you put something into regulations, regulations can be changed 

quite easily, and they’re basically done through orders in 

council without any consultation or opportunity for 

consultation. 

 

And so I’m asking, Mr. Minister, why was this done? Why 

would you do this, or why do your need the power? And are 

you planning to drop the minimum size even further so that tiny 

communities with little revenue have to chip in for policing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think that as you know from the 

discussions that you’ve had with the various towns in your 

constituency or other neighbouring constituencies, it’s been a 

fair bone of contention that the number was 500 because you’d 

have communities that were just slightly over 500 and some 

that were just under 500. And that’s one of the specific 

problems that we’re trying to fix in this legislation, which is 

only the tool that allows us to continue the consultation around 

that particular problem. 

 

And so what we have done is set out here that we are going to 

put in the regulations the size of the community. And at this 

stage, I think it will be that all communities will share and there 

won’t be a minimum size. That’s my understanding of what it 

would be once we’ve implemented the whole process. 

 

But we’ve left that ability to change the numbers for a couple of 

reasons. One of them is that at this time we are using RCMP 

policing and we have another 15 years in our contract with the 

RCMP to provide policing across Saskatchewan. But 15 years 

from now, if there was some other form of policing that 

occurred, we may need to adjust some of those numbers, and so 

we’ve left some flexibility there. Also, through the discussions 

and negotiations, we may end up with another level which is 

more appropriate and makes everything fairer. 

 

So we wanted to just have the flexibility so that we didn’t need 

to come back to the legislature just over the size issue. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A further question. I 

understand the Bill provides the minister with power to 

negotiate global agreements with the RCMP on behalf of the 

municipalities. And I guess a couple questions out of this. What 

sort of global agreements are you talking about here, or 

referring to? And, Mr. Minister, does this mean that you would 

have the power to negotiate agreements? It says, on behalf of, 

but could those negotiations be done without any consultation? 

Are you still talking of consultation with the municipalities 

when you get into agreements and negotiation agreements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think there’s two parts to this answer. 

The first one is that municipalities under that section 5 there 

will have to elect to participate. So they have a choice about  



1914  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

whether they go in. The other thing is that the overall 

negotiation with the RCMP, on behalf of these extended 

communities, the smaller communities, that negotiation can 

only work when there is consultation with all of the 

communities affected. 

 

And we plan to continue the kinds of consultation that we’ve 

had so far. Because it’s the only way that we can do it in 

Saskatchewan, is to all work together as it relates to these 

policing issues. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you. Mr. Minister, one further question, 

and before I ask that question I’ll just thank you for your 

responses and having your assistants on hand, your staff 

members on hand, to respond to the questions. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, in view of the changes that will be taking 

place, do you have an idea of what type of monetary costs rural 

municipalities may be facing as a result of the shift and being 

asked to participate in cost-of-policing services versus where 

they are today as far as the costs that they face in running their 

municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer is similar to the 

answer that I gave before. The report, based on the figures that 

they were using, were looking . . . we looked at a figure of 

about $14.80 per capita. And so there’s a range that would be 

somewhere in that area of $15 that we’re looking at with some 

other adjustments as recommended in that report. 

 

But it’s a consultation process and we’re working with all of 

the particular idiosyncrasies and differences of different 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. I think, Mr. Minister, 

that the concerns and the issues that are being raised today, 

while money certainly is a concern, at the end of the day I think 

what most people are looking for in the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . And certainly some of the tragic events just 

recently such as the circumstances in Kyle, and we hope this 

doesn’t happen elsewhere. But many even smaller communities, 

people are finding that incidents are taking place that we used 

to think of just taking place in centres like Regina or Saskatoon. 

And the visible presence of policing can go a long ways to 

enhancing a safer society that we’re living in. 

 

So I would just like to say in closing that I think it’s certainly 

appropriate that we’re working together with all levels of 

government to come up with ways and means of providing that 

safer environment and certainly enhancing the policing services 

in our province. And I thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. As I indicated 

previously, I do have an amendment to this section. I’ll read as 

follows: 

This Act shall come into force: 

 

(a) only after the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

has granted legislative approval to the formula for 

calculating the cost of policing services to be borne by 

municipalities; and 

(b) on proclamation, which shall take place after such 

legislative approval.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, again, if I may say, while the principle 

of this Bill has been supported by the Liberal opposition, we 

simply are not prepared to put our signatures on a blank cheque 

on behalf of the rural municipalities and villages of this 

province. And that is what is being sought by the minister, and 

that is what we find objectionable. 

 

We ask the minister to accept this amendment, to vote in favour 

of it, in order that we will know exactly what we are approving 

on behalf of our smaller communities and our RMs before we 

approve it. 

 

If the minister is not prepared to accept that, then this 

legislation will not have the signatures of the Liberal opposition 

on it. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I would just like to speak briefly and 

say that we will not be accepting this amendment. And the 

reason for that is that we have worked out a scheme which will 

allow us to do the necessary consultation before this adjustment 

is made to provide fairer policing costs, but also a clear, visible 

presence throughout the province, of the police. And this 

amendment would not assist in that process. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:29 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 12 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Draude Bjornerud 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

Aldridge Toth Heppner 

 

Nays — 22 

 

Van Mulligen Atkinson Tchorzewski 

Johnson Whitmore Goulet 

Upshall Kowalsky Crofford 

Bradley Lorje Nilson 

Stanger Murray Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Jess Langford Murrell 

Thomson   

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 

 

(1530) 

 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my left is 

Dale Sigurdson, assistant deputy minister. On my right is Roy 

White — that rhymes, doesn’t it? On my right is Roy White, the 

secretary of the Agri-Food Council. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

welcome your officials here today. 

 

And I do take note that we have very few rural back-benchers in 

the House today, Mr. Minister. And I think while we’re going 

through the Bill today, it’ll become somewhat obvious as to 

why. And I appreciate you counting. 

 

But you and I both know, Mr. Minister, that what you have 

done here with this Bill by bringing it in at the end of the 

session the way you did, that what you have done, what you 

have done is tried to ram through something against the 

producers of this province — something that you and I both 

know is not going to be seen to be held in high regard by the 

producers of this province, Mr. Minister. And we’ll get into this 

a little later. 

 

I know that the member from Thunder Creek has already asked 

that some amendments be distributed to some of the members 

and yourself. And you will see the thrust of our points, Mr. 

Minister, are that you should not, you do not have the right, Mr. 

Minister, to take the — democratic right — to take the control 

out of producers’ hands. 

 

And it of course is very confusing for the farmers of this 

province when they take a look at the Bill that you have brought 

forward, Mr. Minister. Because on one hand you’re out there — 

you, your members, your government — you’ve been out there 

for some years selling yourselves as the champions for the little 

guy, fighting for all their causes; for their single-desk marketing 

system. 

 

You spent thousands and thousands of dollars during the barley 

vote that was recently held to give the appearance, I guess, that 

your government supports the farmers having a democratic right 

to decide their own fate and to control their own marketing 

system. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve got your federal campaign party right now 

is distributing information; you know, distributing information 

in regards to single-desk marketing especially, I guess, on the 

Canadian Wheat Board. But you’ve got members out there 

selling themselves as the champions of single-desk marketing 

and giving producers their democratic right — letting them 

decide their own future. 

 

We’ve got one candidate right here from Regina, Mr. Minister, 

that is selling that message. You have others on the front page 

of The Western Producer. I believe this one is Dick Proctor,  

NDP candidate in — what is that riding? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Palliser. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Palliser — also talking about single-desk 

marketing and producers’ rights. 

 

And yet, Mr. Minister, you feel compelled to take it upon 

yourself, to take it upon yourself to have full control over these 

boards, commissions, those producers that are part of those 

boards and commissions; that you have the right with the stroke 

of a pen to decide their future. And you’re doing that, Mr. 

Minister, without really going out and asking their opinion to 

find out what they want, to where this should go. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you stand in the House today . . . And I only 

ask some of these questions for the reason that I myself was 

away seeding while you brought the Bill in and I was unable to 

listen to some of the speeches in second reading. 

 

So I would like to hear it in your words, I’d like to hear it in 

your words why you, Mr. Minister, why you, Mr. Minister, feel 

that you should do exactly what the Minister of Health did last 

year — is bring in a Bill that sets out all the . . . everything that 

the boards should be doing in health boards out there, but at the 

end of the day, he’s got the power to decide what’s going to 

happen. 

 

And now you have done the same in agriculture, Mr. Minister, 

and I’d like to hear from your words why you feel you have that 

right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chair, I’ll just go over for the 

member some facts. This Bill simply . . . I’ll just do it; I know 

you weren’t here. 

 

By the way, when you started, you were talking about back rural 

members, and as I looked around you must’ve been mistaken or 

couldn’t see that far because every member that was in the 

House except for two or three were rural members. 

 

So just for the record — just for the record. I know you like to 

get away with these things but you’re not going to get away 

with that one. In fact we have more rural members in the House 

than you have entire members. So that’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Just get to the point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Anyway, yes, I know you want me to get 

to the point. I’ll just do a quick background for you. I won’t go 

into what the Bill does . . . and it does a number of things, like 

allows for a national check-offs and a few other things. 

 

But the point that you’re getting at is the power of the 

Executive Council. Now it’s not the stroke of the pen of a 

minister. I want you to be clear on that. This is simply enabling 

legislation. Simply, this is enabling legislation. It has to go 

through the whole process of Executive Council, to a cabinet 

decision item; so that debate comes to cabinet, then to caucus, 

before anything’s done. 

 



1916  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

So as far as this Bill is concerned, the controversial provision 

where the government would have the right to change 

unilaterally after it went through due process, would have the 

right to change a marketing board structure without listening to 

the vote of members, is true. That’s true. I’m not denying that. 

 

Prior to 1990 . . . Just let me . . . (inaudible) . . . It doesn’t deny 

members a vote. Under the Act, the Agri-Food Council still can 

be approached by a marketing board to have a vote to determine 

what should happen to their board. And we would think that 

would be the normal process. 

 

But there are some abnormalities that do come forward. But 

prior to 1990, the government of the day, the then Tory 

government, had the authority through legislation, like every 

other government in Canada, like every other government in 

Canada, had the authority to unilaterally change a marketing 

board if necessary. 

 

This is not something new. It was taken away by an amendment 

in 1990. When they put the amendment in in 1990, they didn’t 

even realize what had happened. It was only last year when our 

Justice people said, you don’t have any authority over the . . . 

like other provinces do, to change marketing boards if you had 

to. So then that’s why this Bill is here. 

 

So the amendment in 1990 took it away. We’re putting it back, 

and every other province has the power. 

 

But here’s my question to you. And I think if we’re going to get 

into this debate, I want to know where you stand. I’ll put a little 

test, a question — two questions. 

 

Number one, you’re saying this is a power grab by government 

and we’re going to wipe out the small producers and all this 

kind of stuff. Have you corresponded this thought with other 

Liberal governments in Canada, other provincial governments, 

who have this legislation or similar legislation? Have you 

written them and said, you’re going to wipe out small 

producers; you don’t have the authority to do this? 

 

That’s number one question. Have you done that? And if you 

haven’t, are you going to do it? Because let’s be consistent. If 

you’re saying it’s wrong to do it here, then you should be 

lobbying every Liberal government in Canada to take away their 

power so we’re on a level playing-field here. 

 

Question number two. Question number two is: if, as happened 

in Manitoba, a packing company like Schneiders . . . This is 

what happened in Manitoba. Schneiders comes in to the 

minister — the Government of Manitoba — says, I’ll put a $50 

million packing plant in; you kill single-desk. 

 

I ask you, if you were the minister of Agriculture in five years 

time or two or three or four years time and a company comes in 

to . . . it doesn’t have to be . . . pick your marketing board, says, 

we’ll put a 20, 30, 40, $50 million plant in here, we’ll employ 

1,000 or 1,500 people, and you kill the marketing board, my 

question to you is, what would you do? What would you do? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll start by saying that  

I’ll be asking the questions here today and hopefully you’ll be 

giving the answers. But I’m glad you asked those couple of 

questions because they raise some very important questions of 

my own for you. 

 

It’s not, Mr. Minister, so much whether we have consulted with 

governments or parties in other provinces. But, Mr. Minister, 

have you consulted with the producers affected by this 

legislation here in Saskatchewan, in the place that we represent 

these people? Have you done that? 

 

(1545) 

 

Don’t talk to me about what we should have done in other 

provinces unless I know for sure that you have consulted right 

here in Saskatchewan. And I dare say you haven’t. 

 

On the fact of enabling legislation, you’re still trying to sell this 

as something not such a big deal — enabling legislation. 

 

Well let’s be clear on what you are saying, Mr. Minister. You 

are saying that you don’t have to go out and consult with any of 

the affected people, those people that are spending the hundreds 

of thousands of dollars in agri-business, on family farm 

operations. You’re not consulting those people. 

 

What you’re saying is you’re going to consult with and discuss 

with, your cabinet colleagues and your caucus — no other 

member of this legislature. So that’s what you’re doing. 

 

What you have got here is complete power, really in your 

hands. I mean as Minister of Agriculture, if you can’t influence 

your cabinet and your caucus . . . well I suspect you can. I’m 

going to give you that credit. I’m sure you can. You’re a very 

. . . you have a lot of influence in your cabinet, I’m sure. 

 

But what this is doing, you have the right, Mr. Minister, to close 

down board operations without a vote. Simple as that. You can 

decide whether to consult with . . . by way of producer vote, as 

to their future. You have . . . well you don’t have to allow a 

vote, but if you do allow a vote, you don’t have to accept the 

outcome of that vote. You can decide how the vote should be 

handled. You can decide the minimum number of voters. You 

can decide the percentage of voters that would constitute a vote 

to be valid. 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Minister, you, and you alone — well 

your cabinet and your caucus — you and your caucus can 

decide whether or not the future direction of these boards or 

producers should be handled by you or them. 

 

And you’ve chosen, you’ve chosen the latter . . . or the first. 

You feel that you have better knowledge of the business, that 

you know where things are going, that you and your department 

should be able to decide people’s investments far better than 

they. And I disagree. 

 

Now you raised another very interesting point when you talked 

about what if I were a minister and in a situation as the minister 

in Manitoba found himself in. Well what you told this House 

today, Mr. Minister, is that someone of incredible size,  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

marketing size — right? — has put some pressure on you and 

you succumbed to the pressure. Did he not say that? It 

happened in Manitoba. It’s going to happen here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, perhaps you should stand in this House today and 

tell us who is applying that pressure to you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I know that you were . . . would not 

like to respond. But I’ll tell you: in a fair debate you have to tell 

me where you stand. 

 

An Hon. Member:  On what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  On this issue. I want to know. Put 

yourself . . . let’s go into fantasy land here for a minute and say 

the Liberals won government, won the next government. Let’s 

go to fantasy land because that’ll never happen. 

 

But let’s say you won the next government and you were the 

Minister of Agriculture and you were put in a position — the 

same position that I’m put in — where you’re not on a level 

playing-field with Alberta and Manitoba or any other province. 

Therefore you don’t have the opportunity to develop the 

economy of this province the same way that Alberta and 

Manitoba might. 

 

And in terms of the industry, the industry’s changing so 

quickly. At one time, you know, a couple hundred thousand 

bird kill a day was a packing plant . . . eviscerating plant for 

chickens, for turkeys. Right now we’re up to a quarter of a 

million in — after today’s announcement — in Wynyard, and 

the plants now are aiming at a million bird kill as the efficiency. 

 

This is nothing to do with anybody except they’ve decided 

that’s what they have to be to be efficient and that’s what 

they’re shooting at. And they’ll get there. 

 

The hog industry used to be 20,000 kill a week, was sort of the 

norm. You know what the efficiency measure today is? Is 

40,000 kill one shift. 

 

So what I’m saying is there’s going to be fewer plants. There 

isn’t going to be a couple plants in Alberta and a couple in 

Saskatchewan and a couple in Manitoba. There’s going to be 

one or two. 

 

And if that plant . . . if those plants . . . This has nothing to do 

with my philosophy on marketing boards. I’m the old socialist 

marketing board; they’ve done a hell of a — excuse me, Mr. 

Chair, a heck of a job. I withdraw that remark. A heck of a job. 

They were put in many years ago. They’ve done a good job. 

Times are changing; you’ve got to be pragmatic. 

 

And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, put yourself in that position, Mr. 

Member. Five years down the road without this legislation and 

somebody like Cargill or ConAg or the Maple Leaf or Sask 

Wheat Pool, Fletcher’s or Intercon comes to you and says, I’m 

going to put in a 40,000-kill one-shift plant in Saskatoon or 

Calgary or Winnipeg, but we don’t want marketing boards 

because this is the way the industry’s going. What would you  

do? How would you direct the economy? How would you be in 

the same playing-field as Saskatchewan and Manitoba — I’m 

just not quite finished, so you might as well sit down — 

because you wouldn’t have that opportunity. 

 

I’ll sit down by telling you that the fact here is, the consultation 

process, you’re dead right. You’re dead right. We didn’t go out 

for 12 months and talk to every producer and producer group 

under supply management. That was my decision for a good 

reason. Because I’m not sure that you understand — as opposed 

to the Tories who understand this thing because they’re 

agreeing with it — that you and the Liberal Party understand 

what business is all about. You would be up and grandstanding 

despite the fact, despite the fact that you supported this Bill in 

second reading. 

 

Now let’s think about this: you supported . . . if you weren’t 

here, your colleagues all supported it. There wasn’t one no vote. 

There wasn’t one nay in the yeas and nays. So you supported it. 

Your party supported it in second reading; now you’re coming 

in to change it. So I don’t know . . . with amendments; so I 

don’t know. But anyway, here’s the reason. 

 

I wasn’t sure, because of the politics that you would throw into 

it and convolute with half truths — you and others — you and 

others, like Mr. Morris out of SPI through a Liberal press 

release, I wasn’t particularly sure that this legislation would 

pass. 

 

And I’ll tell you another fact. I know that in our caucus as well, 

there were many members, including myself, saying what are 

we doing here? This is not what we’re all about. But you know 

what? You have to look at the world through clear glasses — 

not rose-coloured. 

 

Had we gone and held a year ahead and done the consultation 

process . . . And the way I sum it up is, there’s a time to lead 

and there’s a time to follow. And I believe this is a time to lead. 

Because had we done that — and you would have convoluted, 

whipped everybody up — maybe this legislation wouldn’t have 

passed. And I sincerely believe we need it, not for some hidden 

agenda, but simply to put us on the level playing-field as far as 

business is concerned in terms of the way the world is going as 

far as packing plants are concerned, to make sure that we have 

an industry. 

 

You’re saying I would destroy and others then would destroy 

industry. No, we’re doing this to make sure we have an 

industry. Because if that packing plant, whether it be chicken or 

hogs, goes to Calgary or Edmonton or Winnipeg, do you know 

where the production is going to be? It’s going to be within a 

hundred miles of Calgary or Winnipeg or Edmonton — not in 

Saskatchewan. There’ll be some, but not like it could have 

been. And that’s why I did what I did and I know I’m going to 

take criticism for it, but I’ll tell you, logically, I still believe it 

was the right thing to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  You see, Mr. Minister — as soon as the 

urban members that are clapping for you are finished — Mr.  



1918  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Minister, the problem with your argument is that you’re trying 

to sell to us that you had no time. That you had no time to go 

out and consult Saskatchewan producers . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you did say that. You were saying that 

this had to be done now, can’t be done next year. 

 

Do you think for a moment that I’m going to sit here and 

believe that somebody moving in with a $50 million operation 

is just walking in and saying, you know what, Saskatchewan, 

you’ve got two weeks to decide. Now that’s not how that kind 

of business works, Mr. Minister; you know it and I know it. 

 

And not only is that not how it works but what would you do 

. . . Mr. Minister, let’s go back to your fantasy land; I don’t live 

there but I’ll enjoy visiting for a moment. Okay. But let’s just 

think for a moment what’s going to happen, or who do you and 

I represent? We represent Saskatchewan people, producers, 

family farms. That’s who we represent. 

 

And so you are saying to us that you’re more comfortable if 

Tyson Foods — I think it’s Tyson Foods from the States — 

moves up here, an operation that really could supply all of 

Canada’s needs with one day’s operation. Is that right? I believe 

I heard that from you a year ago. Okay. So who are we running 

roughshod over top of? We’re running roughshod over 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

And we are not saying that we are not pro-business. You know 

that you’re using half-truths in that sense. But all we’re saying, 

is this the only way that you have of helping business or 

promoting business? To say, let’s forget about Saskatchewan 

producers; we’ve got some large entrepreneur out here that can 

come in and just take over everything? Are you not concerned 

at all about the thousands of producers that you are affecting 

here in the province? Do you see no way that they can fit into 

this picture that you’re trying to paint? What about them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  But see, that’s where we fundamentally 

disagree. I think my job is to grow the industry. What you’re 

saying is, your job is to stymie the industry. That’s not true. 

Because if we’re going to produce enough hogs in this province 

to make sure we have a packing plant, we have to have 

everybody producing. 

 

And look at Manitoba. The producers were upset when 

single-desk ended. If you read the reports out of Manitoba, 

they’ve got a stronger marketing arm now than they had before. 

I was just reading yesterday — stronger than they had before. 

Because the fact of the matter is, if you’re in Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan . . . take the U.S. (United States). They’ve got 

huge marketing co-ops. There are some integrated hog-kill 

facilities that market on their own, true. But there’s huge 

marketing co-ops that all the producers, or the majority of the 

producers, belong to because they know there’s strength in 

numbers. So whether it’s legislated or not, there’s going to be a 

marketing division. 

 

But here comes the problem. I want to try to grow this industry 

because I see the potential. And I’m not the only one. Alberta is 

doing it, Manitoba’s doing it, the U.S. are going great guns 

expansion because there’s a huge market developing in the  

Asian countries, and in Russia to some degree. 

 

So we need everybody to produce. We’re not killing the little 

producer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, that’s not what 

they think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They can’t compete. 

The member says they can’t compete. With what? This 

legislation will be enacted, and the day after that are they all 

going to go out and sell their farms? No, they’re not going to, 

because they’re going to have a marketing division. 

 

Did Manitoba’s industry shut down when they killed 

single-desk? Of course it didn’t. Did Alberta shut down when 

they don’t have single-desk? Or Iowa or any place in the States? 

Of course it didn’t. 

 

Are they getting more money than we are, or less money than 

we are? No. In fact some of the problems with some of the 

production is that Saskatchewan’s prices weren’t as high. And 

that’s got nothing to do with single-desk. That’s got everything 

to do with the management of the marketing boards. 

 

(1600) 

 

And we want to make the best product that we can have here 

for marketing boards. But here’s the factor. From 1990 to 1996, 

there was 1,112 hog producers exited the industry. All but 12 of 

those were under 100 sow units; 12 of them were under 200 

sow units. In the same time, in the same six years, there were 33 

new entrants, all of them over 200 sow units. This legislation 

wasn’t even in in 1996. It’s the trend in the industry. 

 

I mean you can do your politics about this, and I’ll take my 

lumps and I’ll get calls from small producers who are all afraid 

that we’re going to destroy them. It’s not true. Smaller 

producers are leaving this industry of their own volition, before 

this legislation. You know why? I know why. 

 

When I lived at my parents’ home when I was younger, we had 

hogs. They had hogs — 20, 25 sows until a few years ago. But 

do you know what happens? You’ve got 25 sows, you’ve got a 

hundred head of cattle, you’ve got 12 or 14 quarters of land, 

and you work so long. And all of a sudden you say, you know 

what? — this isn’t paying me much. What’s the first thing to 

go? It’s the 20, 25 sows because it’s the most labour intense. 

 

You can feed a hundred head of cattle with a tractor and round 

bales and a feed system with very little work, compared to hogs. 

The same amount of work on 20, 25 sow hogs, you could 

probably have 5 or 600 sows. 

 

And it’s those producers, it’s the industry going that way that’s 

going to grow this industry. And that’s not me directing it; it’s 

not you or anybody else. Look at the numbers. It’s simply 

economics. And if we want to make sure that we can compete 

with these other two provinces, we have to be on the same 

playing-field as they are, the same rules. We don’t have their 

rules; we’re at a disadvantage. I just believe we should be with 

the same rules. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you see really there again 

some of the problems with your argument. And don’t try and  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

confuse the issue of whether or not everyone in this House or in 

this province wants us to have a much more viable pork 

industry or chicken industry or egg industry. Of course we all 

do. Let’s accept that up front. But the point is, Mr. Minister, 

why do you feel you need the power to control it? Why do you 

feel you need the power over the producers to decide their 

future and their fate? 

 

That’s the problem with this Bill and that was the problem with 

the health Bill of last year — that you can have all the 

legislation you want, but with the legislation, if at the end of the 

day you with the stroke of a pen can decide where it’s going, I 

don’t think that people are comfortable with that. The producers 

aren’t. 

 

Of course we want these huge operations. And you yourself are 

saying that, well the industry is going in a certain direction 

regardless of what member in this House stands ideologically or 

not for whatever. And you're right; you’re right. We aren’t 

going to influence it that much because I think the industries 

will go where they are going. So then the question is, why do 

you feel you need this power? Why do you need this legislation 

if it’s going there regardless? 

 

Mr. Minister, I got a number of — well I guess it’s what? nine 

of them — of the different boards and commissions that we’ve 

talked to. And I would have to ask you, have you consulted 

with them? You and I both know the answer is no. You haven’t 

taken the time to consult with them or to find out their feelings 

or how they feel they could have played a role here. 

 

And so by not doing that we have to assume that whatever 

mandate the boards and commissions had and whatever 

accomplishments they have made, you, your department, 

someone over on that side of the House, is going to take those 

roles and responsibilities over and try to achieve like 

accomplishments. 

 

Take the Vegetable Producers of Saskatchewan. They were 

established by a producer vote in March 1994, and they’ve had 

a hundred per cent growth in the seed potato sector. So are we 

to assume now that’s going to be done out of your office, if by 

the stoke of a pen you can say we don’t need them any more? 

So are you doing that? 

 

The Saskatchewan Sheep Development Board, there’s the . . . 

where are we? They represent 1,300 producers who raise 

83,000 lambs per year. And so whatever, for whatever they’re 

doing, whether there’s strategic plans to build that industry — I 

take it you’re going to do it right out of your office. 

 

Saskatchewan Pulse Crop Development Board, founded in 

1984 after a producer vote — are you going to take over, are 

you going to take over the accomplishments that they’ve had in 

developing new strains of pulses and such? Are you going to do 

that? 

 

Saskatchewan Broiler Hatching Egg Producers’ Marketing 

Board, formed in 1985 after a producer vote. Their 

accomplishment: achieving major price increases for the benefit 

of producers. 

And these, Mr. Minister . . . I mean we were in contact with 

them and we were asking them their major accomplishments, 

and I’m just going to touch very briefly for . . . you and I both 

know we don’t have long, much time here today. But I have to 

ask you, Mr. Minister, if, if each and every one of these boards 

and their accomplishments . . . who will take it over? Will it be 

you personally? 

 

The Saskatchewan Canola Development Commission — 

long-term goals to increase producer profitability, to increase 

canola research and market development opportunities which 

will benefit producers, keep producers competitive in global 

markets. Mr. Minister, are you going to take over those 

responsibilities? 

 

What about the Chicken Marketing Board and the turkey 

producers? I mean all of their accomplishments — am I to 

assume, Mr. Minister, that you are now going to take over all 

the responsibilities? Or are you going to say no, it’s going to go 

wherever it’s going to go and those producers out there can’t 

play a role in where Saskatchewan ends up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well there was many, many questions 

there. First thing I want to say, I told you why, how the concept 

. . . that there was no long-drawn-out consultation with 

producers. I told you why that was . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Why? Because I think you would convolute this enough out 

in the public, whip people up with falsehoods and half-truths, 

that it may not have passed — and I think it’s important it 

passed. I take full responsibility for that process, full 

responsibility. 

 

However I’ve said since I’ve been minister, a year and a half or 

more ago now, on every occasion, I believe we should be 

internally reassessing our current marketing systems to ensure 

that they’re giving us the best value, that they’re giving us the 

best return for our product in the new world trade environment 

in order that we might grow the industry. They’ve said that 

consistently. Chicken producers, hog producers, all marketing 

board producers. And they’re doing it. The milk producers have 

gone to western pooling instead of provincial pooling. That’s a 

step in the right direction. 

 

And you know why? You know why? You ask . . . and I’ve 

asked this question 100 times if I’ve asked it once. In five years 

time do you think we’re going to have — or 10 years time — do 

you think we’re going to have marketing boards as we know it 

today? Or marketing boards, period? You know what the 

consistent answer from producers is? No, we probably won’t. 

Because you got World Trade Organization coming up in 1999. 

 

You know the pressure that was on last time in ’95, the pressure 

to get rid of marketing boards on the world scale. They’re not 

going to quit. All I’m saying is lookit, if you answer that 

question yes, which they all have . . . I mean anybody I talk to 

in a marketing board, they all think that it’s going to be . . . 

come a time between 5 and 10 years, or maybe sooner — 1999 

is the next WTO (World Trade Organization) round — that 

we’re not going to have marketing boards. All I’m saying is, 

let’s get prepared — let’s get prepared for that time. Do I like 

it? No. But I think I’m a bit of a realist. 



1920  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

You can’t just sit on your laurels, bury your head in the sand, 

and all of a sudden one day you wake up and say, the rules have 

changed, and holy smoly, we better get to work; try to be able to 

compete and catch up. All I’m saying in the industry, the broad 

consultation, when I talk to them I say lookit, we’ve got to keep 

looking at ourselves. 

 

Canadian Wheat Board did the same thing. Looked at it; there’s 

some changes in. Too bad your federal colleague there, Mr. 

Goodale, didn’t have the nerve to put those changes through 

before the election. That’s another question. But you’ve got to 

have it. 

 

Now I want to make a point about the Vegetable Growers. If we 

let this legislation through, the Vegetable Growers came to the 

Agri-Food Council and said, we want to disband, so how do we 

do this. Well the rules are that you have to have a vote of your 

producers. Okay, so we’ll have a vote of producers. They had a 

vote of producers. Producers said yes, we want to disband; it 

was disbanded. That process cost about $10,000 to somebody 

— taxpayers. 

 

Under this legislation, if they would have come to the 

government and said, we’ve decided through our democratic 

process — because they have members and they have delegates 

and they have boards of directors, all these organizations — 

we’ve decided through our democratic process that we want to 

disband, I can say okay, take it to the Executive Council, and 

it’s done — saving money and achieving what they want to 

achieve. 

 

If the cattle people who want a national check-off, they 

come. Do we demand they have a vote? They’ve come to us as 

an association and say, we want to have a national check-off for 

R&D (research and development) and whatever else. This 

would accommodate that; we could just put it through 

Executive Council and make the change for them. But this is 

about growing the industry, not killing it. And I will try to 

convince you of that for as long as you want because . . . I’ll 

make one more point before I sit down, and I enjoy this debate 

because it’s an absolutely fundamental, important debate that 

we have to have in this province. 

 

Because we have good systems in place but they were put in 

place 25 years ago. The question is, are they still good? And are 

they good for whom? Is the person that produces 50,000 

weanlings a year and expanding, does he have the same 

influence over the industry as a person producing 1,500 

weanlings a year? Those are fundamental questions; that’s why 

this debate is so important. 

 

I’m going to give you an example, and I’m going to use the 

chicken industry. I’m not picking on the chicken industry, but 

it’s the best example that I can give you. There’s 72 chicken 

producers in this province. If we were to access . . . if 

somebody . . . a plant were to come in here and say, okay, we 

want to put our plant here. And as you know, if you know the 

chicken industry, the DOAs (dead on arrival) go up after — I 

don’t know, 50 miles; they’re probably less than that — the 

DOAs on the plant go up quite dramatically because the length 

of haul is important. So what happens is your chicken industry  

grows around the plants. 

 

Should there be no change — by the way, they can still have a 

vote . . . If I could just have the members’ attention because this 

is important. Should there be no change — and they have to 

have a vote — and those 72 producers said no, we don’t want a 

change in the marketing board, we don’t want that new plant 

and those 1,000 jobs or 500 jobs with the feed mills and the 

trucking companies and everything else . . . Just go to Wynyard 

and see what a chicken plant does for you. Go to Wynyard. 

Today they announced a $10 million expansion, from 365 

workers to 465 workers. Do you know what that does for that 

town? It’s incredible. 

 

So my fundamental question is, if the 72 chicken producers . . . 

and I know they vote this because they’re forward-thinking; 

they’re looking at their industry. I’ve had talks with them and 

we’ve had disagreements at times, but I know they know that 

the world is changing. But should they vote, have a vote and 

say no, we don’t want that plant; we don’t want the economy in 

this province to grow, should they be able to hold ransom the 

government? That’s the question. And I ask you. I want you to 

answer. 

 

Whereas with this legislation, the government has the authority 

to say look, we’ve got this many jobs in the plant; we’ve got 

this many jobs in expanded production in the barns; and we’ve 

got this many jobs in feed mills; and this many acres of feed 

wheat or wheat that these chickens will consume. Boy, you 

know, maybe we better say to those chicken producers that 

voted no, sorry, we understand your point but it’s in the best 

interest of this province to make that change. 

 

See, what would you do? Do you agree that the government 

should have the power? Do you agree? Like I’m not picking on 

chicken producers, but it’s the best example because they’re a 

small . . . there’s only 72 of them. You could take any other 

industry as well and just . . . the numbers change. 

 

But shouldn’t the government have the right? Does the 

government not have the right, like every other government in 

Canada does, to control the economy? 

 

And people will say they’re cheap, they’re cheap jobs. They’ve 

got all these cheap jobs. You know, cheap jobs because they’re 

going to be all vertically integrated and they’re all going to 

work in the barns for minimum wage. 

 

Do you know what a 1,200 sow-farrow-to-finish barn manager 

makes in this province? It’s in the range of 50 to $60,000 a 

year. In Alberta the bigger 2,400 sow units, they’re making up 

$100,000 a year. There isn’t one . . . In the barns that I’m 

familiar with, there’s isn’t one minimum wage job in the hog 

barn. So don’t get carried away with the rhetoric. 

 

The question I ask you, and please answer: under the scenario 

put forward by the chicken people, do you think the government 

shouldn’t have the right to direct the economy and that they 

should be able to hold the economy ransom? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, let me say one more time:  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

it’s not that anyone is opposed to expansions, large expansions 

in this province. We want to be on the same footing as other 

provinces. We want to have the huge operations here. But, Mr. 

Minister, you’re saying that it’s only you in your office, in your 

cabinet room that should be able to direct or drive where this is 

going. And we’re asking why you’re uncomfortable putting it to 

Saskatchewan producers to decide. 

 

On one hand, you’re telling me that the industries are going in a 

certain direction regardless. Fine. Let them go. They are 

expanding. We all know that. The small ones are eventually 

dropping off, as they are in every industry, in farming and you 

name it. 

 

But I look at my own farming operation where a few years ago, 

strictly durum. And about five years ago I started into canola. 

Now my farm operation is half canola. And you know, we’ve 

tried lentils. We try a number of things. But I didn’t have to 

have the Minister of Agriculture, out of his office, decide or 

drive where I was going to go with this. 

 

Producers should be allowed to decide their own future. Not at 

the expense of stopping industry, but at least have them part of 

the game, Mr. Minister. And that’s where you’re making a 

mistake. You’re shutting out people in this province, and that is 

going to cost you. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well no, I want to reply to that, part of 

that question. And under your scenario, my assistant deputy 

points out, if there would’ve been a lentil marketing board you 

wouldn’t be able to grow those lentils because the quota would 

be tied up. So I mean, don’t get into that; don’t go down that 

road. 

 

I want to make one point. There is no change. The provision for 

votes is still there. It’s still there and will be used. 

 

I know you’re trying to fearmonger and say to the people that 

we’re taking their voice away. It’s only an extreme situation. I 

would hope I’d never have to use this. But I’ll tell you, the 

government has to have the right to direct the economy. Direct 

the economy, that’s what we have to do. That’s our job. 

 

Now the little bit of a twist here is that you’ve got a federal 

government pushing deregulation, pushing deregulation — 

transportation, the grain trade, and everything else — and we 

have been put, in western Canada, in a box. 

 

You’ve taken away . . . I’ll take two minutes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I know, but this is . . . okay, I mean I 

won’t, I will not cut the other member off. I’ll be real quick 

here. 

 

We’re in a box. You’ve got a deregulated environment that is 

costing farmers more money to move their grain. You took 

away the Crow benefit, the federal Liberals — 320 million 

bucks a year. I’m not whining, it’s gone. So how do we have to 

respond? 

 

Value added meat products in Saskatchewan, that’s the best 

growth area we have. Value added meat production. But we 

have national agreements that give Ontario more quota because 

of the way it was set up originally. The quota was set up as far 

as population was concerned. They had more population, they 

got more quota than Saskatchewan. 

 

So we’ve got a federal agreement handcuffing, handcuffing us, 

after you’ve deregulated the system. You can’t have it both 

ways. 

 

If you want to deregulate the system, then agree with that, with 

your federal counterparts, but don’t come to this House and say, 

oh, well, but you guys are taking the power away from 

producers. We’re responding to the new realities in the 

deregulated world . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, 

we’re just simply responding. And you’re being a little bit 

inconsistent with your arguments. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, 

Minister, and welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, I think 

that the . . . What I see happening here is a shift from one 

monopoly to another — from marketing boards which have a 

monopoly to large corporate monopolies. Now one of those is 

no better or no different from the other. 

 

In an instance like this, I think what we have to reflect on is the 

role of government in a time of global change. Many citizens 

and producers of this province are, apparently, finding 

themselves caught up in the transition. And so that has to be, I 

guess. But I believe that it’s government’s role and their 

responsibility in respect for its citizens to provide policies that 

at least provide some measure of cushioning to these changes. 

 

Now had the government introduced this Bill a year ago or so 

and provided adequate time for marketing boards to prepare for 

the change, through some discussion with their own members, 

and in order to prepare for the change and to give time for 

members of this House to hear from them, this might have give 

them a fighting chance to map out their destiny in view of 

what’s happening. 

 

Now would that have not been a reasonable way to go about it, 

Mr. Minister? Do you think that this is a fair measure for any 

government to take in respect of its citizens? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think I must have caught you off guard 

by telling you the real reason that the consultation process was 

none, because you’re going to do your cheap politics and I think 

this is important to do. And you’re going to try to whip up all 

the little producers and say that this is going to be the end of 

them — which is not true. The day after this legislation passes, 

tomorrow, nothing is going to change, nothing is going to 

change. 

 

So I’ll tell you — there’s a time to lead and there’s a time to 

follow. And I’m willing to take that flack because I think it’s 

that important. We have lots of concerns, and I understand your 

concerns. But it’s got nothing to do with this — nothing is 

going to change tomorrow. People are going to still produce, 

they’re going to still try to grow this hog industry. 



1922  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

You think this legislation is going to go bang. Why didn’t it 

happen before? Why doesn’t it happen in other provinces? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, we’re talking here about some very 

fundamental principles on democracy which your government 

often expounds from that side of the House. Now there was no 

level of democracy whatsoever when people are not at least 

approached with changes that are coming about in order to give 

them some opportunity for input. 

 

I’d like to just shift over to a recent article in the Leader-Post, 

Mr. Minister. This article outlined concerns that small hog 

producers have with regard to the elimination of the marketing 

board. Would the minister give us in his opinion . . . his opinion 

rather, as to what effect the change in legislation that you’re 

bringing about and possibly the elimination of the hog 

marketing board, would have on small hog producers. 

 

Now you did allude to this a bit but I don’t think it was a very 

clear answer. I would appreciate right from the heart, your 

feeling on what effect this legislation is going to have on small 

hog producers in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would venture to say it would have 

zero impact on the small hog producers, and I say that based on 

the experience in Manitoba. First of all, zero impact in terms of 

like, tomorrow nothing changes. We’re not going to tomorrow 

stroke the pen and ending it. All this is doing is putting us on 

the same playing-field. And as far as if the decision was made 

by the board themselves or by the government to end the hog 

marketing single-desk, then I think there’s still no change. 

 

Go over to Manitoba — I mean, I’m not promoting this. I’m 

just saying this is simply putting us in the same playing-field — 

go over to Manitoba and ask them. Their small producers didn’t 

change. We’re seeing a trend where small producers are 

dropping off simply because of the cost/benefit of that size of 

production — the viability. 

 

But I want to say something. This government — this is the 

difference between Liberals and New Democrats — this 

government to 1990 made one pile of tough decisions, many of 

which there was no consultation on because we had to do it. It 

was the right thing to do in terms of directing the economy. 

 

And I can remember 1993, 1992 very well. The Liberals were 

jumping for glee because they thought they were going to win 

government because we were making so many drastic changes. 

It didn’t happen. 

 

This is the same thing. It’s not because I want to kill marketing 

boards. I want to ensure this industry grows. And this puts us at 

the same position as every other province and gives us the same 

advantage. Right now we are disadvantaged. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, the SPI Marketing Group has stated 

that they fear the loss of the hog marketing board will cause a 

loss of hogs for in-province processors to out-of-province 

processors. How would you address that concern raised by SPI: 

that if the government moves to an open marketing system, 

hogs will start moving out of the province rather than being  

processed here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  First question I want to ask is, who was 

the representative from SPI that said that? I’d like you to 

answer that because there’s been a certain member of the staff 

of SPI who’s been saying things that are not true. 

 

And secondly, if the producers are going to be selling out of 

province, logically, you would think maybe they’re going to get 

a higher price because it costs more to ship them out. So if 

they’re going to get . . . if that’s the reason then — I mean that’s 

the only reason I can see them going out of province, because 

we’ve got packing plants here — if they’re going to get a higher 

price, then you have to ask yourself the question, is there 

something wrong inside the province? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I would suggest that you call the 

general manager of SPI and you do that yourself. It is your 

responsibility because you are the government bringing in this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I understand the Act and the Bill, the changes 

being made are in order for the government to have control over 

the existence of the marketing boards for the reason of being 

able to market the province to potential processors and 

investors. Specifically we understand that the government 

wants control over the board so that they may be abolished to 

make the province more attractive to processors. 

 

Is there a pending announcement in the works that a company 

such as Maple Leaf Foods might open up a plant in 

Saskatchewan that would warrant such a drastic and immediate 

change to the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The answer to your question is no. 

 

But I ask you a question. If there were, if there were — Maple 

Leaf came in and said okay, we’ll do 40,000 kill a week plant in 

Saskatoon; you kill the marketing board, what would you do? I 

asked your colleague the same question. What would you do? 

Would you say no, I don’t want it; you go to Manitoba or 

Alberta? 

 

I want you to answer that question, please, because I think it’s a 

very, very important question. And your question is important 

as well. 

 

Maple Leaf have never indicated — ever indicated — to us that 

they would come or not come because of the marketing boards. 

That’s off. 

 

I want to tell you something. When you direct me to talk to the 

general manager of SPI, Mr. Jim Morris, your party put out a 

press release last week where they quoted Mr. Morris as saying 

that this Act, that this Act was the reason for lay-offs in Moose 

Jaw. That was a direct falsehood. 

 

What I did is I went to the person who is not the employee of 

SPI but the Chair of the board, Mr. John Germs — Mr. John 

Germs. I’ve called him. I said, I see this press release; I see Mr. 

Morris’s report in the May 5 hog report where he’s again  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

talking about this legislation being the cause of Moose Jaw 

plant’s . . . I said, is that true? He said to me, no. I said, please 

then I have to have something in writing from you to say that 

this is not true. 

 

I have a letter in front of me that he wrote to me. “The Board of 

Directors” . . . This is from John Germs, Chair of SPI 

Marketing Group to myself. “The Board of Directors” . . . And 

this is May 14, 1997: 

 

The Board of Directors of SPI Marketing Group has 

decided to downsize the Moose Jaw Packer plant for two 

reasons: 

 

1. The hog shortage problem in Saskatchewan; (which by 

the way is right across Canada, not just Saskatchewan, and 

2) 

 

. . . The Directors are not prepared to subsidize its 

Provisions Account through the weekly pool. 

 

Nothing to do with the legislation. The decision to close Moose 

Jaw was made before this legislation was known to Mr. Morris. 

And the question that I ask you and the Liberal Party is why you 

put yourselves together with somebody who doesn’t tell the 

truth about this industry. Please answer that question. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I have a question for you. If Maple 

Leaf wanted to open up an expanded flour mill and they ask 

you to do away with single-desk marketing of the Wheat Board, 

would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I really wish we had a few more hours to 

this. 

 

An Hon. Member:  I wish we had a few months here. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  So do I, because two months . . . it’ll 

take me two years to explain to you people, to you people the 

way the world is working these days. 

 

You can’t compare the Wheat Board to this. The Wheat Board 

has had an analysis done, has had analysis done. And it 

provides money to the farmers over and above the street price. 

 

Here’s the difference. Here’s the difference. I live in 

Saskatchewan and I’m a grain farmer. I’m in the Wheat Board 

area. If I don’t like the Wheat Board, I can go pick up and move 

to Manitoba or move to Alberta. Guess what? I’m still in the 

Wheat Board area. 

 

If I’m a hog producer or a chicken producer or any other 

producer living in Saskatchewan and I don’t like the marketing 

board that I’m under for whatever reason — not doing a good 

job, maybe I don’t think it’s giving me enough price, whatever, 

it doesn’t matter — I can pick up my barns or I can leave my 

barns here, build my next ones in Manitoba and Alberta, and it 

will make a difference. 

 

It’s apples and oranges. I know you’re trying to simplify the 

issue and convolute it, but just think about it logically. It’s 

apples and oranges totally, and you know that. And there’s a lot 

longer debate to be had on this, but just for simplicity reasons I 

just want to say, that’s the fundamental difference and you can’t 

compare them. Every one has to be looked at on its own merits 

for the benefit of the industry. The Wheat Board is still by far 

benefiting the Canadian farmers. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, according to the Farm Products 

Agencies Act, federal, there are some statutes in place that may 

affect how marketing boards are changed. To quote from the 

Act under delegation of powers, it says: 

 

An agency may, with the approval of the Governor in 

Council, grant authority to any body authorized under the 

law of a province to exercise powers of regulation in 

relation to the marketing locally within the province, of 

any regulated product, in relation to which the agency may 

exercise its function relating to interprovincial or export 

trade in the regulated product that the agency is authorized 

to perform. 

 

Now our interpretation of the clause would be that the federal 

cabinet can grant authority to create a marketing board, so long 

as it is allowed for under provincial statutes, to market any 

regulated product in a province. 

 

My question would then be to you, if this is the case, could this 

federal statute be used by a group of producers to reinstate or 

re-create a marketing board in the province by a federal cabinet 

decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Again it’s an apples and oranges 

situation because they have jurisdiction for interprovincial 

trade, not for trade within the province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you for that in-depth answer. Mr. Minister, 

I am asking these questions on behalf of producers that have put 

the questions to me and I ask this on behalf of the chairman of 

the Turkey Producers, Mr. Dennis Billo from Bruno. Now he 

wants to know, should the government abolish any marketing 

board, how will this abolishment affect any national quotas that 

exist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well for example in the hog industry, 

there is no . . . the difference . . . you’re talking about two 

different things here. You’re talking about supply management 

versus single-desk selling. There’s no supply management in 

the hog industry. There’s no supply management in the hog 

industry. There’s single-desk selling in Saskatchewan, which is 

basically the only province with single-desk left. 

 

In the chicken industry, there’s single-desk in Saskatchewan 

plus supply management agreement nationally through the 

Canadian chicken marketing association; Your colleague over 

there knows all about this. And the turkeys through the 

Canadian turkey marketing association. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Does the government have any plans to abolish 

any other particular marketing boards like the turkey marketing  



1924  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

board in order to try and promote a certain industry in the 

province? I mean it’s obvious that SPI is probably going to be 

gone. But I’m just wondering whether government has any 

plans to abolish any other particular marketing board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, just one last question. I’m 

wondering if you’ve considered how the abolishment of 

marketing boards will affect Saskatchewan producers’ access to 

other markets, either national or international. 

 

I’m just wondering if the minister has considered how the 

abolishment of marketing boards will affect Saskatchewan 

producers, their access to other markets, either national or 

international. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well first of all, you keep talking about 

abolishing marketing boards. That isn’t what this is all about. 

That isn’t what this is all about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

The member says we’ve got the power to do it. Yes. I go back 

to my original question to that member and maybe his colleague 

can answer it for me. 

 

Do you believe that other provinces should . . . Do you believe 

that we should be on a level playing-field, number one? Do you 

believe that Saskatchewan should be on the same plane as every 

other province? 

 

If so, and you’re arguing here — even though you voted for this 

Bill on second reading — you’re arguing that we shouldn’t do 

this, then you better start your lobby to all your Liberal 

colleagues across every province in Canada to change their 

legislation so that we’re on the same level playing-field. If I 

thought that we could do that, that’s probably the preferred 

route. 

 

We can’t do that; you’re not going to do it. Because they know, 

as we knew prior to 1990 when the legislative authority was 

taken away inadvertently by an amendment to the Act, that the 

governments have to have the authority to control the economy. 

Every other province knows that they have it. It’s nothing to do 

with demolishing or destroying. It’s everything to do with 

ensuring the building. 

 

Answer the question. You folks over there, I mean you can ask 

all these questions and do your cheap little politics, but I’ll tell 

you, I’ll tell you . . . Answer the question. What would you do, 

what would you do in the Manitoba scenario? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well it 

certainly has been enlightening listening to the minister here 

this afternoon espousing his philosophy on one side or the other 

about marketing boards in this country. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t his philosophy. He was forced 

into it. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well yes, we did hear that as well, didn’t we, 

that his hand was forced. And yet on the other hand we hear he 

doesn’t have any memorandum of understanding in his hot little  

hand from any particular big companies around this world, that 

if you take and strike our marketing boards out of existence 

we’re going to come to your province. How far do you go? 

 

You talk about being out in la-la land — what did he call it? 

Fantasy land. Taking us to your fantasy land. Well I guess that 

is where we are. We’re dealing in the hypothetical here, aren’t 

we? You’ve admitted it. 

 

I’ll give you an opportunity in a minute to admit it again. 

You’ve got no memorandum of understanding from any 

particular company saying, you change The Agri-Food Act and 

we’re coming here to your province and we’re going to create 

jobs and we’re going to create processing in the province, and 

the list goes on and on. 

 

So let’s take that one step further. If you’re prepared, based on a 

hypothetical situation, to take and undermine the democratic 

rights of producers in this province by making these changes to 

The Agri-Food Act, what’s next in the province in order to 

entice these imaginary companies to come to the province? 

What do we do next? Do we go after The Labour Standards 

Act? Do we make changes to occupational health and safety in 

this province to entice these big companies to come to our 

province? I’d be interested in hearing the minister’s remarks 

about that a little bit later. 

 

But you know the meat of the issue, the essence of this issue, 

surrounds one week ago in this House. And the minister can 

stand there and he can suggest that we had an opportunity to 

vote against this Bill yesterday. Well do I need to remind you, 

Mr. Minister, that yesterday I gave you the opportunity after 

taking my place to adjourn the debate on this very Bill, 

following up on a promise that the Premier made to us one 

week ago today in this House. 

 

And I’m now going to quote from Hansard just for the benefit 

one more time of the minister, who seems to have quite 

conveniently forgotten. The May 14 Hansard, the Premier on 

this very Bill, and he says and I quote: 

 

You ask your constituents how you should be voting on 

this Bill. You want time to consult with your 

constituencies? We’ll give you time to consult with your 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker, but make sure you consult 

with them in fact and in substance and in all honesty. 

 

Well that’s what we’ve done. And you knew that. I’ve stood in 

this House a week ago tomorrow and I said we’re following the 

advice of the Premier. It’s good advice. He promised to give us 

time to consult with our constituents. I told you we’ve sent 

letters out. 

 

As we speak the member from North Battleford comes into the 

House, he tells me there’s people contacting his office. They 

have concerns about The Agri-Food Act. You’ve saw some of 

them, I’m sure. You’ve saw some them; you’re not being 

honest with this House today. You’re not letting on that you’re 

getting these calls. 

 

I’ve got one here from some individuals in Waldeck, and I’ll  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

send this across to you later. But here, I’ll quote: 

 

Bill 67 has serious implications not just for SPI but for all 

marketing boards. To propose that any government should 

have the power to implement such drastic changes without 

a producer vote is completely asinine and must be 

opposed. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Chair, that is in fact what we’re going to do. 

 

The member opposite asks, what would you do? You’re going 

to find out shortly. You know what we’re going to do. You’ve 

got the amendments in front of you. I gave you the courtesy of 

sending them across to you earlier. What would we have done if 

we were in your shoes? We would have put it to a binding vote 

of the producers that are involved in every one of these boards 

and the commission that you are affecting in this Agri-Food Act 

this afternoon. 

 

That’s what we would have done. That’s what these 

amendments do. And that’s what I’m telling you for the benefit 

of all your back-benchers right now. That’s what this vote’s 

going to be on. When we talk about these amendments, are you 

in favour of the democratic rights of producers in this province 

or not? Or are you going to toe the party line, toe the line of 

cabinet? Is that what you’re going to do? Because we’re going 

to make sure that everybody in your constituencies know what 

you stood for. It wasn’t for their democratic rights, it was for 

what the cabinet says. 

 

Broken promises again — that’s what we have before us here 

this afternoon; a Premier who only a week ago promised to give 

us time. And now you’re trying to let on that there never was 

intent to consult — not trying to let on, you’ve in fact . . . I was 

quite astonished by the admission. You had no intention of 

consulting with anybody. You were afraid to, I guess is 

essentially what you were saying. You couldn’t put the vote to 

the producers, the very producers who are being affected by this 

Act. We’re only now starting to get the calls of concern, as a 

result of taking the Premier’s advice and actively and genuinely 

consulting extensively in this province with producers affected. 

 

And now you’re saying, now you’re saying we’re playing cheap 

politics. Well, sir, you’re on record saying that, as well. 

 

So all I can say is that when your members stand to vote against 

the amendments that we’re going to be proposing shortly, that 

they’re voting against the democratic rights of producers in this 

province to decide their own destiny. And I think you’ve 

somewhat effectively this afternoon communicated just how 

well they’ve done with the boards as they were without your 

meddling, without you having that ultimate hammer, the right to 

strike away their boards without their consultation, without any 

prior notice. Just like you’ve rammed this Bill through. 

 

So, Mr. Member, Mr. Minister, and members opposite, that’s 

what this is about. When these amendments come forward 

shortly, I hope you think long and hard about it. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 

amendment we’re proposing is to: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in clause 12(1)(b) as being enacted therein, 

(i) by inserting the word “binding” immediately before 

the words “vote of producers” where they occur therein; 

and 

(ii) by deleting the word “or” following the clause; 

 

(b) by deleting clause 12(1)(c) as being enacted therein; 

 

(c) in clause 12(5)(b) as being enacted therein, by deleting 

the word “or” following the clause; 

 

(d) by deleting clause 12(5)(c) as being enacted therein; 

 

(e) by deleting the expression “or (c)” where it occurs in 

the general words preceding clause 6(a) as being enacted 

therein; and 

 

(f) by adding immediately after the words “For the 

purposes of amending a plan” where they occur in 

subclause 12(10) as being enacted therein the following: 

 

“, following a binding vote,”. 

 

I so present. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just by way of clarification, we won’t be 

accepting this amendment because what it does is it kills the 

whole intent of the Bill and the member knows that. And again 

that would put Saskatchewan, that would put Saskatchewan at a 

disadvantage compared to other provinces. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  So I’m glad to hear the minister agree, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. It does kill the whole intent of the Bill and we all 

know the intent of the Bill — to take away the democratic right 

of producers involved in these boards and commissions. 

 

So there we have it — again on record. I’ll say no more. Let’s 

put it to the vote. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:49 p.m. until 4:51 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Belanger Hillson 

Julé Aldridge  

 

Nays — 25 



1926  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Tchorzewski 

Johnson Goulet Upshall 

Kowalsky Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Lorje Nilson 

Stanger Murray Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

Boyd Toth Heppner 

Haverstock   

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Also with 

respect to clause 7 of the printed Bill, I wish to move an 

amendment to: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in clause 13 (1)(b) as being enacted therein, 

(i) by inserting the word “binding” immediately before 

the words “vote of producers” where they occur therein; 

and 

(ii) by deleting the word “or” following the clause; 

 

(b) by deleting clause 13(1)(c) as being enacted therein; 

 

(c) in clause 13(5)(b) as being enacted therein, by deleting 

the word “or” following the clause; 

 

(d) by deleting clause 13(5)(c) as being enacted therein; 

 

(e) by deleting the expression “or (c)” where it occurs in 

the general words preceding clause (6)(a) as being 

enacted therein; and 

 

(f) by adding immediately after the words “For the 

purposes of amending a plan” where they occur in 

subclause 13(10) as being enacted therein the following: 

 

“, following a binding vote,”. 

 

I so present, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:55 p.m. until 4:56 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Belanger Hillson 

Julé Aldridge  

 

Nays — 28 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Tchorzewski 

Johnson Goulet Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Pringle Koenker Bradley 

Lorje Scott Nilson 

Stanger Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Langford 

Murrell Thomson Boyd 

D’Autremont Toth Heppner 

Haverstock   

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Finally, also 

with respect to clause 7, and this is the real crux of the whole 

problem we have with this government. In it we’re talking 

about the minister’s right just to arbitrarily discontinue any 

given plan that’s before us here within this Act. 

 

So I would move with respect to clause 7 of the printed Bill to: 

 

Amend clause 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in clause 14(1)(a) as being enacted therein, 

(i) by inserting the word “binding” immediately before 

the words “vote of producers” where they occur therein; 

and 

(ii) by deleting the designation “(a)”and the word “or” 

following the clause; 

 

(b) by deleting clause 14(1)(b) as being enacted therein; 

and 

 

(c) by adding the words “following a binding vote” 

immediately after the words “For the purposes of 

discontinuing a plan” where they occur in subclause 14(5) 

as being enacted therein. 

 

I so present. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:59 p.m. until 5 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 8 

 

Krawetz McPherson McLane 

Gantefoer Belanger Hillson 

Julé Aldridge  

 

Nays — 29 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Tchorzewski 

Johnson Goulet Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Pringle Koenker Bradley 

Lorje Scott Nilson 

Stanger Hamilton Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner Haverstock  

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 8 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chair, I move that we report this 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:03 p.m. until 5:04 p.m. 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 29 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Tchorzewski 

Johnson Goulet Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Pringle Koenker Bradley 

Lorje Scott Nilson 

Stanger Hamilton Wall 

Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

Langford Murrell Thomson 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner Haverstock  

 

Nays — 7 

 

McPherson McLane Gantefoer 

Belanger Hillson Julé 

Aldridge   

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  To my left is Craig Dotson, deputy 

minister of Education; and to my right is Michael Littlewood, 

executive director of third party funding and legislation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

Welcome to you, Madam Minister, and to your two officials. 

 

We ended questioning of this Bill not too long ago, and I didn’t 

have an opportunity to find out what your intention was 

regarding section . . . or clause no. 17, section 186.1. You’ve 

indicated that there was a possibility that you were going to 

address the situation regarding the ability for an appeal 

procedure to take place in regulations. And I’m wondering if 

we might begin there by asking you whether you could clarify 

what your intentions were and whether or not you’re going to 

be addressing this in some other fashion in the education 

regulations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I can tell you, in regulations we 

plan to link placement with program so that parents can’t 

simply appeal placement issues. That there would have to be 

other issues associated with the placement issue, i.e. the kind of 

program the student is receiving. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Could you indicate when you expect that to 

be in regulations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We expect to have the regulations in 

place by the fall. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. One other 

question regarding this clause is the whole idea of cost of 

appeals. I suspect that as you’ve worded it of course, it’s the 

process of appeal must be established by the board, which is 

where I think it should be. But are you expecting that the board 

is going to pick up the entire cost of any of the appeals that will 

be heard? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t expect that if the parent were 

to bring in an expert from out of province or from some other 

place, other than where the school division is located, that the 

school board would be expected to pick up those costs. 

 

This is not expected to be a quasi-judicial process. We don’t 

expect this to be an expensive process. School boards obviously 

would be responsible for their own costs. There would be an 

independent review committee, but it would not be a 

quasi-judicial process. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Historically 

speaking, do you have any statistics that would indicate to us as 

to the number of such appeals that have taken place over the 

last year or two? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No appeals have taken place because 

parents didn’t have the right to appeal. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The other 

clause that we began last session was section 19 and section 20. 

And I think we have to have some clarification there, because 

we’ve been hearing from . . . I’ve been hearing from trustees 

and boards of education, and I’ve been hearing from teachers 

and schools regarding how the clause will be interpreted. And I 

need to get your interpretation of what really is meant here. 

 

And I guess I’m referring more to section 204, the new section 

204. That section says . . . beyond the first two or three words, 

it says, “to a teacher who is employed in a school.” 

 

Now the scenario that I’m looking at, Madam Minister, is this. 

That if we have some of the amalgamations or restructuring 

take place that you’ve talked about that are in the process right 

now across this province, and two school divisions actually 

become a new school division so there isn’t one that remained, 

and then a community that contains a school joins that new 

school division, as I read this clause, your intention here is that 

the local agreement that was in place for those teachers in that 

school would remain in place. Is that true? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes it is. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, Madam Minister, then if a teacher who 

was in that school prior to the negotiation of a new collective 

agreement for that new school division, if that teacher moves to 

another school in that new school division — and I hope you 

follow this because I’m using the word new so many times here 

— if that teacher moves to a school that was under the contract 

A or contract B, we’ll call them that, will that teacher bring 

contract C with them? Or do I read this section to say that only 

in that school will contract C remain in place? 

 



1928  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I understand from the officials that the 

teacher would take the contract with them. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, can this clause not be 

interpreted differently where it says, “to a teacher who is 

employed in a school.” Now I’ve used the example that a 

community with a school has moved. How do your officials 

interpret that now that it says that the teacher can move to 

school X or school Y or school Z when it says that “in a 

school.” 

 

Teachers are wondering about this clause in terms of whether it 

means now that . . . you know, if you have five teachers that 

have moved out of school C, they’re now going to be in five 

different schools in a school division and they will have 

influenced what contract is in place in each school. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I just have to draw the member 

back to . . . Let’s use the example of the Prince Albert 

amalgamation where the school division, without the 

legislation, has agreed that the various teachers in the various 

divisions that are soon going to be restructured will keep their 

collective agreement until such time as a new collective 

agreement is negotiated. 

 

I suspect that the board of education, the new board of 

education, and representatives from the local teachers’ 

association will move very quickly to negotiate a new collective 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I agree, Madam Minister, that of course that 

new school division, the board of education that represents that 

new school division will begin the negotiation process. And it 

may take a while. I don’t know whether it’ll take half a year or a 

year or two years. 

 

But I think the question here, and the teachers that I’ve talked to 

are wondering about this clause — not that they’re opposing it 

or anything — they’re wondering whether or not it creates 

dysfunction within a school. 

 

And I guess the agreement that I’m looking at might be that 

within a collective agreement there could be a section that deals 

with early dismissal for professional purposes once a month, 

okay? The other scenario might be that the school division, the 

school where the teacher has now gone to, doesn’t have that 

provision. 

 

So now in a single school you will have some teachers who will 

have a contract that does not allow for early dismissal on one 

day or another, and in a different scenario, there may be that. 

Does it not put students, the education of students in jeopardy 

here because we’re now dealing with the scenario where . . . I 

don’t know how a principal will make this work. 

 

(1715) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I expect that people in the 

situation that you describe will use their heads and that common 

sense will prevail. 

 

But what I can say to you is that this is no different than 

provisions contained within The Trade Union Act; that if a new 

employer takes over, people get to keep their collective 

agreement until they are able to negotiate a new collective 

agreement between the employers and the employees. 

 

So I guess my short answer is, I think common sense will 

prevail. I think that you are giving a scenario that will be . . . I 

understand the difficulty but I expect that people will negotiate 

a collective agreement very soon, very quickly, and that 

common sense will prevail. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think you’ve 

indicated a different scenario here. And while I’ve stated in this 

House that I fully respect the fact that teachers should be able to 

carry their contract, when we’re talking about a whole school, 

moving from one school division to another, it’s essential that 

the teachers’ rights be protected. No argument. I support that. 

 

The scenario though that I’ve just described, I think, and I know 

you’re saying that common sense will prevail, but we need to 

have a clear intention of what this clause is saying. And this 

clause is not restricting it to the fact that, you know, when 

you’re moving a school, the school keeps the agreement — no 

question. When an employee moves from one location to 

another, I guess the question is, will they now be subject to the 

contract that’s in place at that other workplace? You’re saying 

no. 

 

The other question that I need clarified then is, what will you do 

with new teachers coming on board that will be actually signing 

a new agreement in this new school division, whatever it may 

be called. Will they take the contract that is in place at that 

school? 

 

The majority of the teachers at that school, the fact that you 

might have two contracts that are actually being dealt with in a 

particular school, and the staff may not be large, it may be only 

six or seven, so you may have three teachers under one contract, 

three teachers under another contract, and a seventh teacher is 

now — a new teacher is hired. What contract will they be 

under? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The collective agreement that was 

originally with that school. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, you’re saying that it’s the 

collective agreement of the school. There’s no such thing as a 

collective agreement for a school. The collective agreement is 

for the school division. So I’m wondering now, are you saying 

that it’s the school that was within the school division? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Good afternoon, Madam Minister, and 

welcome to your officials. We got briefly started on this last 

day, so I think there’s probably a fair bit to cover here. 

 

I heard you just mention a little while back that there’s going to 

be some of this information or clarification is going to happen 

through regulation a little later on. And I guess I must express  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

that I’m always a little leery, in fact very leery of things that go 

through regulations, because they can come and they can go. 

We’re never sure what kind of input goes into those sorts of 

things. And so it’s government really ruling by decree, which 

gets awful close to dictatorship. And I’m not at all in favour of 

anything that comes through on regulation. 

 

Now back to something we got started on last time. Part of your 

responsibility in your department is basically to operate an 

education system, keeping in mind all — the word that we tend 

to use, which is stakeholders. And I think education probably 

has more stakeholders in it than any other department, which 

gives you a fair responsibility because you have, number one, at 

the top of the list, you will have all the students. They’re part of 

your stakeholders that you have to be responsible for. 

Immediately alongside that come the parents. 

 

Then you have the teachers, and you have a large group there. 

You have the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association), you have the taxpayers. And by the time you 

finish putting it all together, there’s very few things in this 

province that involve as many people as education does, and 

very few things that people take as seriously as their kids, or 

their grand-kids, or whatever happens to be the case. 

 

So when we’re dealing with education we’re dealing with how 

this was all approached. That’s a very major agenda that you 

have to undertake when you’re going to deal with something 

and bring in some new legislation. And we didn’t quite get 

finished with this last day. 

 

Why were all those stakeholders not approached and given a 

chance for some input on your Education Act, because that’s 

something that’s definitely very important, because it’s one of 

the things that’s nearest and dearest to their hearts. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think it’s fair to say that we did have 

discussions with our various partners about school days and 

school year. We had a committee that was put in place. My 

understanding is that this committee is supportive of the 

amendments to the legislation because we needed to clarify the 

authority of the school division and the authority of the 

minister. 

 

In terms of the decisions around collective bargaining and local 

LINC (Local Implementation and Negotiation Committee) 

agreements, successor rights, I can say that these discussions 

came later in the process, given that we had the P.A. (Prince 

Albert) rural, Kinistino and the Carlton amalgamation. 

 

As well in terms of how we elect trustees. I think it’s fair to say 

that the P.A. group that is working on the restructuring in their 

area wanted, at the end of the day, to have a process where 

school board members within a rural school division could be 

elected, either through a ward system or through the at-large 

system. The present legislation does not allow people in rural 

school divisions to be elected at large. 

 

And I guess in terms of the P.A. rural-Kinistino-Carlton, this is 

the first rural-urban amalgamation. And the issues became 

much clearer as we worked our way through that particular  

amalgamation, and the discussions that the school division had 

with both myself as the minister, and the department as support 

people, to that amalgamation. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  The concept of amalgamation, Madam 

Minister, has been around for a long time. And I’m a little 

surprised that suddenly when there is an urban-rural 

amalgamation, we wake up and say, oops, now we’ve got a 

problem we hadn’t conceived before. Surely somewheres in the 

plans of your department, that was a possibility that was out 

there a long time ago and why it wasn’t taken in consideration. 

 

As I stated last time, the last thing we want to see is have 

teachers’ contracts torn up. If ever we have a concern . . . 

We’ve seen what your side of the House has done with things 

like GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts being 

torn up. So we’ve gone on record as defending contracts and 

defending . . . not tearing them up, and we’re on the same side 

there. 

 

However, your legislation again doesn’t address that 

adequately. There should be a process, as I mentioned last time, 

in place to assure that those things happen and don’t just hope 

they’ll happen. 

 

It’s nice to stand here and make a statement and say that clearer 

minds will prevail and all those sorts of things. And they do 

usually, but they don’t always. And it should be your 

responsibility to make sure that those things do occur on those 

instances where it doesn’t happen. 

 

A specific question: the drafting instructions that went into this 

— who all got copies of those? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can say that the amendments around 

school year, school day, placement, those kinds of issues, I’m 

advised by the department that our partners in education 

received the drafting instructions. 

 

The later amendments, i.e., successor rights, and the issue 

around the ward system, I believe that that came in March or 

later in terms of what we were intending, given some of the 

issues that came out of the restructuring in Prince Albert. And 

I’m not sure that those instructions were shared with our 

various partner groups. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Truly amazing 

that when you’re dealing with something that you know from 

your experience — and you’ve made statements in the House 

that you’ve had a long running time as Minister of Education; I 

believe when you headed out east you were one of the senior 

members, not due to your chronological age but due to your 

experience — and now something comes up and these things 

aren’t shared. I think that would be something you would 

expect from someone who doesn’t have much experience in the 

department to do. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Madam Minister, that it’s because 

exactly those sorts of things that some of the turmoil that’s 

being created now is there. Had those things been shared as 

they should have been, had you been straightforward from the  



1930  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

beginning, I’m sure all the groups, all the stakeholders, would 

have a good chance to air their opinions. And you could have 

probably looked at those and said, okay some of these things 

you feel you’re right and you stand firm on and some other 

things you make some suggestions. 

 

You’re already talking about making some changes to 

regulations, so obviously you’re not totally satisfied with what’s 

happening here as well. That could have all been done decently 

and in order and we wouldn’t have had the difficulties right 

now. Why didn’t you provide for all of this in your consultative 

process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What this is really talking about is 

successor rights. That is the issue that you’re talking about. 

Successor rights are a long-held tradition within the trade union 

movement that when an employer or an employee has a new 

employer, they are allowed under The Trade Union Act to take 

their collective agreement with them. This is not a new concept 

or a new idea. We are in the process of restructuring education 

— public education — in various parts of the province. 

 

Every single, solitary school division that has entered into 

restructuring discussions with their local teacher associations, 

as represented through the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 

has entered into an agreement whereby teachers get to take their 

local collective agreement with them once that school division 

is restructured. We have put that in legislation because the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation felt more comfortable with 

the notion of successor rights being contained within The 

Education Act, as it is contained within The Trade Union Act. 

 

I would suggest to the member that restructuring would not 

occur in some parts of the province without this provision, 

which teachers see as a protection. That’s what I can say to the 

member. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It seems to get 

close to the tirade that you let out the other time. We’re saying 

this was the first major attack on STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation) that you heard in your life. 

 

And if you listen very carefully to when I started this discussion 

this evening, that’s not where the discussion is going. The 

discussion was going, and I was directing it, Madam Minister, 

to the turmoil that you’ve created because of your inadequate 

way that you’re setting up this whole process. Had that been 

done properly this would have probably all been passed, would 

all have been taken care of nicely, but you didn’t do that 

effectively — because of your mishandling the real issues, such 

as the areas of these Bills aren’t focused in the discussions as 

they probably should be. And instead of that, you’re dealing 

with these other issues and trying to bring in those particular 

red herrings and deal with those. 

 

Possibly both 59 and 60 should be pulled off the order paper till 

you do your consultation properly. And I think that’s something 

that needs to be considered because it hasn’t been done to date. 

 

So you’re taking . . . and you’ve talked to one group and you’re 

dealing with one group. You deal with them all, and if you do  

that correctly, Madam Minister, by the time you bring the 

legislation here there shouldn’t be any problems with it. And as 

I said earlier on, we do not want those contracts torn up. 

There’s all the other sorts of issues that are in there as well. 

And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, do you see any value at 

this point opening up some of that consultation process that you 

haven’t allowed so far? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think what I can say to the member is 

that this came as no surprise to our various stakeholder groups. 

This was not a surprise that the government was looking at the 

notion of introducing successor rights into the legislation. 

 

You can criticize me, and that’s fair comment. But I would say 

to you that it wouldn’t have mattered how much consultation 

we had. At the end of the day we made a decision — I’m not 

sure we would have developed consensus on this issue — and 

at the end of the day we made a decision. 

 

And I would submit to you that that’s what leadership is about. 

You try and get a consensus. If you can’t get a consensus, at the 

end of the day you go forward with the legislation. And I would 

submit to you that there was no consensus possible on this 

issue. 

 

(1730) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 

Minister, just a couple more questions. And as you’ve indicated 

in this House and your officials have indicated to me, that you 

followed a different consultation process. And indeed your 

comments in the last Hansard clearly indicate that you did not 

share drafting notes with your stakeholders. That’s what your 

comments are in Hansard. 

 

I’m disappointed, as I indicated to you, that the consultation 

process that I think everybody in Saskatchewan is very proud of 

in education, that indeed our stakeholders have the ability to get 

together around a table and to discuss issues . . . Yes, there is 

the possibility that there will not be consensus reached, and 

that’s something that we’re also very proud of. Because the 

stakeholders, the two very important stakeholders in this 

province, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the 

Saskatchewan school trustees, have the ability to at least discuss 

the clauses and their interpretations and find out how they will 

affect each of their associations. 

 

So that’s something that I’ve indicated to you — that I’m 

disappointed — and as my colleague from Rosthern has 

indicated, I think as an opposition we’re not pleased to see that 

this process did not occur. And indeed, as I’ve indicated before, 

the division that has occurred between these two stakeholders 

may have been preventable. 

 

Madam Minister, you’ve indicated the process that you see 

unfolding regarding the movement of teachers from one school 

to another school, and the fact that there may be two or three or 

more contracts in place. What kind of leadership will your 

department, your officials, provide to that new school division? 

Because I would assume that there will be additional costs 

administering the three or four contracts that are in place right  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

now. Those immediate costs, will your department be involved 

in picking up some of those initial costs before a new contract 

is negotiated? 

 

And then my second question that I’ll ask at the same time is: 

will your department be providing financial assistance, 

personnel assistance, to boards of education, to these new 

boards of education in terms of helping them arrive at a newly 

negotiated contract? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As the member will know, having been 

the president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association 

for some years and having been a trustee for some years, there 

is a regime in place where trustees at the local level negotiate 

local LINC agreements. That isn’t going to change. 

 

I can share with the member that in the case of the Blaine 

Lake-Sask Valley-Hafford-Battleford amalgamation, each of 

those schools got to take their collective agreement with them 

to the newly restructured school division. And they will 

negotiate a collective agreement at the local level that deals 

with issues that can be negotiated at the local level and not the 

provincial level. School divisions will negotiate their local 

agreements and they will do so without financial support from 

the province. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would also 

like to add to that a little bit of a biography, that indeed I was a 

teacher for 11 years and a principal, and my wife is a teacher of 

24 years. And I’m very pleased to say that my son, who’s in 

grade 12, has just been accepted into the U of R (University of 

Regina) College of Education. So I come to you with two hats 

on, one from representing boards of education and being the 

president of the association for two years; but also one who has 

been a teacher and who is very, very involved with the teachers’ 

federation. 

 

So my question though is not so that we have a very expensive 

kind of negotiations. What I want to say is that we have 

leadership provided by your department. And I know 

amalgamations and restructuring are going to be difficult in this 

province. They are occurring in two school divisions that are in 

my constituency. And I wish them well because I have indicated 

in this House that there is a need to restructure to provide 

students with greater opportunities, and I think those things can 

occur with restructuring. 

 

My question is not to interfere with the board of education; my 

question was whether or not your department will be providing 

leadership in assisting, financial or otherwise, to ensure that 

contracts are in place for these eight or nine or ten possible 

amalgamations that you’ve described. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Up until the present, we have not been 

involved in negotiations at the local level. Those negotiations, 

the negotiations and the LINC agreements, have been 

negotiated by the school division. We do not anticipate being 

involved in local collective agreements. What I can tell you is 

that the province is an active participant in provincial 

bargaining. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Madam 

Minister. Last session you’ve indicated that you have a number 

of amendments to this Bill. And I think we’ve had . . . you’ve 

shared them with us on an embargoed basis. And before we can 

get into discussions of how one section may affect another 

section, I think I’d like to be able to ask you whether or not you 

would be willing to release those amendments now, rather than 

at the clause by clause; so that we can have some discussion 

about them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  They’re being released. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for your indulgence, to all 

members, to ask for some clarifications. 

 

Madam Minister, I’d like to refer to clause 7 and the section 20 

that’s amended on page no. 3 of the Bill. And I note that in 

discussion with you, you had talked about the word bylaw and 

policy, and some of your amendments to section 45 deal with 

the word policy. And I’d ask you to clarify for the House what 

the word policy in section 7 means that is different than what 

the word policy or policies means in section 45. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  In section 7 the council can make, 

amend, or repeal bylaws or policy. When we move to section 

45, we’re talking about collective interests of teachers with 

respect to collective bargaining, with respect to terms and 

conditions of employment, with respect to teachers who bargain 

with a local group and bargains on his or her own behalf. 

 

Now it says that the council, in section 45, can make, amend, or 

repeal any bylaws or policies. Now we’re proposing in 45 to get 

rid of policies that are not . . . inconsistent with this Act for the 

purposes of this section. 

 

One section, section 7, has to do with the powers of the council. 

This section has to do with what represents the collective 

interests of teachers and the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 

being able to discipline a member. They’re two distinct 

sections. 

 

(1745) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With that explanation, Madam Minister, I 

would concur with you that indeed section 7 and the new 

section 45 are two entirely different concepts. 

 

Section 45, Madam Minister, is the section of great controversy, 

contention, and everything that you want to throw into the mix. 

I know that you’ve had the opportunity since this  



1932  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Bill was introduced on May 2 to hear from teachers and to hear 

from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; to hear from the 

school trustees association and boards of education about their 

concerns. And as we’ve stated before, I think that a process of 

consultation beforehand may have avoided this. But what’s past 

is past, and we have to be clear as to what this Bill intends to do 

regarding the collective interest of teachers and its definitions. 

 

Now I note by your amendments that in section 45, if I might 

refer you there, you are talking about the deletion of the word 

“policies” from the clause (c), 45(1)(c), and it leaves the word 

“bylaws”. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I guess my question then is: do you see 

that the . . . Is it your intention that the bylaws referred to in 

section 45(1)(c) and 45(2) only refer to the internal 

administration and structure of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  When we delete “policies”, the conduct 

for which a teacher could be disciplined would either have to be 

inconsistent with the statute, with rights collectively bargained, 

or be prohibited in a bylaw. A policy can pass with a simple 

majority. A bylaw can pass with a two-thirds majority of the 

democratically elected council. 

 

So from the point of view of the department and the 

government, it made sense to remove “policy” because a policy 

is something that a person could easily violate. It would be 

more difficult to violate a bylaw. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In speaking with many teachers in the 

province, Madam Minister, I know it’s very clear that teachers 

probably are in violation of many policies of the STF. 

 

And I know that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

indicates very clearly that policies are goals. They’re objectives 

that they wish to attain. And some day I’m sure that the 

federation hopes that they will attain all of their policies, but 

right at the moment there are many teachers who, I know, teach 

and do things that are in violation of existing policies. 

 

When you refer to clause (b) or subsection (b) of that first 

clause, you have indicated that the collective interests of 

teachers: “(b) with respect to the terms and conditions of 

employment pursuant to section 209 of The Education Act, . . .” 

 

Now section 209 is a very broad section and when we take a 

look at that, like there are so many things that deal with in The 

Education Act . . . that are dealt with in The Education Act. We 

talk about regulations, we talk about the Act, we talk about all 

the clauses, the duties of a teacher, the duties of principals, how 

the discipline procedure must occur. I think the Act also covers 

lengths of school year and in many sections it covers all the 

kinds of things that are dealt with in terms of the appeal 

procedure. 

 

What parts of section . . . of The Education Act and the 

regulations are you referring to by mentioning section 209? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I believe I’ve already shared that with  

you in written commentary. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The written 

commentary, I need some clarification if you would. The first 

clause that you’ve indicated says that the reference to section 

209 in the definition of collective interest of teachers does not 

mean that a teacher could be disciplined under these new 

provisions for errors of omission or commission in carrying out 

their duties. What are you referring to when you say the new 

provisions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The new 45.1 dealing with collective 

interests. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In section 209, the final context I think, it 

says that the teacher who failed to carry out his or her duties 

under the Act can of course be dealt with right now, as every 

board of education and every teacher knows that there is the 

need to carry out your professional work. 

 

The STF, as I read this, is it now going to be the provision 

within this Act that would now allow the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation to further discipline a teacher for violation 

of its contractual obligations to the employer? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There are two distinct sections of The 

Teachers’ Federation Act. One deals with the teachers’ 

federation’s ability to discipline a teacher for misconduct that is 

unbecoming to the profession. This section deals with the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation being able to discipline a 

teacher who does not act in the collective interest of teachers. 

 

An example might be trying to negotiate their own collective 

agreement when it comes to certain procedures or processes that 

would be contained within a collective agreement. 

 

An example could be, I suppose, early retirement or something 

like that, where a teacher goes around the collective bargaining 

process and negotiates their own deal. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, currently, as I’ve indicated, 

there are many, many STF policies regarding goals. Do you 

foresee that some of the policies will now move into the 

condition of bylaws, to be able to indeed have a broader base? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It’s possible that policies could move 

into bylaws with two-thirds support from the council. But what 

I can say to you is that all bylaws have to come through this 

Legislative Assembly, so there is the opportunity for sober 

second thought. And I think the teachers’ federation 

understands that and acknowledges that their bylaws come here. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. One of the 

contentious issues that’s been around for a number of years, 

and I think teachers are very concerned about it as well, 

especially those new teachers seeking jobs, is the ability for a 

school division to be declared “in dispute.” And I’ve read the 

Act, I’ve read regulations, and nowhere do I see the words “in 

dispute.” 

 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

What process is followed for the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation or some other basis to be declaring a school division 

in dispute? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well since 1946 I’m advised, so for 

over 51 years, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has 

followed a policy of naming a school district, school unit, 

school division as in dispute if the teachers in that division are 

experiencing extraordinary difficulties with their board of 

education. 

 

And in that event, if a school division is declared in dispute, 

teachers are advised not to apply to that school division for a 

teaching contract until such time as these extraordinary 

problems can be resolved. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that explanation. And I agree 

with the minister, it doesn’t happen often and to, I think, the 

betterment of education. 

 

My concern I guess is that . . . you’ve indicated I think since ’46 

this was a policy. And I would venture to say that it’s possible 

now, as you’ve indicated, that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation may consider it to be a bylaw. Will this pose a 

problem for delivery of education in a system then if indeed 

teachers may be disciplined? Because now this is a bylaw and if 

a teacher does happen to accept a position in that school 

division, they could be disciplined. 

 

Do you see that possibility of some difficulty? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well what I can share with the member 

is that bi-level bargaining, provincial bargaining and local 

bargaining through the LINC agreements was established in 

1973. That was over 24 years ago. And there have only been 

four school divisions in that 24-year history that have been 

placed in dispute. That, I think, is a good history. 

 

I just might also point out that we’ve never had a provincial 

strike in this province since bi-level bargaining came in in 

1973. 

 

So I think what I can say is that once a school division is placed 

in dispute, significant negotiations go on in order to resolve this 

dispute in order that teachers can apply for teaching contracts 

within that division. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I think maybe one or two 

final questions. I’ve heard from a number of teachers their 

concerns about the things that went on in Saskatoon when there 

was the possible strike action by teachers, and indeed there was 

some concern about lockout by the board of education. This is a 

number of years ago. 

 

And as you’ve mentioned, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation is not under The Trade Union Act and there are . . . 

those provisions aren’t dealt with in The Education Act or The 

Teachers’ Federation Act, regarding strike, regarding lockout, 

regarding votes. All those kind of things are not there. And I 

think some teachers have expressed some concern on that issue. 

 

On the other side of the coin, I think I’m hearing from boards of 

education that indeed there are some concerns about the 

process, the process that you’ve just described that’s been in 

place since 1972 or ’73 around local negotiations, provincial 

negotiations, how we arrive at a provincial contract. 

 

Is there any process in place within your department to take a 

look, with your stakeholders, with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation, with the Saskatchewan trustees’ association, with 

LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents), to take a look at the whole collective 

bargaining process that it’s in place in this province? 

 

And indeed, do you see the need for a review of this process to 

clarify some of those things that have been around already for a 

number of years and seem to have created greater and greater 

difficulties? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I see the member has his 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association hat on with this 

question in that this is . . . because this is certainly what the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association have been arguing 

for. 

 

Let me say this to the member. That we do not share the view 

that this Bill changes the overall collective bargaining process 

or puts it in a piecemeal fashion. We don’t share that view. 

 

I think, and I’ve been to every province in this country where 

we have collective bargaining with teachers, and I think that 

both the SSTA and the STF would acknowledge that we have 

an overall, province-wide, teacher bargaining regime which is 

the best in Canada. I think that they would say that. 

 

If you look at the kinds of disputes that take place in every 

provincial jurisdiction, we have not had those kinds of disputes 

since we went to province-wide bargaining in 1973. Our system 

has served this province well over the last 25 years. We have 

never had a province-wide strike as there have been strikes in 

other jurisdictions. 

 

Now from my point of view, it works; it works well. I think the 

changes to The Teachers’ Federation Act are fairly 

straightforward. They are consistent with the broad principles of 

province-wide bargaining that we’ve had in this province for 

the past 25 years. They are consistent with the principle that the 

teachers’ federation, as the collective bargaining agent, should 

be able to discipline its members for certain actions in a union 

or bargaining context, but should not be able to deal with those 

same actions in any way which attacks a teacher’s professional 

reputation or standing as a professional teacher. 

 

And what I can say is that this flows directly from the Court of 

Appeal decision of 1992, which came out of the Regina 

dispute. I think that we should all be proud of our bargaining 

record and our bargaining system because we do not have the 

difficulties that other jurisdictions have. 

 

(1800) 

 

And I would say to you that if we were to review the entire  



1934  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

regime . . . The member talks about tensions that exist presently 

between the teachers’ federation and the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association. I would suggest to the member if we were 

to enter into a review of how we bargain in this province, I 

would suggest to you that you won’t have seen any tensions yet. 

 

The other point I want to make to the member is that teachers 

also have difficulty, not unlike the trustees, with the way we 

bargain. We have a protocol agreement that we’ve entered into 

with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association where in 

essence we have jointly agreed to Chair. Teachers don’t like it. 

And there are times, since I’ve become the minister in the past 

four years, that the government does things that the teachers 

don’t like, and the government does things that the trustees 

don’t like. 

 

But I think that on the whole we have struck a fairly effective 

balance. And sometimes it’s better to be in trouble with 

everybody, and sometimes it’s better to be in trouble with some 

groups, because that’s what I call leadership. And maybe some 

day the member will be sitting in this chair and he will have the 

opportunity to try and stickhandle — and that’s what I’d call it 

— competing interests, and try and get to a point where you 

don’t please all of the people all of the time, but you do please 

some of the people some of the time. And that’s not such a bad 

thing to do. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And yes and 

you can’t fool all of the people all of the time neither, okay? So 

therefore when you suggest that I’ve suddenly ended with my 

trustee’s hat on, I’m raising issues for you from calls and letters 

that I’ve received over the last three weeks from teachers, from 

teachers who have said there is a problem right now with the 

bargaining process that’s going on. 

 

You’ve indicated that they have some difficulty with the current 

bargaining structure. We know that the last agreement was not 

signed by the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, so for 

you to say that this is a system that is working and there is no 

need to look at it, I think that’s maybe stretching the point a 

little bit. I think there are some concerns. 

 

Whether it’s a full scale review of the process that creates more 

divisiveness than actual solutions, maybe that’s accurate in 

terms of your description. But I think there’s a need to address 

the concerns of all of the stakeholders in this process. So the 

question wasn’t to ask you whether or not there’s a full review 

planned by your process . . . by your department. The question 

was whether or not you’re indeed looking at the entire picture 

of all of the stakeholders, all of their concerns, and how will 

you deal with that problem? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I have to ask the member . . . you know 

it’s fine and dandy to try and walk both sides of the fence. I 

know that’s what, with all due respect, Liberals do. You know 

you sort of try and walk both sides of the fence. And I notice 

that the member has tried to do this very carefully, trying to 

stickhandle this issue and that’s why I was interested to see that 

the members of the Liberal Party did in fact vote for The 

Teachers’ Federation Act on second reading. 

What I can say to the member is this. I’d like you to tell me 

which collective bargaining process is better in any other part of 

Canada? Tell me that. Is there any other system? 

 

When the member talks about review, what is he talking about? 

Taking away the teachers’ right to strike? Taking away boards 

of education’s right to lock out teachers? Is he talking about 

getting rid of the protocol agreement? Is he talking about 

teachers shouldn’t have successor rights? Is he talking about 

teachers shouldn’t be able to discipline people for crossing a 

picket line? What precisely is the member talking about? 

 

He wants to review collective bargaining. That’s obvious by his 

question. What is he talking about? And I think that everybody, 

all of the stakeholders need to know what the Liberal position is 

because you know obviously we’ll be into election a couple of 

years down the road. And it’s not good enough to stand here 

and ask questions without indicating to all of us what precisely 

is your position when it comes to collective bargaining in this 

province. Do you want to get rid of local bi-level bargaining? 

Do you want to go back to the days where every school division 

negotiated their own collective agreement? What precisely is 

the member’s intention? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, my intention is that all 

stakeholders in this province are heard. And if you struck a 

committee and you had people on that committee and you 

wanted me to sit on that committee to give my perspective, I 

would do that for you. And I would share those concerns with 

you. Until I hear all of the concerns from all of the stakeholders, 

I don’t know what all of the problems are. I don’t want to stand 

here and tell you that I understand all there is to do in 

education, and nor do you, I’m sure. 

 

But my comment was so that indeed all of the stakeholders have 

an opportunity to voice their concerns so that you would hear 

them. And you have indicated that in this process leading to 

these two Bills, you followed a different procedure in that you 

didn’t have them together because you said that you didn’t see 

that consensus could be reached. That may be true. 

 

You must then recognize, if you’ve taken that stand, that there 

are some problems out there; that you can’t bring the two most 

important stakeholders together at a table to debate the issues, 

discuss the issues and come up with something that is 

acceptable by all. You’ve admitted that by the fact that you 

didn’t follow the procedures that you’ve always followed. 

Okay. 

 

So in that respect, in terms of whether or not there is a review, I 

want to find out from you, is it your intention to take a look at, 

collectively, with your stakeholders, as to what problems there 

are and see whether or not they are insurmountable? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I can say to the member is we 

didn’t consult the teachers when we decided to enter into the 

protocol agreement. I even think that you might have been the 

president of the SSTA association when we entered into the 

protocol agreement. 

 

We did not consult teachers. That was a decision that was made  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

by the government, because we saw the trustees and the 

government as the employer. What the employer does is the 

employer’s business. What teachers do is teachers’ business 

when it comes to their own collective interests, as long as they 

don’t violate the rights of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Now what I will say to the member is if you have some ideas 

about how we can improve the process, I would welcome your 

ideas. I know that every spring the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation has a spring council. You’ve been in this legislature. 

You’ve been a member of the legislature for two years. You 

have never been to a spring council. 

 

Your former leader was there representing the Liberal caucus at 

the spring council one year ago, and your present leader was 

there representing the Liberal Party at the spring council this 

year. Both people were at a disadvantage in that they didn’t 

know a lot about educational policy. You, sir, do, and I would 

hope that next year that it will be you at the STF spring council 

pontificating on what the position of the Liberal Party is when it 

comes to all kinds of issues. Because I think teachers would like 

to hear that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, for your clarification, the 

request of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to the Liberal 

opposition was that the leader attend and serve on the panel. 

 

The leader last year attended and I was in attendance with him 

and I discussed matters with teachers on a individual basis. This 

year the invitation was to the Leader of the Liberal Party and he 

attended and so did I, along with two other colleagues, and we 

did meet with teachers. So I think your comments are very, very 

unreasonable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like one other comment to make. The fact 

that indeed we voted on the Bill as a party to move it from 

second readings to Committee of the Whole was for the 

opportunity to hear from you what kinds of changes you suggest 

to make this a better Bill. 

 

That’s our job, Madam Minister. Our job as an opposition is to 

hear from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, to hear from 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and to try to do 

a better job. 

 

And, Madam Minister, we did hear from them. We have reports 

from school boards, from trustees, from schools. from teachers, 

and they have expressed some concerns about making this a 

better Bill. And with your amendments this might be a better 

Bill, and I’d ask you to explain some of the amendments that 

you propose. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I’d like to indicate that as we 

move through the clauses of the Bill, I will be proposing five 

House amendments. These amendments have been discussed 

with both the SSTA and the teachers’ federation, and they were 

both given advance copies by the government. And I 

understand that the official opposition and the third party also 

were given draft advance copies of the House amendments. 

 

In keeping with the commitment that I’d made to the  

opposition, I believe that these House amendments will address 

some of the concerns which have been raised by the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and clarify the 

intent of the legislation. They all fall under clause 27 of the 

printed Bill or the section that deals with section 45.1 of the 

Act. 

 

We’ll deal with each of these House amendments in turn when 

we get to the appropriate clause. And I can say to the public that 

I have taken very seriously the concerns expressed by the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and I think that 

these House amendments will deal directly with some of their 

concerns. And obviously I invite the opposition to join us, when 

we complete the Bill, in supporting the Bill. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all just a 

point of clarification. I think you said something about it before 

but I’d like to sort of make sure I had it correct. In discussing 

the part under section 7(a) where it talks about “regulating and 

governing members of the federation,” in what way does that 

not impact on the same kinds of things we would find under 

45.1(3) “engaging in conduct contrary?” 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  45.1 deals with the collective interests 

of teachers. The section that you’re referring to deals with the 

ability of the council to make amendments to bylaws, policies, 

and repeal bylaws and policies. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Probably my last time. This is 

more of a comment than it is a question. My colleague asked 

most of the critical questions that I think we both had with 

regards to some of this legislation. 

 

I think you’ve made a fair number of comments about how well 

you felt collective bargaining was going in the province because 

of the lack of strikes. And I think from time to time that has 

been both to the credit of the STF and sometimes to the credit 

of the SSTA, because they have acquiesced and given in. And 

you know, there have been various contracts where I think 

various ones of those have been unhappy about. 

 

But I think what’s unfortunate is, as was just mentioned, is that 

all the signatures of the people negotiating aren’t on all the 

contracts. And I think that tells you very definitely that even 

though kids may have still been in school with teachers, the 

contracting has not been a success in total even though the 

strikes haven’t taken place. 

 

Last comment I would like to make is in the discussions that 

I’ve had with boards and teachers — and I’ve had quite a 

number of those over the past numbers of weeks — particularly 

in relating to the part on the 45.1(3), my statement always was 

that if that was removed or rewritten in such a way that any 

interpretation that I might have that would have been of some 

concern there, I would be supporting the rest of it. 

 

Looking at what that particular one says and your amendment, I 

personally am not totally satisfied that the amendment removes 

all the possible concerns that I had, and for that reason, I will 

not be supporting it. Thank you. 

 



1936  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I move that we: 

 

Amend section 45.1 of The Teachers’ Federation Act as 

being enacted by clause 27 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in clause (1)(c) by striking out “or policies”; 

 

(b) in subsection (2) by striking out “or policies”; 

 

(c) in subsection (3) by striking out “and includes any 

matter that the council considers to be inimical to the 

collective interests of teachers”; 

 

(d) in subsection (8): 

 

(i) by adding “or” following clause (b); and 

 

(ii) by striking out clauses (c) and (d) and substituting 

the following: 

 

“(c) do either or both of the things mentioned in 

clauses (a) and (b)”; and 

 

(e) by adding the following subsection after subsection 

(10): 

 

“(11) Nothing in this section is to be interpreted as 

restricting a member’s freedom of expression or 

association”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

(1815) 

 

Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 28 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I report the Bill with amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 6:19 p.m. until 6:21 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 45 

 

Romanow Van Mulligen Wiens 

MacKinnon Lingenfelter Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Crofford Calvert 

Pringle Koenker Bradley 

Lorje Renaud Scott 

Nilson Serby Stanger 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

 
Sonntag Jess Langford 

Murrell Thomson Krawetz 

McLane Gantefoer Draude 

Bjornerud Belanger Hillson 

Julé Boyd D’Autremont 

Toth Heppner Haverstock 

 

Nays — nil 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Before I invite the Government Whip to 

move that the committee rise and report progress, I just want to 

beg indulgence of committee members to simply say what a 

pleasure it has been to be the Chair. It’s really a good 

Legislative Assembly and my congratulations go to all members 

for their conduct throughout this session. And of course I want 

to thank the Clerks for their very steady good advice, and all of 

the people that support us. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Chair, I move that this Assembly now 

rise and report progress and not ask leave to sit again. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I move the Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I move that this Bill be read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation 

Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I move that the amendments now be 

read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 60 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 

Deputy Chair, or Deputy Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 

possible, of such date and time. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1830) 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 6:35 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 50 - The Private Investigators and Security Guards 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 18 - The Saskatchewan Applied Science 

Technologists and Technicians Act 

Bill No. 65 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 62 - The Psychologists Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 71 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Projet de loi n 71–Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 

jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 72 - The Children’s Law Act, 1997/Projet de loi n 

72–Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

Bill No. 73 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 

1997/Projet de loi n 73–Loi de 1997 sur 

l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 

Bill No. 74 - The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/Projet de 

loi n 74–Loi de 1997 sur les prestations 

alimentaires familiales 

Bill No. 75 - The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/Projet de 

loi n 75–Loi de 1997 sur les biens 

matrimoniaux 

Bill No. 12 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 41 - The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 56 - The Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997 

Bill No. 303 - The TD Trust Company Act, 1997 

Bill No. 15 - The Department of Health Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 16 - The Occupational Therapists Act, 1997 

Bill No. 1 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 49 - The Local Government Election Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 26 - The Planning and Development Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 64 - The Wascana Centre Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 44 - The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 40 - The Residential Services Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 58 - The Saskatchewan Assistance Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 51 - The Arts Board Act, 1997 

Bill No. 70 - The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 42 - The Wildlife Act, 1997 

Bill No. 11 - The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 

1997 

Bill No. 9 - The Wanuskewin Heritage Park Act, 1997 

Bill No. 10 - The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 63 - The Meewasin Valley Authority Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 2 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 3 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 13 - The Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 55 - The Department of Agriculture Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 36 - The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 46 - The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

Bill No. 48 - The Highways and Transportation 

Consequential Amendment Act, 1997/Projet de 

loi n 48–Loi de 1997 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997 

Bill No. 17 - The Dental Disciplines Act 

Bill No. 68 - The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 1997 



1938  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

Bill No. 57 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 34 - The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment 

Act, 1997 

Bill No. 66 - The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act 

Bill No. 69 - The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 67 - The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

Bill No. 59 - The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Projet 

de loi n 59–Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’éducation 

Bill No. 60 - The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 

1997 

 

His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 76 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 

1997 and on March 31, 1998. 

 

His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 6:42 p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve come to the end of another session, 

and a session that’s been shorter than many sessions in this 

legislature, due to the fact that there were fewer Bills. 

 

We on the government side would like to think it’s due to the 

fact also that we’ve been able to manage the issues and keep 

everybody happy. The last session in the House we weren’t 

quite as lucky. The opposition had a few more things to say. 

But this is an operation that I think has gone through this 

session with the opposition doing due diligence on all the Bills 

and in the estimates of Executive Council. It asked the tough 

questions and I think we’ve been able to provide those answers 

to those tough questions, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have been served well. 

 

But to make this House run, Mr. Speaker . . . and before I say 

that, I guess I should say that I did try to get a hold of the House 

Leader just today. I was unable to get through, but I think I 

could say on his behalf anyway that he wished he were here, 

and I know all our thoughts are with him and his recovery from 

the operation he had. 

 

And I have been I think, blessed with the opportunity to be the 

Deputy House Leader on this side and to work with the 

members opposite through this session. And with the great 

cooperation of all our members, I think we’ve managed to make 

it a pretty successful session, not just for ourselves and the 

opposition, but for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people involved in making 

this House work, and at this point in time, I would like to thank 

some of those people. 

 

First of all, I guess I’d like to thank all hon. members, because  

we are the people that have been empowered by the citizens of 

Saskatchewan to represent them and to ensure that the laws of 

the land are such that we have a fair and just society. And we 

have Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and the third party doing 

their job and doing it, I think, very well. So to all hon. members 

I thank you for your cooperation at this time in making this 

House work. 

 

But there are number of other speakers . . . other people, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We are without the Speaker tonight and I 

would like to thank him in his absence. I know he’s in Ghana 

doing some very important work for the people of that country 

who are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t think, I don’t 

think he’s suntanning. He’s helping that country figure out 

democratic process and he’s giving a seminar to the newly 

elected members. And so I’d like to thank him. 

 

I’d like to as well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like me have 

come from a deputy position to fulfil a role and it is a nice 

challenge to have to face. And I think you’ve done your job 

very, very well. 

 

(1845) 

 

Then there are what I would call the important people in this 

Chamber, not to diminish . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 

that’s the third party; no. There are a number of people who 

make this Legislative Assembly run very well, starting with the 

Clerk of the Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk; assisted very capably by 

Greg Putz and Margaret Woods. Then there’s Monique Lovatt, 

secretary to the Clerk; Pam Scott, secretary to the Clerk at the 

Table. 

 

And of course, without having to draw his sabre once, without 

having to draw his sabre once, the very capable Patrick Shaw, 

Sergeant-at-Arms and security of staff. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to thank the Hansard 

staff, Susan Hope, Donelda Klein, Darlene Trenholm, Barb 

Lindenbach, and the other folks who report all the glorious 

words spoken in this Chamber. We thank them very much for 

that, for the accuracy, and for sometimes bearing through the 

garbled talk sometimes when we speak too fast and get our 

words mixed up. 

 

The Journals staff, Rose Zerr, clerk assistant; Teena Embury, 

assistant clerk; Marilyn Borowski, director of financial services; 

as well as Linda Kaminski and the people in personnel and 

administration services. People like Marilyn, the director of 

financial services — we all expect very much because that’s 

where our cheques come from; so we have to make sure we 

always mention her. Visitor services, who do a very good job of 

presenting this building as a public building to the people who 

visit our province and from the people within this province in 

order that they might come and see the workings of this 

Chamber and come and see the process that goes on here in 

day-to-day operations. 

 

Bob Cosman, Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. 

 

And as well we have five people who come — different people  



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

— the pages in this Assembly. Of course you cannot repeat as a 

page in the Assembly, so we have a set of new pages every 

year. And this year . . . I’m getting some help here. Thank you 

very much. So the five pages that we have today, and I would 

like to thank them very much because they are really stuck right 

beside us as we go into the dog-days of Bills and estimates. 

There’s Dapper Dan Abramson, there’s Guy LaFleur Turton, 

and there’s Clarabelle — better known as Claire LaBelle; and 

there’s Master Michael Dowie, and Lean Lyle Cowles. We 

thank you very much for your tolerance and indulgence in this 

session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just to finish off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we would also like to thank Marian Powell and all the 

Legislative Library staff for the work that they do for us. And 

just might say that it won’t be long before they’re very busy 

because I’m sure the opposition parties will learn to use the 

library sooner or later. Just a joke — don’t get upset. No, the 

very, very well-used library by all members — or most 

members of this Assembly. 

 

The cafeteria, those people who help us to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  To make sure — and now I’m getting 

heckled from my own party here so — to make sure that we are 

all well-fed, and as you see most of us don’t miss many meals. 

 

And the building staff who help keep the building clean. 

 

And of course I’m sure we’d all like to thank the press gallery 

for their indulgences over the year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it takes a lot of 

people to ensure that this building functions well, from the 

members through everyone involved. And I would like to thank 

them. I would like to wish everyone . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . That’s right. That’s one thing I didn’t have written down. 

 

The only thing I had to remember I forgot. And that is the staff 

of the entire members from the caucus offices to the ministers’ 

offices . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Yeah, the constituency offices. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Keep coming. The constituency offices, 

the House business office, Executive Council, and all those 

people that I may have missed. We’d would like to thank . . . 

We jest, we jest, but it’s so important. Without all those support 

staff, this Assembly simply wouldn’t operate. 

 

And before I end, I would like to say that in order that the 

people of Saskatchewan can see what happens in here, we have 

a very capable Mr. Gary Ward and staff who beam out this . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  . . . beam out our signal on cable TV 

right across the province and expanding. 

 

And then of course we have as well the commissionaires, but I 

mentioned them — you see, I’m doing . . . (inaudible) . . . I 

mentioned them under the Sergeant-at-Arms so we’re doing it 

twice. 

 

I would like all members — all members . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . It says Uncle Fred, too. 

 

I wish all members have a very good summer. I know we will 

all be doing our work in our constituencies. We’ll be coming 

back in the fall . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  In the fall or in the spring. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  . . . to start another legislative session; 

we’ll be getting the Bills ready in the fall for the spring. 

 

So, all members, thank you for your cooperation. It’s been a 

good session and I think I’ll sit down now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 

to add to the words of the . . . but I hope, but I hope that we can 

adjourn soon enough so that we indeed can get back in the fall. 

 

It indeed has been an honour and I’m very proud to be part of 

the system that we have in this province in terms of the 

legislative experience. As a person who has accepted additional 

responsibilities this year, I’ve enjoyed each and every one of 

you as individuals in this House. 

 

I want to pay a very special thank-you to the members that sit 

on this side in the loyal opposition, indeed for your support and 

your continued support. I do want to thank caucus staff, as 

indicated. I think caucus staff, the researchers that we have, the 

people that work with us, are essential. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I do want to indeed extend a very, very, very 

heartfelt thank-you to each and every one of you. I know that 

we’ve had the opportunities to express our philosophical 

differences to one another here in the House, but we’ve also 

had the opportunities to share outside of this building. And 

that’s the part that I found to be very, very appreciative and the 

fact that we indeed can get along once we are out of this House 

— the fact that our political philosophical differences are here 

in this building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Without mentioning all of the names, I want 

to quickly thank the individuals here that sit at this Table — 

Gwenn and Greg and Meta. And of course the people that are 

outside as well in all the other departments. 

 

I want to thank Pam Scott and Patrick Shaw and the pages. I  



1940  Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1997 

hope that your experience has indeed been a worthwhile one 

and that you’ll treasure this experience, as I know I as an MLA 

treasure the experience of being here and representing the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to thank the people in Hansard and broadcast services, 

the visitor services, the Legislative Counsel and Clerk, who 

assist us in doing our daily jobs. The people in personnel and 

administration and of course financial services, who . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, without them we wouldn’t be 

here. Thanks for the pay cheques. 

 

We also want to thank the library staff and we do know where 

the doors are and I would hope that the member opposite also 

knows where those doors are; the cafeteria staff for changing 

the look — we appreciate that — and indeed changing the way 

the foods are served; cleaning and security staff of course have 

worked to make sure that this building runs properly and we 

want to extend a thank-you to them. 

 

What I want to also say finally is a thank-you to the Speaker, 

who’s on leave and I know an extended leave, so I’m not sure 

that he’s involved in that very, very businesslike matters of the 

association, but I hope he has enjoyed the time away and I 

know he has represented this province very, very well. To you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you for doing a very admirable job, 

and appreciate the fact that you’ve given the opportunity to all 

members to voice their concerns in debate. 

 

I also want to end by extending on behalf of the loyal 

opposition, our indeed . . . our thoughts and our best wishes to 

the member from Regina Northeast. I know that he is going 

through a very tough time right now and we wish him the best 

and a speedy recovery and hope that he returns to this House in 

the fall. 

 

With that I want to extend to all members a very, very enjoyable 

time away from the legislature, back in your constituencies, 

back dealing with all the people in your own constituencies. 

And I know that we may not have the opportunity to see each 

one another until the fall, so best wishes. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s certainly an 

honour to stand here this evening and just extend some 

thank-you’s. We have enjoyed the time in this past session, 

being it’s one of the shortest ones that I’ve experienced, 

considering the fact that I’ve been here through some summer 

months right into the fall, and we look forward to getting to that 

point. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would have to suggest that this 

has been an interesting session. It’s amazing how far the 

government has come on a number of policies that we have 

brought forward and we hope that they move forward on the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . policy as well. 

 

But we’d be remiss if we didn’t just extend a hearty thank you 

to each and every one that’s involved in helping this place  

work. It’s not just the MLAs. We’re individuals here that 

represent the people. But the realities are, I’m afraid, that we 

would do a very poor job if we didn’t have the qualified 

personnel certainly sitting at the Clerk’s Table; the pages that 

serve us here; the Hansard and broadcast services; the Law 

Clerk — we certainly appreciate the work that’s been done in 

helping us with our Bills; library services; visitor services; and 

cafeteria. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’ll all admit there’s been 

quite a change in the cafeteria services and the food that they’re 

offering, and we certainly want to congratulate them for what 

they’ve done and wish them well. 

 

Financial services, cleaning staff, and I guess most of all, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we would have to say that each and every one 

of us are probably mindful of the hard work and the long hours 

that our caucus staff put in as well. And we would like to thank 

our staff and extend a hearty thank you to all the other staff 

members, and especially ministers’ staff people for the way 

they respond. I think on many occasions I found that ministers’ 

staff have responded well and certainly responded quickly to a 

number of issues we’ve raised. 

 

So without making this belated, drawn out thank you, thank you 

to each and every one of you. We certainly trust that you’ll have 

an enjoyable summer. Enjoy getting back and working with the 

family, being part of the family. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thanks so much for the good times. 

We look for better times ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

now to move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Before this House adjourns I have a 

message, if everyone else is done. The Speaker has left this 

message and asked that I relay it to the House. 

 

I regret being unable to be in the House for the 

adjournment of the second session of the twenty-third 

legislature. 

 

And I will tell the members that he is doing a very important 

job where he is, even though he has extended his stay, is to do 

important work for the province. 

 

I would like to express my thanks to the many who have 

aided in the effective Assembly workings over this past 

session. I want to add my appreciation to those important 

people who help us do our work around the calendar, but 

especially when we come together in session. 

 

To those in the Legislative Library, Marian and staff, 

whose valuable services provide us food for thought. And 

to those in the Dome Cafeteria under the direction of 

manager Peter Chartand, to the much appreciated food for 

the daily energy we need to sustain some long hours, we 

say thanks. 



May 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

I also want to acknowledge Hansard and Journals with 

Rose, Donelda, and Susan and their staff for continuing to 

work so diligently as you wrap up today. Many of you this 

session have had the opportunity to explore a new web site 

and see just how efficient and accurate these two 

departments are. Each day’s proceedings were on the 

Internet by the next morning. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the computer service 

technicians, Richard and Chris, whose hard work this past 

year has enabled us to stay up and running on the Internet. 

 

Thanks goes to the visitor services, with Lorraine, Linda, 

and their staff, coordinating and welcoming the many 

people who come to visit the Legislative Building and 

their MLAs. 

 

Thanks to the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff for their 

security protection. 

 

In broadcasting, Gary, Kerry, and Ihor, thank you for your 

efforts in achieving coverage of our proceedings in at least 

one location in every constituency in this province. 

 

To the staff in financial services and personnel and 

administration under the direction of Marilyn and Linda, 

we appreciate your behind-the-scenes work and assisting 

us with the administration of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thanks also to Bob, Allison in the Legislative Law Clerk’s 

office for the drafting of legislation. 

 

I want to say a special thank you to our pages, and if I 

may, on behalf of us all, we wish you the best in your 

careers. (He has asked that you please stand when you’re 

being introduced) — Daniel Abramson, Lyle Cowles, 

Michael Dowie, Claire LaBelle, and Guy Turton. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1900) 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  

 

To the staff in my office — Debbie, Margaret, and 

Rhonda, thank you for your daily assistance to me and for 

facilitating the members’ access to the Speaker and to the 

Deputy Speaker since my absence. 

 

A special thank you to the Clerk’s office with Gwenn 

Ronyk, Greg Putz, Meta Woods, and their staff, Monique 

Lovatt and Pam Scott. Their hard work all year, but 

especially during session, is greatly appreciated by all of 

us in the Assembly, but especially for those of us who 

preside over the House. Their expertise and knowledge is 

invaluable. 

 

I want to say thank you, as well, to the Deputy Speaker 

and the Chair of committees who worked, in my opinion, 

in a very expeditious way to assist in the conduct of the 

affairs of the Assembly. 

To the members of the Assembly, I particularly appreciate 

the level of conduct of the partisan parliamentary affairs in 

the Assembly, having respected the dignity in the House 

and its place in the lives of the Saskatchewan people. As 

well, I commend the respect you have shown to one 

another, and therefore our institution of parliamentary 

democracy. 

 

In conclusion, the members of the Parliament from Ghana 

have asked me to pass on their appreciation to our 

members for your support of their newly emerging 

democracy. Saskatchewan is certainly held in high regard 

in Ghana. Thank you to the hon. members. 

 

And now I, as Deputy Speaker, would like to add my thanks to 

those of the Speaker. In the past week and a half I have gained a 

greater appreciation of the behind-the-scenes work that goes on 

each day that this House sits. That includes all those who work, 

as the Government House Leader has said, the important people 

— the Legislative Building staff, the staff of the Legislative 

Assembly, the House business staff, the people that work in the 

caucus office and cafeteria, and certainly is Hansard, a special 

ode to them, and many more that I won’t go into right now. 

 

In particular, I would like to personally thank the staff in the 

Speaker’s office for their assistance — Debbie, Margaret, and 

Rhonda. Also my appreciation goes out to our extremely 

efficient table officers who I, as Deputy Speaker in the last 

week and a half, have relied very heavily on — Greg, Meta, and 

Gwenn. 

 

And of course, to our pages for this session who have worked 

hard and showed a commendable level of commitment to this 

institution. 

 

To all hon. members in the House, I say thank you for making 

this past number of days a pleasant and yet humbling 

experience. I appreciate your cooperation and understanding, 

and may I say that I am proud to be part of this democratic 

process. 

 

I wish everyone a great summer, and God willing, we will meet 

here again. 

 

This House now stands adjourned until the call of the Chair. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7:05 p.m. 

 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1897 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1898 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1898 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1898 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1898 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1898 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1898 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1899 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1899 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Bond Rating Increased from BBB High to A Low 

  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1899 

 Pothole Patroller Invitation to the Minister 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1899 

 Youth Job Record 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1899 

 Pothole Alert 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1900 

 Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................1900 

 The Wondrous Beauty of Northern Saskatchewan 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1900 

 Treaty Day on Little Pine Reserve 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1900 

 Canada Day Poster Challenge 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1901 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Health Care Reform 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1901 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1901 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1902 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1902 

 Crown Corporations Review 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1902 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1902 

 Municipal Government Amalgamation 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1903 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1903 

 Social Justice Policies 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1903 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1903 

 Open Government 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1904 

 SaskPower Proposed Project in Guyana 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1904 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1904 

 Health Care Reform 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1905 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1905 

 Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 



 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1905 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1905 

 New Democratic Party Government’s Record 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1905 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1906 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Chief Electoral Officer Report 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1906 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Debate on Bill No. 67 

  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................1906 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1907 

 Ruling on Bill No. 229 

  Deputy Speaker .......................................................................................................................................................................1907 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 34  The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1907 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1907 

 Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1908 

  Hillson ......................................................................................................................................................................................1908 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1910 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1911 

  Hillson ............................................................................................................................................................................1911, 1914 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1912 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1912 

 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1914 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1915 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1915 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1921 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1924 

 Recorded divisions ..................................................................................................................................................1925, 1926, 1927 

 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1927 

  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1927, 1930 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1928 

 Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1931 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1931 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1935 

 Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................1936 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1936 

 Bill No. 66 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1936 

 Bill No. 69 — The Police Amendment Act, 1997 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1936 

 Bill No. 67 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1936 

 Bill No. 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1937 

 Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1937 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1937 

ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1937 


