



















































Hansard: March 20, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 295 

 March 20, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens with respect to the increase in crime by 

young people. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on the petition are primarily from the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatoon, and I’ll read the prayer for the Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to continue the services of 

Working for Women in Saskatoon, who have a 16-year 

history of successfully providing cost-effective, accessible 

services to women in poverty by reducing their barriers to 

training and employment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

I present this on behalf of various citizens throughout the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 

signed by citizens from the city of Regina: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the problem of youth crime in Saskatchewan 

in light of the most recent wave of property crimes; such 

task force to be comprised of representatives of the RCMP, 

municipal police forces, community leaders, 

representatives of the Justice department, youth outreach 

organizations, and other organizations committed to the 

fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

to bring forward petitions from all throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding big game problems. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) change the Saskatchewan 

big game damage compensation program so that it 

provides more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers 

and townsfolk for commercial crops, hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including the 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and (2) to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And the people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, of 

course are from the constituency of Wood River, from the 

communities of Asquith and Lancer. I so present. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

from all across this province and I’ll read the prayer to you: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reduce the PST by two points 

to 7 per cent in the 1997 provincial budget, and table a 

long-term plan for further reductions in the PST in the 

years ahead. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions represent some 4,000 residents of 

Saskatchewan from all across this province and I’m pleased to 

present on their behalf today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions on behalf of people concerned about the province’s big 

game compensation program. And the prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to change the Saskatchewan big 

game damage compensation program so that it provides for 

more fair and reasonable compensation to farmers and 

townsfolk for commercial crops, stacked hay, silage bales, 

shrubs and trees which are being destroyed by the 

overpopulation of deer and other big game, including 

elimination of the $500 deductible; and to take control 

measures to prevent the overpopulation of deer and other 

big game from causing this destruction. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these concerns have been brought forward to  



296  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

me from all across the Thunder Creek constituency. I so 

present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

ensure that the Department of Education’s external music 

credits policy is not eliminated; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reduce the PST by 2 points in the 1997 provincial budget; 

and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

assist women in poverty by continuing the services of 

Working for Women in Saskatoon. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on day no. 16,  I 

will ask the following question of the Minister of Justice: 

 

How many sentencing circles were held in Saskatchewan 

in 1996 and where were they held? 

 

I have similar questions for each of the years 1993 to date. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, I’m sure I voice the 

feelings of all members of the Assembly when I rise today to 

welcome all of our special guests who are here in the House 

with us today for this most important reading of the budget. 

 

I also, while I’m on my feet, want to introduce a very special 

group who have travelled a long way — I would like to think, 

only to be with us for reading of the budget, but for other 

reasons as well. The UCAZ, or the Urban Council of 

Association of Zimbabwe, have a special relationship with 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) here 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and they have exchanged 

delegations between Zimbabwe in Africa and the province of 

Saskatchewan over the last couple of years. 

 

And I’m pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to introduce councillor 

C.Z. Tawengwa, who’s the president of the UCAZ and is a 

councillor in the city of Harare in Zimbabwe; Johnson R. 

Mawere, the executive mayor of the city of Kwekwe; councillor 

I. Madzima, who is the chairman of the town of Norton and that 

town council; and also the secretary of the UCAZ, Samson 

Mombeshora, who is here with us today as well. 

 

And with them and accompanying them, and I think a group  

who have been in Zimbabwe: Keith Schneider, the 

executive-director of SUMA – Keith, if you would stand and be 

recognized; Murray Westby, the president of SUMA; and Mike 

Badham, the vice-president of Cities, the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. And also Mike is, as we all know, a 

city councillor in the city of Regina. 

 

I’m sure all members will want to wish well our special group 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

on behalf of the official opposition, would like to extend a 

warm welcome to our international guests and to everyone 

assembled here today, to all our special guests. We would like 

to welcome them and wish them a very pleasant afternoon. 

Thank you, 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too as well, in the 

PC caucus, would want to recognize and welcome the guests 

from the international locations to Saskatchewan. I hope their 

visit is very pleasant. A good friend of mine, who was 

employed at SUMA one point, was involved in some 

discussions that took place over in Africa, and we would 

certainly want to welcome them to Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to join with other 

members in welcoming all the special guests here today, and in 

particular to welcome a group of students who have travelled, 

not nearly as far as the guests from Zimbabwe, but only from 

Campbell Collegiate in Regina South. This is a group of grade 

12 students who are here today to watch the budget, and I know 

that they will enjoy it. And all members will want to join with 

us in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, being a former debating champ yourself, as was the 

Premier, I know you will take a great deal of interest in the 

introductions I have today. Yesterday I talked about the 

Saskatchewan debating championships that I attended, and I 

referred to the high quality of debate at those championships, 

and the pride that all of us have in our young people. 

 

Today some of our young debating champions are present — 

which is an honour for all of us — and I would like to introduce 

the five young people, have them stand when I introduce their 

names, and we’ll welcome them when they all stand. 

 

First of all, Tammy Park. I see Tammy there. Tammy is off to 

Halifax for the Canadian finals and we wish her well; Erin Weir 

— Erin and Tammy won first place in the team debates; 

Jennifer Wilson, and these folks are from Regina. 

 

From Saskatoon in the east gallery, I believe, we have Mike  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

Joyce — Mike are you . . . Oh yes, right — and Ryan 

Androsoff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these . . . and friends and members, all of us are 

proud of our Saskatchewan youth. Our future is in great hands, 

and I would invite everyone to join me in welcoming our 

special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Hockey Team Heads for Provincial Championships 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

acknowledge the accomplishments of a group of young boys 

from my constituency. Recently, the BIRS Raptors hockey team 

beat the club from Odessa to capture the provincial Pee Wee C 

division southern championship. The Raptors will now play for 

the provincial title against either Avonlea or Luseland. 

 

BIRS Raptors are named for the communities of Buchanan, 

Invermay, Rama, Ryan, and Sturgis, the home towns of the 

players. This cooperative approach exemplifies what rural 

Saskatchewan is all about. The coach and manager for the club 

are Julius Dziaduck of Buchanan, and Louis Korchinski of 

Rama. 

 

I’d like all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the BIRS Raptors and their success to date and 

wishing them the best in the provincial finals. But I’ll 

understand if the members representing Avonlea and Luseland 

do so reluctantly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Film Industry in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, on Park Street in Regina, in the 

Provincial Secretary’s constituency but close to mine, is a 

94,000 sq. ft. sound stage owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan, managed by SaskFILM, and leased to movie 

companies in Saskatchewan and across Canada. 

 

There are over 50 production and production service companies 

in Saskatchewan. They’re lined up to do business here, Mr. 

Speaker, because one of the many new industries booming in 

Saskatchewan is the film industry. 

 

Last week, for instance, Shaftesbury Films of Toronto and 

Heartland Pictures of Regina announced a six-film deal worth 

$20 million — the films to be based on novels by Saskatchewan 

writers, my friend, Gail Bowen, and Rob Forsyth. This means 

jobs, and this highlights Saskatchewan to the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the growth in Saskatchewan film is remarkable, 

from $5 million in 1991 to over $26 million last year to a 

projected $64 million by the year 2000. The number of jobs in 

this industry is expected to increase also to nearly 2,000 by the 

year 2000. 

SaskFILM is working together with private companies to build 

a working film culture that is producing quality films, economic 

activity, and jobs. The announcement last week is just one 

example of the great things happening in Saskatchewan — great 

for our cultural identity, terrific for our economy. Quiet on the 

set. Action! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Booming Pork Industry 

 

Mr. Jess:  Mr. Speaker, we are all familiar with the many 

new and innovative farming methods and technologies that 

have been diversifying our agricultural economy. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, pork producing is not new, and certainly it is not 

revolutionary to the province, yet it is diversifying and helping 

strengthen our economy. 

 

The hog industry is expanding at an outstanding rate. New 

operations are merging in the Glenavon and Kipling areas along 

with the Melfort-Kinistino-Beatty regions, and the Melville 

areas, which must make the members from Moosomin, 

Melfort-Tisdale, and Melville very happy. 

 

They are also emerging in the Leroy area, the Neilburg and the 

Unity areas. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the hog industry is expanding 

to cover the province. 

 

The industry has always been part of our agricultural sector, 

Mr. Speaker, but it has now emerged as one of the world 

leaders in production. The industry will inject millions of 

dollars into our economy, which I know all the members of this 

Assembly are happy to hear. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Renewed Growth in Swift Current 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With this being the first 

day of spring, a time of renewal and growth, it is with great 

pride that I have the opportunity to stand here today and present 

to the members of the Assembly signs that renewal and growth 

are occurring in the Swift Current constituency and 

undoubtedly throughout the province. 

 

The Swift Current area experienced tremendous growth in the 

oil and gas sector. The number of wells drilled increased 50 per 

cent and the number of licences issued increased by 58 per cent 

in 1996. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the economy of Swift Current has 

increased so much that there is a housing problem. Although 

housing starts doubled in 1996 from 1995, contractors simply 

cannot meet the demand. 

 

And there is more, Mr. Speaker. Plans are in place for the 

construction of a $60 million pasta plant which will certainly 

benefit the Swift Current community with increased 

employment and economic returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, spring is undoubtedly a glorious time of the year  



298  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

with renewed growth and the prospect of a brighter future. As 

we move from one season to the next, Mr. Speaker, much like 

the government did in 1991, we move from the bleak and 

dismal into the bright and optimistic. 

 

I welcomed the new seasons in 1991 and 1995 as much as I 

welcome the one today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Signs of Spring 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, as we all know, this is the 

first day of spring. In a few minutes the Minister of Finance will 

rise in her place to deliver her budget, which undoubtedly will 

contain good tidings of great joy. 

 

At that moment, Mr. Speaker, the season of new beginnings, the 

time of new hope, of rebirth, of rejuvenation, will be officially 

kick-started. When the minister stands, winter is over. 

 

There are, however, other signs of spring. For those with a nose 

to smell, the mighty Wascana once again has its own 

sulphurous announcement that the long winter is over. For those 

with an eye to see and an ear to hear, the joyful sounds of tires 

spinning in the soft ruts of Regina’s melting streets can be heard 

at any hour. The invasion of magpies, Mr. Speaker, is surely a 

sign that the annual migration of more desirable songbirds is 

not far behind. 

 

Speaking of birds, Mr. Speaker, is it too much to hope for a 

return to the nest in the legislative press gallery of Dale Eisler, 

the albatross of the Conrad Black empire? The lesser birds in 

the nest obviously miss his wisdom, his fairness, and his perfect 

memory of this legislature. He would remember, for instance, 

as Mark Wyatt does not today, that our current Finance 

minister, waiting her turn, was preceded by the member from 

Regina Dewdney. But 1991 was a long time ago, and small 

birds have short memories. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canola Biotechnology Relocation 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 

reputation as a world leader in agricultural biotechnology was 

recently enhanced once again with the Mycogen Corporation, 

based in San Diego, relocating its canola research and 

development program to Saskatoon’s Innovation research park. 

 

The corporation specializes in genetic engineering and its 

application to seeds and bio-pesticides. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Mycogen Corporation’s expertise in plant 

breeding, oil modification, and insect resistance will add to the 

focus already being shown in these areas of research and will 

aid in producing new products and technologies for 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

A partnership between Ag-West Biotech and the International 

Centre for Agricultural Science and Technology will provide 

half a million dollars of new money for the establishment of a 

microspore culture lab, a plant breeding complex, and other 

research facilities. 

 

The relocation of Mycogen Corporation to Saskatchewan 

illustrates our commitment to research, development, and to the 

diversification of our agricultural economy. Providing prairie 

farmers with up-to-date information and technology will help to 

maintain Saskatchewan’s advantage in this industry and to add 

to this province’s growing leadership in the biotechnology 

sector. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Big River Nursery Closure 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a few 

minutes the people of Saskatchewan will hear the Minister of 

Finance bring down the provincial budget and talk about how 

wonderful her government is performing. 

 

The same cannot be said for the community of Big River who 

received devastating news on the eve of today’s budget. The 

town was informed that this government will close the oldest 

tree nursery in the province on March 30. As a result, 16 

permanent employees and 100 casual employees will lose their 

jobs. Most of these employees are women who live in low 

income families, and they are devastated. 

 

Will the Minister of Labour comment on the fact that this 

decision is the height of hypocrisy, as it comes only days after 

this government made a so-called commitment to pay equity 

and to women? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the hon. member for the question. 

 

Certainly jobs are very important to us here in Saskatchewan, 

but unfortunately the Big River nursery was just out of date. In 

our transfer of seed and seedling production, reforestation 

efforts, to the forest companies, they did not see fit to continue 

on with the Big River nursery. 

 

The notice was actually given out last year and formal notice 

was given over a month ago. We are continuing to work with 

the people displaced by this exercise and we will continue to 

work with the people involved to try to find other opportunities 

for them in the area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of Big 

River say closing their nursery will have a drastic effect on their  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

town and they feel that the government has bailed out on their 

community. 

 

They question, and justifiably so, this government’s 

commitment to the northern economic development, and 

employment in that area. They also question why this 

government has not negotiated an agreement with the forestry 

company to buy Saskatchewan seedlings. At present these 

companies purchase most of their seedlings from British 

Columbia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that this government has stated time 

and time again that employment is the number one priority, how 

can they justify this decision? And will he comment on this, 

another example, which demonstrates the government’s lack of 

commitment to northern people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the hon. 

member did point out, the production of seedlings in 

Saskatchewan at the old Big River site is just out of date and 

not cost-effective. The seedlings were inferior, their survival 

rate was very low and thus the companies are going to other 

sources. 

 

Now on the brighter side, we are negotiating and making every 

effort to find someone to take over both the P.A. (Prince Albert) 

and the Big River nursery. And we will continue to do this and, 

as I say, continue to work with the people affected in Big River 

to provide every opportunity for them in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  The Minister of Environment wrote in a letter 

on December 11 that his government’s objective was to find 

interested parties who would operate and purchase the nursery 

to grow seedlings or other products that would allow it to 

continue as a viable operation in Big River. Perhaps the 

minister would explain to this House why his government has 

come up empty-handed and as a result failed the community of 

Big River and the employees of Saskatchewan’s oldest nursery? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

indicated, we are still looking at opportunities for other 

companies to come in and operate the nursery. That is certainly 

our goal — to produce the seedlings here in Saskatchewan, 

create the jobs here in Saskatchewan for the Saskatchewan 

forest industry. And we have not closed the door on this yet. 

We are still negotiating and have a couple of good leads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina Health District Board 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a recent article in 

a Regina paper, it paints a very disturbing picture of the Regina 

Health District Board. This item notes that the Board’s policy of 

maintaining a veil of secrecy around the motions it passes is  

oddly out of step with the policies of some of our other districts 

in the province. 

 

Susan Wagner, the chairperson of Saskatoon Health District, 

says that, most of us who ran for election run on making the 

process more open; however, the chairman of the Regina board 

says that’s not the way it’s going to be done here. 

 

Because there’s no specific statute stating what a board must 

discuss in public, will the Minister of Health explain how he 

intends to address this lack of public accountability? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, many people have wondered 

why it is that the Liberal caucus office is paying their leader 

$21,000 out of public funds. Many others have wondered why 

the Liberal leader has been so strangely silent lately. And I 

think I have the answer. They’re paying to keep him quiet. 

 

And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because what he says again 

is different than what the Liberal Party in the legislature says. 

Because what we believe in, Mr. Speaker, is democratically 

elected health boards in 30 districts. What the Liberal leader 

advocates is going back to 450 boards of people hand-picked by 

him to do all health business in private. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the most democratic 

health board process in this country. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to keep it that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know full well, 

and so do the people of the province, that the district boards are 

only a front for the NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s 

reform model, the wellness model. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have experienced 

firsthand in a very real way this government’s approach to 

health care reform. We witness boards that are not accountable 

to the public. We see boards placing gag orders on health care 

workers. And worst of all, we see the Minister of Health today 

defending this attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these actions only serve to further destroy any 

confidence the people of Saskatchewan have in the present 

health care system. Will the Minister of Health again — and I 

ask him once more — will he stand in this House today and 

take a step toward ensuring that our boards are open and 

accountable to the very people that elected them and that they 

serve? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to answer this 

question on behalf of the government, if I might. I want to 

answer it because the member from Arm River picks up on the 

theme that the official Leader of the Opposition picked up in his 

debate on the occasion of the speech throne a few days ago . . . 

throne speech debate, where the Leader of the Opposition,  



300  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

Liberal Leader of the Opposition said the following about the 

district health boards: New Democrats have established “puppet 

district health boards.” 

 

And that is the thrust of course, of the member of Arm River’s 

question here, that somehow these are puppet district health 

boards and that Regina is one of them, that the Minister of 

Health should tell them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the question very simply this 

way. It’s about time that the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan got 

its act together because I would suggest that the president of the 

Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, one Anita Bergman; the official 

Leader of the Opposition in this House, the member from 

Canora; the Liberal leader, Dr. Melenchuk, get together, 

because as you should know, the president of the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Party, Ms. Anita Bergman, is on the Regina District 

Health Board and she is either a puppet or she is not. 

 

Will you stand up on your feet and say that Ms. Bergman is a 

puppet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I am required to remind all those 

who are visiting the Assembly today that guests are not 

permitted to participate in the proceedings, and having been 

advised accordingly, I’m sure everyone will follow the same 

rules as the members. 

 

Compensation for Parents Affected by Labour Standards 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 

parents in the province continue to play a frustrating waiting 

game, not knowing whether this government will do the 

honourable thing and provide compensation to those who face 

substantial bills for back pay for their babysitters. The 

government took the first step by admitting it was their mistake 

that created this hardship for parents in the first place. 

 

However, the Minister of Justice has indicated that there is no 

mechanism to provide compensation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest there is a mechanism. If the government and members 

opposite would agree to forgo the $4,200 in additional salary 

that they collected under the former pay system — something 

that other members on this side of the House did repay — then 

the problem could be solved. 

 

So will the minister make a commitment in this House to accept 

this challenge? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, this is the third time in the 

last two weeks that this question has been asked; the second 

time by this official opposition. And the answer is perfectly 

well-known to the member, but I’ll give it again, slowly, so she 

can understand it. 

 

We do not have an existing program from which these claims 

can be paid. We are however, committed through the mouth of  

the Premier and through the mouth of myself, that we will 

monitor this situation. We’re talking about taxpayers’ money 

here and we’re not about to expend taxpayers’ money or 

commit ourself to spend it until we have a clear idea of the 

dimensions of the problem. 

 

Now if the member will listen, maybe she won’t have to ask 

this question again. 

 

And when we understand the dimensions of the problem, 

namely, how many people have had claims made against them 

and what the settlements have been, and how many people out 

there have been complying with the law and would be entitled 

to similar treatment, then and only then can we make a rational 

decision on that. Now is that clear? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think I’d 

take the opportunity to ask a question about today’s budget and 

direct my question to the Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, every day since this session began our 

members have been tabling petitions from all across the 

province calling for a reduction in the PST (provincial sales 

tax). Taxpayers are demanding it, businesses are demanding it, 

and as you know, Madam Minister, our party’s election 

platform said it was possible even though you said it was not 

possible. 

 

Madam Minister, are you finally going to listen to the thousands 

of people who signed our petition, and are you finally going to 

adopt the PC (Progressive Conservative) taxation policy and cut 

the PST by 2 points? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to address the 

latter part of the question first. The answer I can give the hon. 

member when he asks, will we finally adopt the PC taxation 

policy and approaches, the answer is unequivocally no, we will 

not adopt that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  You’ll remember how your taxation 

policies were: you put on a tax on lotteries, then you took it off 

and you said there’s a tax break. You put on a tax on used cars, 

then you took it off and you said there was a tax break. You 

took off the tax on the fuel, put it back on and said, well, we 

had to do it. In the process you ran up a deficit of $14 billion. 

 

Now you get up in the legislature and say are we going to adopt 

your fiscal policies? Nobody in Saskatchewan is going to adopt 

your fiscal policies. 

 

We have said this since we’ve been assuming office in 1991. 

We want to give tax relief, program enhancement, debt 

reduction, when we can deliver for ever on the interests and on  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Not the 

old Tory way for short-term votes, but for the benefit of the 

quality of life and benefiting all the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s the NDP Saskatchewan way, not your way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is also for the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, 

just before the last election you wanted to silence any 

opposition to your government’s expanded gambling policy so 

you promised to share 10 per cent of the VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenues with municipalities. As soon as the election 

was over, you promptly broke that promise. Not only that, you 

cut millions of dollars of revenue-sharing grants. 

 

Madam Minister, you seem to be hinting that your government 

has a lot of new-found wealth. VLTs are sucking hundreds of 

millions of dollars a year out of Saskatchewan people. Are you 

finally going to fulfil your campaign promise and back-fill your 

cuts to municipalities by giving them 10 per cent of the VLT 

revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again there is a 

fundamental contradiction which should be addressed someday 

by the Conservatives; because the Conservatives and that 

member in particular get up in the legislature daily — or almost 

daily it seems — and say that the VLT policy, not the VLT 

policy of revenue sharing, but VLTs and all of it is all wrong. 

Now he gets up and says, however, maybe it isn’t all so wrong. 

Maybe if there is some money coming out the money should be 

revenue shared in some form or capacity. 

 

Our position has been that that money should be revenue 

shared. Our money . . . position is that the 10 per cent should be 

shared in such a way that the urbans and the rural municipalities 

and the provincial governments and the SSTA (Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association) can agree. 

 

We sat down and negotiated and negotiated and talked and 

talked and could not find an agreement. In the consequence, the 

government is moving with respect to 911 and the expenditure 

of other dollars and other ventures, with respect to that 10 per 

cent, in order to benefit the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, on this issue. What are we talking about when 

we’re talking about VLTs? This money does not go into the 

pocket of the Minister of Municipal Affairs or the pocket of 

Economic Development or my pocket or your pocket. All of 

this money goes back to the people of Saskatchewan in benefits 

— for roads and schools and hospitals and everything else that 

this budget, in about 10 or 15 minutes, will talk about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Young Offenders Act 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my  

question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, yesterday a 

group of students from Miller High School were here in the 

Assembly. Yesterday the Premier made a commitment, the 

Minister of Justice made a commitment, to meet with these 

students regarding a petition they have put together to address 

the concerns that everyone has regarding the Young Offenders 

Act. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I had an 

opportunity to meet with the students, to look at their petition, 

and to sign it. However, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice 

has yet to meet with that group of students. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m sure that your office staff have provided you 

with a copy of the petition. Have you taken the time to read it 

and, Mr. Minister, do you support their petition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear 

that these students were overwhelmed yesterday by all the 

attention that they received. I immediately went out to ask them 

if they were available to meet, and they said, not today. I am 

going to meet with them, but yesterday they were very busy. 

And I understand that. 

 

I think the important point to remember is that these young 

people have taken the initiative to become involved in some 

issues in Saskatchewan and in Canada, as particularly these are 

federal issues. And they have gone about setting out their ideas, 

their concerns, and entered into the public debate. 

 

I think that’s a very important thing for high school students, 

for all citizens of Saskatchewan to do, and I applaud them. I’m 

looking forward to meeting with them and discussing their 

issues. And when we have had a chance to discuss all of these 

things, then I think we will have a decision about whether we 

can support them or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the minister 

is telling us that he met with them, when we were informed that 

they were waiting to meet and didn’t have that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister if he had read the petition, if 

he had even glanced at it to see what the students were bringing 

forward. And I would also like to ask the minister if he would 

give not just a firm commitment that he will meet, but if the 

minister has already given his staff the orders or asked them to 

contact the students and to plan a meeting next week at its latest 

possible time. 

 

Can the minister give us a promise, not just a promise to meet, 

but a commitment to already set a date and a time and address 

this concern? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I said before and I’ll say it 

again, that my staff met with the teacher who was with them  



302  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

and the students and offered to meet with them yesterday 

afternoon. They were very clearly busy and taken up with all of 

their time with the media and with the members opposite. And 

they are going to meet with me at a time that’s mutually 

convenient for all of us and we will fully discuss this. I have 

seen the petition. We have looked at it, and we are continuing to 

look at it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Plebiscites 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is some degree 

of uncertainty as to who will respond to any of the questions 

from this side of the House today. However there is an issue 

that is on the minds of people throughout this province, and it’s 

an issue that should not just be looked at too lightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, media reports indicate that as many as 22 Alberta 

towns and villages may soon hold plebiscites to determine the 

future of VLTs in their communities. The people of Punnichy 

have expressed the same interest, and other Saskatchewan 

communities may very well follow suit. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Liquor and Gaming tell this 

House how his government plans on addressing this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to first advise the member from Melville that I have 

indicated to hoteliers and to municipalities across the province 

that if in fact there is a petition that comes forward, that 

certainly I would be prepared to meet with any one of the 

communities that were to do that. 

 

The member from Melville should remember here however, 

that this is a very, very delicate issue for communities to deal 

with. From the point of view that when this program was 

established in Saskatchewan, it was designed to protect 

hoteliers, to ensure that hoteliers in this province continued to 

have a livelihood. 

 

We talk about jobs in small communities. We talk about a tax 

base in small communities that would be in some jeopardy. 

Hoteliers have been very clear that they want to ensure that 

VLTs remain in their community. And the member from 

Melville needs to ensure that that process stays in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank the minister for his response, Mr. 

Speaker, but we have seen this government’s tactic of pitting 

one group against another in several forms. To use two 

examples, we have seen community fighting community over 

health care funding. We are also seeing all levels of local 

government fighting each other because of this government’s 

ill-prepared tax reassessment plans. Now this government 

appears prepared to spark a community versus community 

battle over VLTs. 

 

Is the minister not concerned that individual plebiscites could 

set a precedent which leads to community fighting community 

over the issue; and would he not agree that a province-wide 

plebiscite on this issue of non-casino VLTs may be a better 

solution? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure on which 

side of the fence the member from Melville really sits, because 

the member from Melville understands that plebiscites are 

within the jurisdiction — or should understand — they’re 

within the jurisdictions of the municipalities, and at the end of 

the day, they’ll make those decisions as to whether or not they 

wish to hold one. The ultimate decision about whether or not 

there’ll be a VLT program in Saskatchewan will rest of course 

with the government of the day. 

 

But I hear the member from Melville criticizing the VLT 

program this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I have a press release 

here . . . or an article that was in the paper, dated February 26, 

1997, where the member from Melville says in its response to 

the Alberta Liberal issue, where the Liberals in Alberta were 

saying they don’t support VLTs, the member from Melville 

says, that the “. . . election promise to phase out VLTs over 

three years is impractical, inequitable and possibly 

unconstitutional.” 

 

And the member goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, the member then 

goes on to say: “Let’s allow (the) people to have the same 

choices (every) . . . other parts of (the province and) North 

America (have).” Let’s leave VLTs in place. Where is the 

member from Melville sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

911 Service Charges 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this week in this House the 

minister in charge of Municipal Government was questioned 

about a series of broken promises regarding VLT revenues 

which were to be earmarked to our cities, towns, and villages — 

a 911 service which was to be financed with those funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated a couple of days ago that it 

was premature to even talk about monthly 911 charges to 

municipalities, including those which already have 911 service. 

However, her officials are talking about new charges and fees to 

pay for the 911 service. 

 

Will the minister be upfront with the people of Saskatchewan 

and explain why she and her department officials are sending 

mixed messages? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 

that question. I think that the answer that I gave the other day, I 

was asked specifically whether a certain fee would be charged 

for users of 911. And what I said then — it’s premature to talk 

about the amount because the planning is not yet finished. 

 

In terms of the other, we spent $2.4 million doing the mapping 

that’s necessary for the 911 locator. We spent $3 million on the 

radios for the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), which  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

is part of the response to the 911 call. Then SaskTel committed 

$5.6 million to the capital for the infrastructure. 

 

Now this is all capital and amounts to $11 million, which was 

more than was in the municipal fund from the VLTs. It’s $1.5 

million more than that line. So we kept our word. We put in 

more, and not took away. 

 

Then there has to be, once the system is established, provision 

for operating it, and if there will be a fee and how much it will 

be, there’s enabling legislation. But it will be incremental as the 

system grows to cover the whole province, and it will be at the 

discretion then of communities that are organizing their 

responses to the partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, you’ve just admitted that 

you had another broken promise, because not one dollar of that 

money found it’s way into municipal government coffers. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister indicated that the only reason the 

government did not hand over the 10 per cent VLT revenues to 

communities was because they could not come to a consensus 

on how to use the money. 

 

Legislative rules do not permit me to state my honest feelings 

about this statement, but suffice it to say our communities do 

not share this version of events. Mr. Speaker, the minister also 

stated that this 10 per cent VLT revenue, some $10 million 

annually, is being returned to our communities, as she’s tried to 

let on. 

 

Will the minister explain in specific terms and in a better way 

than you have tried to do, Madam Minister, and specifically to 

the municipalities that are listening today, how you are 

returning these dollars? And I say you are not returning these 

dollars. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, maybe the rules of the 

House don’t allow me to express my views frankly either, in 

this particular instance. However, let me say that this was . . . 

Read the press release. Go back and read the press release from 

1995. It never once said that one dime was going to municipal 

governments. It said, it’s going to be returned to communities 

for the benefit of the people of the province. 

 

And it is being returned. It is being returned in spades — in 

education, in health care, in highways, in municipal grants. All 

across the piece, it’s being spent for the betterment of the 

quality of life in Saskatchewan, including the development of 

the 911. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that the 

question no. 20 be converted to notice of motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker:  Item no. 1 is converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of open, 

accountable, and responsible government, I hereby table the 

answer to question 21. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to item no. 2 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES 

AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I have a message from 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ll ask all hon. members to rise for the 

reading of the message from His Honour. 

 

The message is as follows; from the office of the Lieutenant 

Governor: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 1998, and supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1997, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

(Signed) The Honourable John E.N. Wiebe, Lieutenant 

Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Members may be seated. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Premier: 

 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates, and 

supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are many special guests who have joined us 

today and I welcome them all. There are five very special 

people in my life here today that I would like to personally 

acknowledge, and I would ask each of them to stand. 

 

First is my husband, Peter MacKinnon, who is acting 

vice-president, academic, at the University of Saskatchewan. 

Beside him is my son Alan MacKinnon and his friend, Tricia 

Mutlow, who are students at Walter Murray Collegiate. Next to 

them is my son William MacKinnon, who is enrolled at Aden 

Bowman. And next to him is a long-time family friend, Bill 

Kinloch. I’d like to thank each of you for your ongoing trust  



304  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

and support. 

 

I’d also like to thank the government caucus for its tremendous 

support and counsel as we developed this budget. During this 

budget, they were asked to maintain confidentiality for more 

than six weeks. They said it couldn’t be done; I said, nobody 

else could do it. Mr. Speaker, this is the finest caucus in all of 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today 

to present a budget that invests in people, a budget about 

creating more growth and jobs, a budget about reaping the 

benefits of sacrifices past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have come a long way 

together. Five short years ago, we confronted a financial crisis, 

a large deficit, a growing debt, rising interest payments 

gobbling up dollars that could’ve been invested in people. 

 

To overcome this crisis, Saskatchewan people turned to their 

traditions — traditions of cooperation, compassion, and 

community. Everyone pulled together to restore the province’s 

finances. Together we started paying down the mortgage on our 

children’s future. Today we will plainly see the benefits of our 

work together. Today I am presenting another balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our fourth balanced budget in a 

row, and three more to come — right into the next century. No 

other province will surpass that record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Today our debt is falling and we are 

spending less on interest payments. This frees up money to 

invest in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, balanced budgets, fiscal stability, declining debt 

— these are the foundations of a strong economy and a healthy 

society. 

 

Fiscal stability and predictability attract new investment, 

growth, and jobs. In 1996 investors and business people were 

active in every sector and corner of the province. Resource 

exploration set a new high. Business investment was up 18 per 

cent. Manufacturing shipments up 10 per cent — the highest 

increase in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Retail sales up 8 per cent — triple 

the Canadian average. Housing starts up more than 40 per cent. 

Our population is growing again, rising to the highest level in 

eight years. Best of all, Saskatchewan families are showing 

renewed confidence, hope, and optimism. Now is the time to 

invest in people, to build an even better future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  As we build that future, let us 

remember the lessons of the past. The 1980s taught us spending 

today and paying tomorrow is wrong. It shackles our children 

with debt they do not deserve. This government remains 

committed to living within our means, to spending responsibly, 

to the discipline of paying our bills, not leaving them to burden 

our children. That is how we earned our financial freedom. That 

is how we will keep it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, while we have to 

remember the lessons of the past, we cannot return to it. 

Governments can no longer be all things to all people. Today 

people want governments to focus on their priorities, to reflect 

their values. They want more than short-term, short-sighted, 

quick-fix schemes. They want governments to make sound, 

long-term investments. 

 

But most important, people want governments to do all they can 

to live up to their commitments. Broken promises mean broken 

dreams and the loss of trust and faith. 

 

Five years ago, we made a commitment to restore the 

province’s finances and we promised to do it with fairness and 

balance, reducing the debt, strengthening our social programs, 

cutting taxes — all three together, in balance, with fairness. 

That’s what this budget is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Keeping our promises, Mr. Speaker 

—that’s what this government is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, now is the time to 

build on our strong fiscal and economic foundations. Now is the 

time to spur our economy to greater success, to greater heights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spirit of cooperation has long been a defining 

feature of a strong and growing Saskatchewan. To build on that 

heritage, I’m pleased to announce increased funding for our 

new, refocused department of economic and cooperative 

development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Through our expanded cooperatives 

directorate within the department, we will promote growth and 

jobs today and into the future. We are building on our strengths, 

working with Saskatchewan people to create jobs right in their 

own communities. 

 

We will keep working with our regional economic development 

authorities to promote growth and jobs locally. We will keep 

working with industry to build on our record as an exporting 

province, where one in three jobs is export related. 

 

We will keep working with farm groups to strengthen and  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

expand agriculture, the foundation of our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, stability and predictability are just as important to 

a farmer near Unity as to a shopkeeper in Moose Jaw. We all 

know the risks of farming — too much or too little rain; an 

early frost. These can push a farm family to the brink 

financially. That’s why we worked with our partners in 

agriculture to ensure income stability and security for farm 

families. Last year we paid down $150 million in crop 

insurance debt. 

 

(1430) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Today we have a new, sustainable 

crop insurance program with lower premiums and better 

protection for farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, new products and 

better crops give farm families more options. That’s why we’re 

working with farmers to develop the products of the future, 

everything from specialized crops and health food supplements 

to animal vaccines. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers are also leading the way in expanding 

and diversifying to capture new market opportunities. Canada’s 

western provinces are emerging as major suppliers to the 

growing world market for pork. Mr. Speaker, we’re teaming up 

with Saskatchewan farmers to pull ahead of the competition. I 

am pleased to announce a new initiative to promote our hog 

industry and other livestock operations. Effective midnight 

tonight, a new education and health tax rebate will be 

introduced to encourage investment in livestock production. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  With this tax incentive and our 

comprehensive hog strategy, we expect Saskatchewan’s hog 

production to triple by 2005. This means hundreds of new jobs 

and opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve been using targeted tax incentives since 1992 to create 

growth and jobs. We strengthened our small businesses by 

reducing their income taxes by 20 per cent. We attracted new 

call centres by removing the sales tax on 1-800 numbers. We 

improved the tax treatment for Saskatchewan-based truckers. 

 

We also introduced a number of tax incentives for 

manufacturing and processing. This growing sector continues to 

create thousands of new jobs. This budget builds on our 

momentum, with one more reason for manufacturers and 

processors to expand, one more reason for them to create jobs 

today and even more jobs tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to announce the manufacturing and processing investment tax 

credit will be extended to include used equipment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our manufacturers and processors 

can now receive a tax credit on new equipment and used 

equipment they bring into the province to expand their 

operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, manufacturers and processors, farmers, miners, 

and loggers, all rely on our roads to get resources and products 

to the world market. Our roads are also the vital link between 

our communities, farms, schools, hospitals, and businesses. Our 

roads bring thousands of tourists to every corner of 

Saskatchewan, bringing jobs and opportunities for our youth, 

students, and business people. But our roads and highways are 

under heavy pressure. Federal deregulation of railways, rail line 

abandonments, the loss of the Crow benefit — all this is taking 

its toll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to act and we have to act now. That’s 

why I am announcing today the first phase of our long-term 

plan to work with communities on a modern transportation 

network. I’m pleased to announce that over the next 10 years 

we will invest $2.5 billion in Saskatchewan’s roads and 

highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This investment starts with $200 

million in 1997-98. That’s an 18 per cent increase over last 

year’s budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Increased funding, a strategic plan 

for tomorrow — that’s a solid, long-term commitment to our 

essential roads and highways. 

 

We’re also joining the one-year extension of the 

federal-provincial infrastructure program, and we’re directing 

the entire federal and provincial share to municipal projects. 

With the municipal share, that’s $35 million this year to build 

stronger communities and create jobs. Much of this funding will 

be directed to roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these short-term, one-time federal commitments 

are welcome, but what we really need are long-term permanent 

programs, especially for roads. Sadly we’re the only country in 

the western world without a national transportation program. 

 

We’re ready to work with the federal government and the other 

provinces to build a modern, comprehensive, national 

transportation system for the 21st century. Today Saskatchewan 

has put its investment for roads and highways on the table; now 

we’re calling on the federal government to match our 

contribution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, infrastructure means 

more than just roads and highways. This year government 

departments and Crown corporations will invest $640 million to 

build and upgrade our state of the art telecommunication 

system, our power and energy grid, our hospitals, health  



306  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

centres, and schools. 

 

Provincial parks are also an important part of our heritage and 

quality of life. This budget further invests in Saskatchewan 

people and tourism by improving camping and recreational 

facilities in parks right across the province. 

 

Roads, parks, thriving modern communities — Mr. Speaker, 

we’re putting a new face on Saskatchewan, on our way to the 

new century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s how you build for the future. 

That’s how you invest in people for prosperity and jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ask Saskatchewan people what they cherish about 

our province and they will tell you: fresh, clean air; wide open 

spaces; friendly and helpful people; a great place to raise 

children; a place we’re proud to call home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our social programs are at the heart 

of our quality of life. They’re the envy of the world. 

Saskatchewan has a long and proud tradition of compassion and 

social innovation. These traditions served us well in the past 

and they put us in the vanguard of the future. 

 

But society is only as strong as its weakest link. Our world 

continues to face a real and looming problem — the widening 

gap between rich and poor nations and between rich and poor 

people. In this environment, more and more people feel no 

hope, no chance, and nothing left to lose. This sets the stage for 

crime and social unrest. That’s why we must work continually 

to ensure that every person, rich or poor, has access to health 

care; that every child, rich or poor, can get a quality education; 

and that a social safety net is in place to catch those who have 

fallen on hard times and need help getting back on their feet. 

That is why this budget secures our universal health care, 

strengthens our world-class education system, and broadens our 

social safety net. 

 

Mr. Speaker, building for tomorrow means investing in our 

children. We all want our children to enjoy healthy and happy 

lives. Canada is a wealthy nation. No parent should have to 

worry that their children want for food, warm clothing, or a safe 

home. That’s what makes child poverty a sad and unnecessary 

blight on our country. We must change this. That is why our 

province is leading the fight against child poverty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, a good job is still the 

best way to lift families out of poverty and off social assistance. 

Jobs will always be our top priority. But today the Canadian 

system hurts working-poor parents. It claws back the modest 

benefits they need to care properly for their children. That’s 

why we championed a national plan to help parents better 

provide for their children, and keep working. 

 

We promoted the concept of a national child benefit at 

federal-provincial meetings right across this country. Such a 

plan would be the first new national social program in 30 years. 

Last month the federal government announced its intentions for 

a national child benefit program, and that’s a promising start. 

But the plan won’t begin until July 1998, and there is no 

national commitment to adequate long-term funding. 

 

Needy children deserve help today. And for our part, this 

budget backs words with action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our internationally acclaimed action 

plan for children is already blazing the trail to a better future for 

thousands of Saskatchewan young people. Thanks to this plan, 

more school children enjoy hot meals, more teen parents stay in 

school, and more recreational programs keep children off the 

street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that our action plan for 

children will provide $13 million more in benefits and services 

for Saskatchewan children this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Now thousands more children and 

families will see a real improvement in their day-to-day lives. 

More children will receive the textbooks, notebooks, erasers, 

and pencils they need for school without cutting into the family 

budget for food and housing. More children will begin their day 

with nutritious meals. And when their parents go to work, more 

children will be cared for. We’ll build new and improved child 

care centres in our inner cities, in our rural areas, and in the 

North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  These measures give us the strong 

bridge we need until the long-term national plan is in place. 

And we will never let up until that plan is firmly established, a 

plan that can improve the future of children and families from 

coast to coast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, thousands of 

Saskatchewan people have made helping others their way of 

life. They work in women’s shelters, homes for the disabled, 

and child care centres. For too long, they’ve laboured for low 

wages. After a lifetime of work, many don’t even have the 

dignity of a small pension. These people have invested their 

lives in helping others. This budget invests in them. 

 

Today I am pleased to announce $10 million over three years 

for these front line care workers. That’s to give them better 

wages and pensions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This investment includes $500,000 

this year to improve the wages of our child care workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Step by step, we’re making lives 

better and making our communities safer. 

 

We’re also working with others to build a province-wide 911 

system to bring emergency services right to the doorstep of 

every Saskatchewan family. We’re increasing funding for more 

RCMP officers in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But our plan is not only to respond 

to crime. This budget advances innovative options to reduce 

crime. Restorative justice, community service, sentencing 

circles — these forward-looking initiatives bring our 

communities and our cultures together to build a safer and 

better Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, the mark of a great 

society is how well it treats its most vulnerable citizens. Our 

social safety net must always be there to protect people, but it 

should never become a trap. Real pride and hope come with 

self-respect and self-sufficiency. This budget takes significant 

steps to improve the lives of needy children, youth, and 

families. But most important, Mr. Speaker, it gives them real 

hope for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This budget also prepares our 

children to live and work in the new knowledge-based 

economy. New technologies and globalization are changing our 

world, creating thousands of exciting challenges and 

opportunities. 

 

Our schools must give our children a head start. Good teachers 

and a strong curriculum will always be essential, but the tools 

of the future, like access to the Internet, are becoming 

increasingly important. Our school boards and schools lead the 

way in using these new technologies. Programs like distance 

education bring students high quality instruction no matter 

where they live. 

 

We can build on this strong foundation by investing in our 

children. Therefore I am pleased to announce that operating 

grants for schools will increase to $363 million in 1997-98 and 

to $369 million in 1998-99. That’s a $22 million increase over 

last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our children also need a learning 

environment that is safe and healthy. Therefore I am pleased to 

announce that this budget provides $17 million to build and 

renovate Saskatchewan schools. That’s a 40 per cent increase  

over last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in 

Saskatchewan students to keep them at the head of the class. 

Active learning minds must never be blocked by the lack of 

money or privilege. 

 

In Canada the doors to a higher education have always been 

open, but federal cuts to post-secondary operating funding are 

undermining this system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are living up to our 

responsibilities. Our two universities are working hard to cut 

administration and duplication so that every available dollar can 

be spent in classrooms improving our students’ education. They 

are now putting in place ideas from the MacKay report. Already 

they’ve planned a new fibre optic link between campuses to 

share lecture and research information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re doing their part, and we will do ours. I’m 

pleased to announce $3 million in special funding this year. 

This funding will support their initiatives to share resources and 

will bring new technology like multimedia into their classrooms 

and libraries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  In addition, we are more than 

doubling our ongoing capital grants this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  In total, we’re providing $14 million 

to help our universities upgrade scientific and research 

equipment, to modernize labs and classrooms, to equip our 

students to excel in the new high-tech economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thousands of students today are 

frustrated by the federal cuts which they know are driving up 

tuitions. We share their frustration, and we’re doing something 

about it. This budget replaces, dollar for dollar, federal cuts to 

our universities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

announce operating funding for our universities will be $163 

million in both 1997-98 and 1998-99. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This funding will allow our 

universities to reconsider their recent tuition announcements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This is a substantial investment to 



308  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

help keep the doors of higher education open to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, learning today is a lifelong experience. An 

explosion in information and technology is creating exciting 

new jobs and opportunities. Our young people will need to be 

trained and retrained throughout their careers to get and keep 

these jobs. 

 

Just when we need to do more, the federal government is 

shutting down thousands of training spaces at SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and our regional colleges. More than one in four training 

opportunities will be lost as a result of these federal cuts. 

Apprenticeship programs alone will lose 70 per cent of their 

funding. 

 

That’s why we’re building our own made-in-Saskatchewan 

training system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, our young people are 

eager and ambitious. We must give them the training and skills 

they need to get ahead. Over the next three years, we will 

deliver more training to more young people for more jobs than 

ever in the history of this province. We’re completely restoring 

funding for apprenticeship and adult basic education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We’re building on the strengths of 

SIAST and our regional colleges. We’re expanding our 

successful JobStart and Future Skills programs. In total, this 

budget provides $117 million this year to prepare Saskatchewan 

men and women for jobs today and tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s investing in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year Saskatchewan commemorates one of its 

finest achievements. Thirty-five years ago this province gave 

Canada medicare so that everyone, rich or poor, rural or urban, 

young or old, would receive the best health care available 

regardless of the size of his or her bank account. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Today universal health care is under 

attack. The federal government says it supports the basic 

principles of public health care, yet it cuts billions of dollars 

from Canada’s social programs. These cuts threaten to push our 

great country into a two-tiered health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a sad and backward step. Saskatchewan 

people know the danger of a two-tiered system. Many 

remember when families had to choose between medical help 

and food or clothing, when hospital and medical costs could 

mean financial ruin. Mr. Speaker, as long as we are here, we 

promise those days will never come back. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Saskatchewan people want one 

strong, publicly funded system available to all. That’s why we 

are replacing every single federal dollar cut from health. On top 

of that, this budget makes a further major investment in health 

care. I am pleased to announce that we are providing health 

districts with an additional $51 million this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This funding will bring advanced 

technology and better services to Saskatchewan people. More 

seniors will now enjoy the independence of living in their own 

homes. That’s because round-the-clock home care will be just a 

call away. More people will have easier access to an MRI 

(magnetic resonance imaging) unit with one in Saskatoon and 

one in Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  More people will receive faster, 

better emergency services, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, one out of every $3 this government spends will 

be invested in health. This investment builds a stable and secure 

health system for today and develops the new services families 

will need for tomorrow. 

 

Imagine the day when the parent of a sick child can receive the 

immediate advice of a specialist in Saskatoon or Regina, or 

even Toronto, regardless of where they live in Saskatchewan. 

That’s the vision behind Telemedicine — an exciting new 

project to establish video links between health professionals and 

patients. 

 

Imagine the day when medical care can be provided closer to 

home for families right across Saskatchewan. That’s the vision 

behind our plan to include advanced clinical nurses in our new 

health teams. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  These are just two examples of how 

we will be building our modern universal health system for 

today and tomorrow — a caring, compassionate, stable, and 

secure health system; a health system that will always be there 

when people need it. That’s what the men and women of this 

province who pioneered medicare would have expected. That’s 

what Saskatchewan people and families deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, a healthy society, a 

growing economy, sound finances — these are Saskatchewan’s 

ingredients for success now and into the new century. 

 

We promised a balanced approach. We promised a balance 

between debt reduction, enhanced social programs, and tax cuts. 

We’re keeping our promise to reduce the provincial debt. 

 

In 1993, Saskatchewan’s debt was equal to more than 70 per  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

cent of all the goods and services produced in the province. 

Today it has been reduced to 49 per cent. By the year 2001, the 

total debt load will be cut to 36 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our annual interest bill will be $200 

million less than in 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s money we can put to work to 

strengthen social programs or reduce taxes. 

 

We’re also keeping our promise to protect the cornerstones of 

our quality of life – health, social services, education. We’re 

replacing 100 per cent of the federal cuts to these vital, social 

programs. 

 

But we’re not stopping there. We set out a plan to preserve and 

enhance our quality of life right into the next century. 

 

We’re also keeping our promise to lower taxes. In 1995, we 

reduced personal income taxes and we did it with fairness. We 

made sure that every single Saskatchewan taxpayer benefited 

from this tax cut. 

 

But there was compassion as well as fairness. More than 6,000 

lower income earners no longer pay income tax because of this 

measure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The way we apply the education and 

health tax is further confirmation of the fairness of our tax 

system. We do not apply the sales tax to family essentials — 

items like children’s clothing, electricity, and home heating 

fuel. Other provinces tax these items. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind everyone that under the 

federal government’s harmonized tax scheme, these family 

essentials would be taxed. We do not tax them because we 

believe they are a necessary part of the family budget. 

 

We also believe that other family expenses such as certain 

medical devices should not be taxed — items like glucose 

monitors, cholesterol testers, medical supports, and braces. 

Therefore, I’m pleased to announce an extension of the sales tax 

exemption for medical equipment. Effective midnight tonight 

these and similar medical devices will no longer be taxed. 

 

(1500) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But we promised to do even more 

when we could afford to. We believe that when a tax cut is 

given, it has to be sustainable through the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province’s finances are sound. Our economy  

is strong and growing. Today we can introduce a further 

responsible, sustainable tax cut — a tax cut that will benefit 

families right across the province; a tax cut that puts $180 

million back into Saskatchewan pocketbooks and cash registers 

each and every year; a tax cut that business people told us 

would do more than any other single measure to create jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to announce a reduction in 

Saskatchewan’s sales tax. Effective midnight tonight, the 

education and health tax will be reduced from 9 per cent to 7 

per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This is the tax cut Saskatchewan 

people have worked so hard for. As of midnight tonight, the 

people of Saskatchewan will pay less in sales tax than any other 

province with such a tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, this tax cut proves that 

discipline and sound financial management pays off, but 

today’s budget shows something more. It shows this 

government’s determination to keep our commitments and to 

take a balanced approach. It shows we can pay down debt, we 

can create prosperity and jobs, we can cut taxes. We can do all 

of these things and still enhance and strengthen the social 

programs that make Saskatchewan the best place in the whole 

world in which to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, all the strategic 

investments and benefits I’ve announced today were made 

possible by Saskatchewan people — by their determination, 

their hard work, their sacrifice and discipline. 

 

Today’s benefits are the rewards of sound, careful management 

of the public purse. And today we are renewing our 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan — our promise to 

invest wisely and to safeguard our ability to choose our own 

future. 

 

William Jennings Bryan once wrote: 

 

Destiny is a matter of choice; it is not a thing to be waited 

for, it is a thing to be achieved. 

 

Today we stand on the threshold of a new century filled with 

confidence and optimism. We’ve made our choices — growth 

and jobs, roads and infrastructure, social programs, lower taxes. 

We are achieving our destiny with balance, fairness, and 

responsible financial management. 

 

That’s how to invest in people. That’s how to build a modern, 

prosperous, and cooperative society. That’s how to work 

together to build a better today and an even better tomorrow on 

our way to the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



310  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 

respond to the Minister of Finance’s budget address on behalf 

of the official opposition. While I’ll save the bulk of my 

comments for tomorrow, there are a few brief points that I wish 

to make today before adjourning debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for over five years now, the people of 

Saskatchewan have been on the receiving end of some very 

harsh medicine administered by this government, and this 

Minister of Finance in particular. And yes, Mr. Speaker, some 

serious measures have been needed after the financial disaster 

left over by the Conservatives under Grant Devine. However, 

the type and extent of that medicine is where the government 

opposite has gotten off track. 

 

And while some of the announcements in today’s budget may 

take a small portion of the sting out of the last five years, we 

have a long way to go before we heal the destructiveness this 

government has created on people’s lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, obviously a very significant 

portion of the budget we have just heard concerns the provincial 

sales tax. The official opposition welcomes the news that the 

Minister of Finance has finally seen fit to listen to what so 

many have been saying for so long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I think we can all remember that when the 

Liberal Party campaigned on reducing the sales tax in 1995, the 

members opposite ridiculed us and said it would do nothing to 

promote economic development in Saskatchewan. It’s 

heartening to see they’ve finally agreed with us, late though it 

is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Obviously we welcome this reduction. And 

at the same time, we offer our congratulations to business 

people, to business organizations, and Saskatchewan residents 

in general who have finally forced this government to listen for 

a change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  At the same time though, I believe a little 

perspective is needed on this issue. Rather than calling this 

full-scale tax relief, as the government members no doubt will, I 

see it as a slight reprieve from the opposition . . . members 

opposite have taken so far out of people. Their approach has 

been to tax the life out of Saskatchewan businesses and people 

since 1991 and squeeze the economic life out of them. 

 

And the result of this can be seen in this government’s job 

creation numbers, Mr. Speaker. Last year in this province, a 

paltry 1,000 new jobs were created and many of them were part 

time or low paying. That’s certainly not a record for this 

government to be very proud of, especially when you consider 

during the very same period 30,000 jobs were created in 

Alberta, and even more startling, 24,000 jobs created in 

Manitoba last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  It’s mind-boggling that Manitoba which is 

so similar to Saskatchewan in so many ways created 24 times 

more jobs than we see here. And it appears that the story will be 

similar this year. In the first two months of 1997, 7,000 new 

jobs were created here. And, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that 

those 7,000 jobs that were created here were created in spite of 

this government, not because of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And again, let’s look by contrast to 

Manitoba. During this same period 20,000 people found 

employment in Manitoba. Totalled up, during the last 14 

months our sister prairie provinces have created 54,000 new 

jobs to this government’s 8,000. It’s a shameful record, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s a record that continues to chase our best and 

brightest out of the province. 

 

This government constantly brags about the low unemployment 

rate in Saskatchewan. Of course our unemployment rate is low. 

Anyone who is unfortunate enough to be looking for work in 

Saskatchewan soon learns that it’s a futile search and is headed 

off to other provinces. 

 

Between 1992 and 1995, 13,464 more people left Saskatchewan 

than came here. Many of these are our kids who have had to 

abandon their home province in search of opportunities 

elsewhere. We raise them here, we educate them here, and then 

we send them away. This isn’t what I’d call an investment in 

our people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let’s look at the reduction in the PST. What this 

government has done today is reduce the PST back to the point 

where it was when they came to power. Yes, we’re now at 

exactly the same point we were five years ago. Only in 

Saskatchewan would they call that progress. 

 

And let’s take a look at the tax take by this government in 

general. Even after forgoing the $180 million with this 

reduction in the PST, this government is taking in nearly $800 

million more today than it did in 1992 — 800 million, Mr. 

Speaker. Clearly this is not a government that gives up its tax 

dollars easily. And what they are giving back to the people of 

the province is but a fraction of what they’ve been gouging over 

the last five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  And the effects have been devastating. 

Between 1992 and 1995 the rate of personal savings in  



March 20, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

Saskatchewan fell 39 per cent. The people of Saskatchewan 

have been forced to mortgage their future to pay the bills of 

today. 

 

This is the true legacy of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

The government is better off, but the people certainly are not. 

And today’s announcement of a reduction in the PST, while 

certainly welcome, doesn’t even come close to bringing our 

citizens back to the same point they were only a few years ago. 

 

I find it even more interesting that these same members who 

only months ago said tax cuts would do nothing to spur our 

economy, now see this reduction in the PST as the key that’ll 

make our economy boom. 

 

It won’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because it’s only one small piece 

of the puzzle when it comes to creating a good climate for small 

business. While the reduction is good news for small business, 

the main engine of economic development in Saskatchewan, 

more has to be done. 

 

Saskatchewan’s onerous labour policies remain impediments to 

small businesses. Labour standards, The Trade Union Act, the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, these are only but a 

few of the hurdles this government has thrown in the way of 

small business. And if we are to continue to build a strong 

economy and promote economic development, we must find a 

friendlier climate for small business. These things have been 

pushing us in the opposite direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find the title of the budget, Investing in People, 

particularly interesting when I look at the government’s 

so-called commitment to the key areas I mentioned earlier — 

health care, education, and social services. And of course, Mr. 

Speaker, we can’t forget highways. I, along with my colleagues, 

will tackle these issues in more detail as the budget debate 

progresses in the days ahead, but I do want to say a few 

preliminary words about them today. 

 

Let’s start with highways. I know many of the guests who have 

travelled long distances to be with us today probably drove over 

some pretty bumpy roads to get to Regina. These are roads that 

have been neglected for almost two successive administrations. 

The Conservatives began the ball rolling on the deterioration of 

our provincial highway system and the NDP followed suit, step 

for step, when they came to power in 1991. 

 

Everyone knows it’s a lot easier to repair an existing highway 

than to start from scratch, but many of our roads have crumbled 

to the point where that’s exactly what we’ll have to do — start 

from scratch. So let’s take a look at this government’s 

new-found commitment to highways in our province — a 

province that depends more on passable, safe roads than 

probably anywhere in Canada. 

 

Taking a look at the press release put out under the Minister of 

Highways’ name, the figures may look impressive — 2.5 billion 

over 10 years. Yes, to the average person out there in our 

province making a living, this is a lot of money. At first glance 

it may appear that there’s a new-found commitment to our 

highway system — at first glance. But at second glance, the  

real story of this government’s true commitment to safe 

highways and roads becomes obvious. 

 

(1515) 

 

Take a second look, Mr. Speaker. Take a look at what this 

government is actually committing itself to. Not much, by my 

estimation. Very little of this is new spending. There’s very 

little investment here. The province increased commitment to 

highways amounts to about $15 million this year, once you 

account for the federal government’s share. 

 

But that’s only a drop in the bucket when one considers the 

shameful and dangerous conditions our roads are in. In fact this 

extra money doesn’t even bring the department’s budget back to 

the level it was when the NDP government came to power. An 

addition to the ‘97-98 Highways budget of $200 million, only 

represents 40 per cent of what this government takes in from the 

gas tax and vehicles registration fees. Quite a commitment — 

40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in many municipalities around Saskatchewan the 

grid road and country road system has been just devastated by 

this government’s lack of commitment. Part of the problem has 

been the overall drubbing local governments have taken at the 

hands of the Minister of Finance. 

 

This minister always takes the first opportunity to point fingers 

and yell and protest when she loses a sliver of her revenue 

through federal transfer reductions, thinks nothing of hitting 

municipal governments with cuts year after year after year after 

year, Mr. Speaker. And these are cuts that are quickly passed 

along to local taxpayers. Again, the provincial government may 

be better off through these measures. The people definitely are 

not. 

 

This year, rural revenue-sharing grants will be cut by another 

$12 million while urban grants will drop another $17 million. 

All added up, this amounts to another 30 per cent cut to local 

governments. Just compare this to the so-called devastating 

cut-backs this government has received from Ottawa. Despite 

this government’s constant criticism of the federal government 

for transfer reductions, this year those cuts amount to just $59 

million or 1.16 per cent of provincial spending. Compare this to 

what the province has done to the municipalities and it puts 

everything into perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s more, nearly every dollar of the transfer cut-back is 

made up in the form of savings this province is beginning to 

realize because of the sound fiscal policies of the federal 

government and interest rate reduction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Because of its sound financial planning and 

its intelligent, realistic policies, interest rates are the lowest 

they’ve been in decades. This has saved the province $30 

million this year alone in interest payments. However, we don’t 

expect any credit from the members opposite, even if it’s a 

reality. 

 



312  Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 1997 

Let’s move on to health care, staggering under this 

government’s policies. For the past five years, the health care 

system has been starved and the effects have been frightening, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve lost acute care in much of rural 

Saskatchewan. Hospitals have been replaced with health centres 

which provide limited services. People are saying, it’s just not 

good enough. 

 

And what do we see from this government? We see an increase 

in funding that barely covers the rate of inflation for the past 

year. And if you look at the funding levels over the past five 

years, you’ll see the budget has not even kept pace with 

inflation. And that doesn’t take into consideration the failing 

system that this government has put in place — the dollars that 

are there that are making it to where they’re most needed. The 

members opposite have done nothing to address this. 

 

The system is rotten, Mr. Speaker, and this pitiful increase in 

funding isn’t going to do anything to cure that rot. And the fact 

remains, districts throughout the province will again face 

sizeable deficits and this budget does nothing to address this. 

 

And while the destruction of the health care system is harming 

our sick and our elderly, our children face increasing challenges 

as well, as an investment in education. Again, this government 

is using every trick in the book to make it look as if education is 

getting a boost. But in reality, Mr. Speaker, the increase in 

funding covers only the cost this government imposed on 

school boards for an increase in teachers’ wages – an increase 

negotiated by the government but paid for by the school boards. 

 

In reality then, there’s no increased spending for students for 

our future. Schools will continue to close and our kids will 

continue to suffer. This government is simply playing a cynical 

shell game. We fully expect another wage increase for teachers 

this year and there’s nothing here to cover that cost to school 

boards. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t look like much of an investment 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

For the universities, the government has cancelled previously 

announced cuts. In other words, Mr. Speaker, they’re now 

back-filling themselves. Again this is welcome news, but it’s 

not what I’d call an investment in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve see a shocking lack of commitment to our 

agricultural community – the heart and soul of this province. 

While they point to the end of the Crow rate by the federal 

government as a major hit to our farmers, again that is 

short-sighted. We should look at the end of the Crow rate as an 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker — an opportunity to keep our 

products here and build a value added industry. 

 

But let’s look at their commitment, Mr. Speaker. This budget 

forecasts a $40 million cut. That’s a direct result in the farm 

income stabilization program, which was reduced 55 million 

itself. The government’s reduction in those programs warrants 

very close monitoring, and it’s of a major concern. 

 

Of course, we’ve seen a major lack of commitment in  

agriculture in the past. Anyone who remembers the action taken 

with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) knows that 

farmers are not a major concern to this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government seems to be putting its stock into 

building a hog industry in Saskatchewan, and we support this 

fully, as we support the sales tax rebate for building materials 

and equipment needed for this industry. We believe this rebate 

should have been expanded to the construction equipment and 

machinery industry so we could be more competitive with other 

provinces and have the tools to rebuild our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you’re talking about investing in people, 

you can’t forget the most downtrodden. Mr. Speaker, this 

budget cuts the Social Services budget at a time when poverty 

levels are at their worst. We do, however, applaud the fact this 

government is redesigning the social assistance programs. The 

member from Humboldt will have much more to say on this in 

the days to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the end this budget will not do what the 

government says it’ll do. Yes, there are good things in it, but 

they are far too little and far too late. It’s more of the same. Yes, 

some of the hard edges of past budgets have been shaved off 

and there are parts of the budget we fully support. 

 

Overall, this government continues to be out of touch. And until 

they get a real dose of reality on that side of the House, our 

province will fail to move forward. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have much more to say tomorrow on 

this budget. For now I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Premier: 

 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 

resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 

Friday, March 21, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:24 p.m. 

 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 295 

  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 295 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 295 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 295 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 295 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 295 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Hillson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 296 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 296 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Hockey Team Heads for Provincial Championships 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 297 

 Film Industry in Saskatchewan 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 297 

 Booming Pork Industry 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 297 

 Renewed Growth in Swift Current 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 297 

 Signs of Spring 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 298 

 Canola Biotechnology Relocation 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 298 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Big River Nursery Closure 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 298 

  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 298 

 Regina Health District Board 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

 Compensation for Parents Affected by Labour Standards 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 300 

  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 

 Provincial Sales Tax 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 

 Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 301 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 301 

 Young Offenders Act 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 301 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 301 

 Video Lottery Terminal Plebiscites 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 302 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 302 

 911 Service Charges 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 302 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 302 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 303 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 



 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 303 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 303 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 310 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................ 312 

 


