



















































Hansard: April 25, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1123 

 April 25, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of the citizens of the great community of 

Balcarres. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Veregin and Kamsack. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions today to do with the problem of youth 

crime: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan, in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; and such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the town of Kamsack. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

establish a task force to aid in the fight against youth 

crime. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 12 

very important people from Porcupine Plain. They’re the air 

cadets. Along with them are their chaperons Brenda Kipling 

and Ted Kwiatkowski, as well as 2nd Lieut. Teale and 2nd 

Lieut. Green. 

 

We all know that there’s a lot of commitment and work 

involved in being a cadet, not only with the cadets themselves 

but also with their instructors. So welcome to all of you and I 

look forward to meeting you later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

the member from Kelvington-Wadena to welcome the air cadet 

squadron from Porcupine Plain. Because you see, Mr. Speaker, 

Porcupine Plain is right on the edge of the Carrot River 

constituency; so I know that some of the cadets are certainly 

from my constituency. 

 

I want to welcome them all here today. Have an enjoyable visit 

and have a great and safe trip home. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and this Assembly, 15 students from St. 

George School seated in your gallery. They are accompanied by 

their teacher, Brennan Merkosky, and chaperons, Marge 

Laturnus and Rob Barth. And they’ve travelled here from 

Wilkie to visit us. I will be joining them later for drinks and a 

photo, so please make them welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 

privilege and a pleasure for me this morning to introduce to you 

and through you to you to all members of the Assembly, 135 

students seated in the west gallery and the east gallery from 

across Saskatchewan. They’re from across Saskatchewan and 

also from our neighbouring province, Manitoba. 

 

I’d like the Manitoba students to know that our thoughts and 

prayers are with them and their families as they address the 

floods in their province. 

  



1124  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

They’re here as a part of a youth leadership conference 

sponsored by the Health Education Association of 

Saskatchewan, which is a coalition of education professionals, 

health professionals, and others interested in supporting health 

education in schools. 

 

So with that in mind, for the past three years, the health 

education association has been working with youth from all 

over our province and neighbouring provinces on a project to 

develop leadership skills in the area of health and take those 

skills back into their communities and their schools. 

 

They’re accompanied this morning by Dale Bayley, who is the 

president of the association; by Shaine Peters, the youth 

adviser; by Lisa Williams, the coordinator; and they’re looking 

forward to, following question period, meeting with myself, and 

I’ve also arranged that they would be meeting with our Minister 

of Health. 

 

Their motto is “tobacco stinks” and they want to tell us if there 

are any stinky parts to the legislation that still need to be 

addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m very excited to be able to introduce them to you and to 

meet with them. I ask all members to behave during question 

period, and to give them a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the rest of the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a constituent of mine from Liberty, Mr. Don Wolff, in 

your gallery this morning. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wolff is here today 

in the hopes of meeting with the Premier later on and presenting 

him with 750 letters from concerned citizens around 

Saskatchewan. So I’d ask the Assembly to please welcome Mr. 

Wolff here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

join with the member from Regina Wascana Plain in welcoming 

all the students who are here, but specifically pointing out a few 

students from the Windthorst area, I see. And Gordon Bates, a 

teacher from that area; Betty Metzler, who’s a health 

coordinator, health nurse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the distinct pleasure of meeting with some of 

these students and discussing this issue of smoking. And the 

question I guess that was pointed to me quite directly is, was I 

in favour of banning smoking in public places? And I think I 

. . . I hope I got the message across. 

 

It was certainly an honour to work with them, and the fact that 

we do want to have smoking in public places such as we have in 

the Assembly here today. And I think it’s very good that 

students are taking a very sincere interest in this . . . on this 

topic, especially when we look at the statistics that are pointing 

out that young people are becoming more involved. 

 

And I want to commend the students, and I certainly encourage 

them in all their efforts and their deliberation. I welcome them 

to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take pleasure in 

introducing to you and ask other hon. members to kindly join 

me in welcoming Vi Campbell and her son Colin to the 

legislature this morning from North Battleford. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to members of the Assembly, some friends 

visiting with us this weekend — Peggy Pitzel, sitting in your 

gallery, and four of her children. There’s Meagan, Spencer, 

Mari, and Chloe, and I’d ask that all members welcome them 

here today, and they are very pleased to not have to be in school 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 

Assembly some 14 grade 4 and 5 students in the east gallery. 

These students are from the Climax School in my constituency. 

They have with them today, and my eyesight won’t be able to 

pick them out, but Lee Jensen-Guenther, a teacher; and Janice 

Gilroy, and chaperons Richie Ostrander and Judy Klein. And I 

want everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

As many members know, Climax has been raised on several 

issues in this legislature in the past few years, and I heard on the 

radio this morning yet another incident in Climax. A good 

friend of mine, and a friend of many of the people up in the 

gallery today . . . have a 6/49 winner from the community of 

Climax — some $5.3 million winner. Yes — Allan Mything 

was the . . . Allan Mything. And not only did he win once on 

last Wednesday but he had two tickets that won. He had a 

second ticket that won $2,200. So congratulations to Allan and 

thanks for coming to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Youth Association on Tobacco Prevention 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very happy 

earlier to introduce a group of students who have come to 

Regina to develop a provincial youth association dedicated to 

tobacco prevention among their peers and their communities. 

I’m equally happy to recognize them and the urgency of their 

task in a member’s statement today. 

 

Their message is simple and forceful — tobacco stinks. Their 

suggestions are openly challenging to us and to all legislators at 

all levels — make it illegal for minors to possess tobacco; make 

it practically impossible to find a public place to use it; and 

improve enforcement of measures that are already in place. 

 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

We in this Assembly have made some progress. For instance, 

the former Health minister, Louise Simard, banished smoking 

from this building. I think it fair to say that the people’s 

building should not stink. 

 

But I can also understand the impatience of the health education 

association and of the young people who have come together to 

plan their strategy. After all, recently one tobacco company 

admitted what we already knew — that young people are the 

target of tobacco advertising. 

 

We can all do more — individuals and government. Not to be 

overly dramatic, but we can do more because this really is a 

mater of life and death. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

YWCA Women of Distinction Fund-raising Banquet 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night 12 

Saskatchewan women were honoured at the YWCA’s Women 

of Distinction fund-raising banquet. These women were 

awarded for their contributions to arts, science, sport, business, 

humanitarian service, health, and work for rural communities. 

 

I would like to express my congratulations to these women for 

their dedication and their commitment to their careers and their 

communities. Congratulations as well to the YWCA on their 

most successful dinner event ever. It raised $50,000 for the 

YWCA battered women’s shelter. 

 

The YWCA’s achievement is twofold. By recognizing the 

outstanding women of this province, they help provide role 

models for aspiring young women. They also raise money for 

women in crisis — women who are outstanding in their own 

right by the strength of their own determination and courage in 

beginning a new life. 

 

Saskatchewan women are resourceful and dedicated. These 12 

women represent what we can do when we set our minds to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with my colleague, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, in 

recognizing some remarkable women in this province. Last 

night I and more than 600 other people attended the 15th annual 

Regina YWCA Women of Distinction dinner and awards 

ceremony. And a fine evening it was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two significant things happened. First, more than $50,000 was 

raised for the Y, most of which will go to the Isabel Johnson 

Shelter and residence. That in itself is reason enough for the 

evening. But as well, 12 women were honoured for their 

contribution in their field to our community. 

 

It should be pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that there were 12 

winners, but many nominees in each field, any one of whom 

would have been an equally deserving winner. That’s a long 

way of saying we have a lot of talented, committed women in 

Saskatchewan. 

Time allows me only to name the award winners. In science and 

technology, Katherine Berman. The young woman of 

distinction was Christine Stapleton. Schmirler the curler’s rink 

was named in sports and recreation. The arts and culture award 

went to Gail Bowen. 

 

Sheryl Simons won the business, labour, and professions award. 

Keitha Kennedy in community and humanitarian service. Verna 

Thompson for contribution to a rural community. And there 

was a tie for the health and wellness recognition — Janice 

Cibart and Hilary Craig. 

 

My congratulations to all winners and all nominees. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Construction of Balcarres Grain Terminal 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

draw to the attention of the House a development going on near 

the community of Balcarres in my constituency. And I’m very 

pleased, Mr. Speaker, to explain to the House that thanks to the 

initiative of several residents throughout the area, the sod will 

be turned this July on one of the largest projects to hit Balcarres 

in many years. Terminal 22 expects to start construction this 

summer on a $14 million inland grain terminal 1 mile west of 

Balcarres. When construction is completed on the facility in the 

autumn of 1998, there’ll be 20 jobs created and that number is 

expected to jump to 30 jobs by the third year of the facility’s 

operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the terminal will have a storage capacity of 

between 1.1 and 1.2 million bushels. Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to offer my congratulations to Bill Huber, president of Terminal 

22, and the 21 other directors who launched their efforts about 

two years ago. Their efforts and success show the initiative of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Perhaps the government can take 

some lessons from this group in its own economic development 

efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Soil Conservation Week 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 

members of the Assembly that this week has been designated as 

National Soil Conservation Week. It serves as a special 

reminder of our need to conserve the resource that is 

fundamental to our Saskatchewan way of life — the soil. 

 

This week is designed to increase the public awareness that our 

producers are taking steps to conserve the soil and implement 

environmentally sustainable agricultural practices. 

 

While we have encouraged diversification within the 

agricultural industry, while we have sought ways to increase 

profitability, and while we have elevated our competitiveness 

worldwide, we must also take precautions to protect the health 

of the soil and the water resources that make such economic 

activity possible. 

 

The soil is a fragile resource. It must be protected and nurtured   



1126  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

to ensure a healthy and prosperous agri-food industry. 

 

The agri-food innovation fund has recently provided $5.5 

million in funding to assist with the development and adoption 

of emerging sustainable farming practices. This investment in 

sustainable agriculture will ensure Saskatchewan farmers and 

processors continued success in their endeavour. But it also 

recognizes the importance of conserving our soil resources for 

our future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cancer Month Recognition 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

cancer month and I would like to take this opportunity to 

highlight the seriousness of the disease and the excellent work 

being done in this province on cancer research and care. 

 

Too many people in this province have had a personal 

experience with cancer as a victim, a loved one, a friend. Too 

many of us have felt the devastating impact of this disease. Last 

year there were 5,724 cancer victims and the predictions for 

1997 are grim — 4,700 new cancer cases in Saskatchewan, 

2,200 cancer-related deaths. 

 

This month dedicated volunteers are canvassing to raise funds 

for cancer research. An awareness campaign is under way to 

raise the profile of what needs to be done to combat the disease. 

Over 10,000 volunteers in Saskatchewan contributed to the 

$33.5 million raised nationally by the cancer society. Talk to 

cancer survivors in Saskatchewan and they will talk about the 

Canadian Cancer Society and the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation. Cancer affects aspects of people’s lives and these 

two organizations provide a network of care, support, and hope 

for those affected by this terrible disease. 

 

I salute those involved in the fight against cancer. Your hard 

work and dedication has made a difference in the lives of so 

many people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

News Media Accountability 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Historic leaps 

often take place a small step at a time. Consider this: everyone 

agrees that open and accountable government is desirable, even 

necessary, in a democracy. 

 

We know this is so because the more steps we take to be open, 

the more the ever-vigilant media find to criticize. This reminds 

us, of course, that in a democratic society the news media play a 

vital role in the functioning of that society. And believe it or 

not, we down here recognize that role. It may gripe us from 

time to time, but we do value it. 

 

But we toiling in the pit down here also believe that what is 

sauce for the political goose should also be spread over the 

media who gander at us. If we should be open and accountable, 

so should you. 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to report a first, 

small, important step. Two days ago Regina CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) News Hour allowed a camera into its 

story meeting for the day. The meeting was broadcast that 

evening on Cable Regina. This amazing crack into media 

secrecy came about because of the efforts of the Coalition for 

News Media Literacy and its journalism at work program, a 

program designed to introduce to the public the internal 

workings of journalism. 

 

First the CBC, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow Conrad Black; someday 

we might even be exposed to the inner working of Murray 

Mandryk, a day we look forward to with co-mingled dread and 

anticipation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

l997 Anavet Cup Winners — Weyburn Red Wings 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

recently I congratulated the Weyburn Red Wings for winning 

the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Championship. At 

that time I mentioned the Red Wings were hoping to qualify for 

a national championship. Well, Mr. Speaker, last night I 

witnessed that wish become a reality along with 1,900 cheering 

fans. 

 

For the past week the Red Wings have been taking on the best 

junior team from Manitoba, the St. James Canadians, to decide 

the Anavet Cup. The Red Wings may have lost the first game, 

but they came back with four straight decisive wins. Last night 

they clinched the 1997 Anavet Cup and with it the right to 

compete in the Royal Bank Cup in Prince Edward Island, May 

3 to May 11. 

 

The Red Wings are one of only five teams from across Canada 

competing for this cup. Judging by the decisive way the Red 

Wings disposed of recent opponents, they have the talent, skill, 

and drive to win the Royal Bank Cup for Saskatchewan. The 

Red Wings have proven themselves to be a truly great hockey 

team. As one of the players said last night, we just refuse to take 

no for an answer. 

 

The players, coaches, manager, and trainers have all worked 

hard to achieve this level. The entire Weyburn area and the 

province of Saskatchewan is extremely proud of your 

accomplishment and we’re behind you all the way to P.E.I. 

(Prince Edward Island). 

 

Please join me in congratulating this remarkable group of 

athletes, the Weyburn Red Wing organization, on winning the 

Anavet Cup and wish them well as they compete at the national 

level. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Hospitality Network Movies 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker,   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

you’ll have to bear with me this morning as I am somewhat 

tired, as I spent a good part of the night doing research. 

 

Yesterday we brought to the attention of the public the fact that 

the provincial government is peddling XXX movies to hotel 

patrons in Saskatchewan. The minister in charge of “SaskPorn” 

described her government’s relationship with the Hospitality 

Network as a strategic alliance. She also told this House she is 

proud to be associated with the Hospitality Network. Somehow 

I don’t believe the general public would be proud of their 

government as a promoter of porn. 

 

Madam Minister, you indicated yesterday that you would verify 

if XXX movies were being distributed, as we have suggested. 

Have you checked into this issue and are you now prepared to 

tell this House that SaskTel is getting out of the XXX business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very sorry that the 

member opposite had to spend his night researching — I guess 

lurking in a hotel room surfing the Net for his definition of . . . 

But I think he should be very careful, Mr. Speaker, because 

when he uses the word, pornography, he is accusing a Crown of 

violating the Criminal Code of Canada. And this, Mr. Speaker, 

is not the case. 

 

What the procedure is, is that the distributor, the Hospitality 

Network, buys movies, entertainment packages, which come 

from a distributor in Quebec. They are rated there with the 

Ontario film classification code. When they arrive in 

Saskatchewan they’re referred to the Justice department and 

they’re approved, rated, by the Film Classification Board of 

Saskatchewan. And they are not approved for viewing in 

Saskatchewan hotels or any venues unless they’re approved by 

our Film Classification Board. 

 

So I have faith in their judgement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel Blocking Fee 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, all we’re talking about 

really is what’s right and what’s wrong. And when a member of 

the family of Crown corporations is promoting pornography, I 

think we all agree that’s wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition hears from people on a 

consistent basis who have concerns about the easy accessibility 

children have to 1 900 numbers. The latest such call comes 

from Bud Penny of Christopher Lake who discovered on a 

recent phone bill that a member of his family had run up a $400 

phone bill as a result of 1 900 calls. 

 

When Mr. Penny contacted SaskTel about blocking the 1 900 

service from his home telephone, he was informed this would 

require a $9 charge and an additional monthly fee. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain why parents who 

want to prevent their children from accessing pornography are 

forced to pay to block this service? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly acknowledge 

that there is a nominal fee for blocking the service. But it should 

be remembered that there are very many legitimate uses for the 

1 900 number. For instance, many manufacturers list a 1 900 

number for warranty information for their products. There are 

information services, a large number of information services, 

that use the 1 900 number. 

 

So if a subscriber wants to block the 1 900 number for all 

purposes, there is a fee because it requires an alteration in the 

equipment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, you’re providing a 

service that all patrons out there do not want to receive, and 

they definitely should not have to pay to block it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may interest the members of this House to know 

that while our provincial telephone company charges a blocking 

fee, its counterparts in Alberta and Manitoba, TELUS and MTS 

(Manitoba Telephone System), do not. Our neighbouring 

provinces have decided that parents should not have to pay a fee 

to protect their children from 1 900 pornographic services. 

 

Why do you feel SaskTel has the right to gouge parents who are 

only trying to protect their children? Do you not think SaskTel 

has a responsibility to help keep pornography out of the reach 

of our youth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat that 

there are many, very many legitimate uses for the 1 900 service. 

And I don’t think that a one-time fee of $9 could be considered 

gouging, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what the charge is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Information Availability 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning we 

heard from the member from Regina Victoria talking about 

open and accountable government and I just want to point out 

one example here of what a joke that is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Recently, when the residents of the community of Wadena tried 

to access some information regarding their hospital through the 

district health board, they were told that if they wanted the 

information they would have to go through the freedom of 

information Act to receive this information. 

 

Now these health boards are a creation of this government. 

They’re a front for the government’s health policy and a front 

for the government downloading. 

 

Will the Minister of Health explain today why residents have to 

fight their way through bureaucracy and red tape to find 

information out that should be readily available to them? 

  



1128  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I would remind the member 

from Arm River — the Liberal member from Arm River — 

once again that the president of the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan, one Anita Bergman, is a member of the Regina 

District Health Board, an elected member. 

 

Is the member from Arm River suggesting that the president of 

the Liberal Party is a front for the provincial government? I 

don’t think so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a ridiculous assertion. But I would say this to 

the House and to the people: the member wants to talk about 

openness and democracy — the leader of the member’s party, 

one Dr. Jim Melenchuk, is on record as saying that the elected 

health boards in this province should be abandoned and that we 

should replace them with 450 boards, the members of which 

would be hand-picked by him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that kind of system, going back to 450 hand-picked, 

appointed boards, may be that party’s idea of democracy; our 

idea of democracy is to elect members of district health boards, 

Mr. Speaker, and we will side with the people on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess there’s a 

perfect example and a good reason why we would want to do 

away with the district health boards, if they’re not accountable 

to the people who elected them, in particular not accountable by 

the members that were appointed by that government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have seen the gag orders, Mr. Speaker, placed on health 

care workers; we’ve seen gag orders placed on board members; 

we see important health issues being discussed and 

implemented behind closed doors that are affecting these very 

residents that have been stonewalled by these district health 

boards. 

 

On behalf of the residents of Wadena, Mr. Speaker, and the rest 

of the residents of Saskatchewan, what’s the minister going to 

do about this problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  What we are not going to do about this 

problem, Mr. Speaker, is to abandon the public medicare 

system. 

 

I want to remind the House that that member is on record, Mr. 

Speaker, not only as wanting unelected, undemocratic, 450 

boards hand-picked by the Liberal Party, that member is on 

record as favouring a private system of medicine, a two-tiered 

system of medicine. 

 

And I want to quote once again. That member on May 1, 1996 

said this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

If there are people that are prepared to pay, (meaning pay 

for their health care) then I think we have to let them pay. 

 

That’s what that member says. 

 

Now then we have, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party 

saying this about privatizing our hospitals. He says: 

 

If private clinics can deliver the same level of service as 

hospitals and make a profit, I don’t have a problem with 

that. 

 

Well we do have a problem with that, Mr. Speaker. We’re in 

favour of the public medicare system. We’re going to keep 

public medicare; not a private, two-tiered system that that 

member wants to set up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess when you 

have a government that doesn’t want to be open and 

accountable and does everything behind closed doors — and we 

could point out a dozen issues in the last two months, Mr. 

Speaker — why would they want to pass that on to district 

health boards? Why would they say to the district health boards, 

you be open and accountable; we’re not but you should be? 

 

I’ll ask the minister once more: Mr. Minister, what are you 

planning to do with the district health boards to ensure that 

residents who are directly affected by decisions made by the 

district boards are . . . what are you going to do to enable them 

to get the necessary answers that they need to the questions and 

be open and accountable, of which you are not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have faith in the local health 

boards; I have faith in the people of local communities and I’m 

going to let them decide what decisions are appropriate for their 

communities. And what we’re not going to do is have private 

medicine; what we’re not going to do is get rid of the medicare 

system; and what we’re not going to do is follow the advice of 

Dr. Melenchuk, who says this — this is a quote from the 

Leader-Post, September 25, 1996: 

 

Melenchuk prefers the Australian or “regional” model of 

medicine where there is primary care (that means a 

doctor’s office) for populations of about 10,000 in rural 

areas integrated with secondary care or hospitals for 

populations of about 100,000. 

 

What that party is saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we should have 

hospitals in two cities in Saskatchewan: Saskatoon and Regina. 

That’s what they say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not going to adopt that model; we’re going to keep the 

system we’ve got in this province which has served us well, Mr. 

Speaker, which is the public medicare system, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s the system that the people want; that’s the system that 

we’re going to keep. 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Condie-Queen Elizabeth Power Line 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we’re on the 

subject of open and accountable government, of which the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) are not, let’s talk about the Condie 

power line for a minute — open and accountable. 

 

Here’s a government, that while the taxpayers of Stalwart were 

in the courts, proceeded with building the line in the Stalwart 

area. While we’re in the courts in the Meewasin Valley 

Authority — and that one’s still in the courts — they proceeded 

and finished the line at the tune of $300,000 of taxpayers’ 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have a gentleman from Liberty, Mr. Don 

Wolff, who has driven in here today to present the Premier with 

750 letters of concerned citizens around the province about the 

lack of accountability of this government — of the Premier and 

his government. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you agree to meet with this member, Mr. 

Wolff in the Speaker’s gallery today, receive those letters, and 

listen to the concerns of the people from around the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the hon. 

member didn’t extend the courtesy to my office or to me 

requesting a meeting. And as the hon. member will understand, 

my agenda for today is quite committed and quite 

pre-committed. 

 

I will obviously have enough time to take the petitions from the 

member. My suggestion would be that perhaps the minister of 

Power and the Deputy Premier on my behalf, if the time is 

available, will meet after question period with the individual 

involved. 

 

But I do wish the members, generally speaking, not on Condie, 

just generally . . . I know this politics — this high politics. If 

you want legitimate discussion about legitimate problems, 

please give the ministers just some forewarning so that we can 

rearrange agendas, rearrange meetings, before question periods. 

So that we can meet with these people on a legitimate basis 

rather than getting up and grandstanding and grandstanding 

only. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your ministers have 

known for over two years that this Condie line was going to be 

rammed through to the people of Arm River and the landowners 

contained. 

 

The reason that there was such short notice this morning, Mr. 

Premier, was because the gentleman from Liberty — we 

weren’t sure if we could get him in. He is here. I think it’s 

incumbent upon you to meet with him. If your Deputy Premier 

wants to be there, I would appreciate that. If the minister 

responsible for SaskPower can be there, I would be happy to 

that too. 

 

It’s not grandstanding — any more, Mr. Premier, than you 

yesterday with the issue of timing where you closed debate. 

You can get up and grandstand and knock the federal Liberals, 

the provincial Liberals, and everybody concerned. So don’t talk 

about grandstanding to me, Mr. Premier. You’re the one that’s 

great at doing it; so please meet with Mr. Wolff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the Liberals 

are extremely sensitive about their federal counterparts in 

Ottawa, and they’re very sensitive about the variety of the very 

embarrassing issues they have found themselves in. 

 

When the member gets up and says that the Condie line has 

been rammed through . . . I think the Condie line started in 

what? 1992 — 1992 we are told. The minister in charge tells me 

three-quarters of the people affected have voluntarily entered 

into arrangements with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in 

this situation. 

 

Now listen. I understand the hon. member’s request, that there 

is a person who has a petition and wants to present it to the 

government. Fair enough, we’ll receive the petition. 

 

What I’m saying about grandstanding is you cannot . . . since 

this matter has been going since 1992, you cannot get up in — 

you can do it, but you can’t do it credibly — you can’t get up in 

question period, giving no notice to myself or to other ministers 

— and this is a habit that you and your party have adopted — 

and saying right away, will you meet, will you put everything 

aside and meet. I’m simply saying that is not fair to government 

and it’s not fair to the person who’s come this way. 

 

If you want a legitimate discussion of the issues involved, give 

us some fair warning and stop your political grandstanding on 

this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier 

would listen to my response, I indicated the reason why we 

couldn’t give too much notice, because Mr. Wolff was having a 

problem getting in here this morning. 

 

How much notice, Mr. Premier, did you give to us yesterday 

morning on your motion? Who was grandstanding? You were 

grandstanding, Mr. Premier, trying to make politics out of 

something that you’d tried to make the people of the province 

believe that you were sincere about, in wanting to fix the time 

thing. We’re sincere about fixing that and our leader was 

working on that much before your grandstanding in here 

yesterday morning, Mr. Premier. So don’t talk to us about 

grandstanding and politics. You’re great at grandstanding and 

politics and hiding behind district health boards and everyone 

else. 

 

So, Mr. Premier, for once do the honourable thing — take the   



1130  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

time out of your busy schedule and meet with Mr. Wolff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says to 

members of government, regardless of the political stripe of the 

government — without any notice, whatever you’ve lined up by 

terms of agendas or meetings with officials or other people, 

whatever the obligations are, without giving the government 

any notice — your obligation, he says to the front bench, is to 

drop everything in order to hear this particular important issue. 

That’s what the hon. member says. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well that’s what your House Leader did 

yesterday. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well yesterday . . . the argument is 

about the motion yesterday. It is the business of . . . If you 

thought you were being jammed, you didn’t have to give us 

consent. You didn’t have to give us consent. And don’t be so 

doggone sensitive because your country cousins there in Ottawa 

have goofed on the issue of the Elections Act. 

 

And don’t be so sensitive about the fact that you bring down an 

innocent person, ask that person to come to the gallery, give no 

notice to anybody on an important issue — this is an important 

issue, not only to this person but to us — give us no notice 

whatsoever. And you do it for cheap politics, pure and simple, 

and you abuse the citizenry in doing that. Shame on you for 

doing that. Be responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, you’ve 

got to give Gordon Kirkby credit. According to this morning’s 

Star-Phoenix, he’s not backing down one inch on this election 

timing issue. You know, I think I know the reason why too. It’s 

good news for him. It’s good news for him because it’s going to 

take an hour longer to vote him out of office than we thought. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, according to the Star-Phoenix and 

according to Mr. Kirkby, the Liberals have no plans to change 

their screwed-up voting times. Of course as we know, Mr. 

Premier, Gordon Kirkby is no big wheel in the Liberal 

government. 

 

So I’d like to ask you, Mr. Premier, following yesterday’s 

emergency motion on this issue, did you have an opportunity to 

contact the Prime Minister to tell him first of all, what time it is 

here in Saskatchewan, and second of all, to get on with fixing 

this mistake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I welcome the question 

because I did fax to the Prime Minister a letter incorporating the 

essence of the resolution, which was passed unanimously, and 

asking the federal government to take the immediate steps. 

I don’t know if this is true so I perhaps should be somewhat 

careful in answering additionally, but I’m advised by my staff 

that we have had yet an additional unfortunate response in the 

House of Commons on this issue today. Where the House 

Leader, Mr. Herb Gray, says in the House of Commons today in 

response to a question by a Saskatchewan MP (Member of 

Parliament), look, everybody in Saskatchewan wants you to 

make sense out of this foul-up that you’ve concocted; let’s get it 

on and get it done within a matter of seconds. The response of 

the federal Liberal House Leader is, the way to solve it is for 

Saskatchewan to go to daylight savings time. 

 

So maybe Mr. Kirkby isn’t such a small player in the Liberal 

government. It may very well be that he has a greater influence 

and control over them than we think. 

 

Either way, this is really a very unacceptable response, and I 

want to tell you, displays a Liberal government and party which 

has lost touch with the people of Saskatchewan totally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Law Society Investigation 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, four 

charges have now been laid by the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan against Dean Mattison for his dealings with Ken 

Dickoff in the SaskTrust scandal. And we know that Mr. 

Dickoff has received a five-year prison sentence. 

 

But Dean Mattison, former law partner of the Premier and 

former minister of Justice, was never charged. Many people 

have questioned the decision, Mr. Minister. Of course the NDP 

did an independent prosecutor’s report on Dean Mattison, but 

then you refused to release the report. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of the charges being brought against Dean 

Mattison by the law society, isn’t it time to end the cover-up 

and release the independent prosecutor’s report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The law society 

has started their investigation of this matter, which they’ve 

announced. The law society is a self-regulating profession. 

They take care of these matters themselves. The whole situation 

as it relates to our department is that we’re not involved, 

obviously. And we are in a position where we will wait and see 

what the law society does. 

 

I think practically, the whole matter is a situation where the 

report that was dealt with ended up saying and confirming that 

there should be no criminal charges laid. But that still doesn’t 

mean that the law society doesn’t have some questions. And 

they are in fact going to use their procedure to deal with the 

matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, as I 

recall I believe it said something about, wasn’t in the public 

interest. But you didn’t release the full report. 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

Mr. Minister, you’ve released the report on Phoenix 

Advertising. You released the report on David Milgaard. You 

released the report on the former Justice minister. Why are you 

refusing to release this report? 

 

Mr. Minister, by not releasing it, it raises a lot of suspicious 

questions, when several SaskTrust officials were charged, but 

the lawyer who worked on most of the deals was never charged 

— and that even looks more suspicious. It even looks more 

suspicious now that the law society is proceeding with charges. 

 

Mr. Minister, if there are good reasons for not charging Dean 

Mattison, why don’t you release the report? And what are trying 

to hide? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As I stated in this House last spring when 

this matter arose, the Justice system has a method of whereby 

they investigate matters and then proceed to look at them. If a 

decision is made not to proceed with criminal charges, then 

that’s where the matter lays and no further report is given from 

the Justice system. 

 

In this particular case, the matter was reviewed by independent 

counsel and the whole thing was dealt with last spring. Now the 

law society through their own forms of investigation are 

looking at the person’s practice as it relates to his law practice, 

and that is their right as a self-regulating body. 

 

As we all know in this legislature, we have been bringing forth 

many Acts that relate to a number of the different professions in 

Saskatchewan. The reason we do that on the recommendation 

of the Department of Justice and the government is that we have 

a lot of faith in our people that they know how to regulate and 

adjust their professions. Let us allow the law society to do their 

job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, a further question. Mr. Minister, 

isn’t it true that your government does a significant amount of 

work with the Woloshyn Mattison law firm, in fact hundreds of 

thousands of dollars a year? In light of the law society’s charges 

against Dean Mattison, Mr. Minister, will you suspend your 

dealings with Woloshyn Mattison until the charges by the law 

society are dealt with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan does hire lawyers from many law firms 

throughout the province, including the law firm of Woloshyn 

Mattison, and the main consideration that we do have when we 

give out legal work is that we know that the people can do the 

job. 

 

We are also in the process of identifying some other 

considerations that reflect public policy and how we deliver 

legal work, and one that I would . . . I’m happy to state publicly 

today is that in the promotion of the employment equity policy, 

that we would like to hire law firms that actually have a fair 

number of women and others who need to be employed. 

 

And I guess what I would say is that there are many 

considerations when we hire law firms. Some years we hire a 

law firm, other years we don’t. All of those things will be taken 

into account as we hire people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Manufacturing Employment Levels 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the issues that 

has not surfaced in this House in relation to employment is the 

fact that growth is being recorded in the public sector but there 

is actually a decline in the number of private sector employees 

in this province. Among the industries in which there is a 

decline in employment is manufacturing. 

 

Will the minister explain if these declining employment levels 

are connected to the fact that manufacturing investment has 

taken an 85 per cent tumble since this government came to 

power — something that is in sharp contrast to Manitoba where 

the same manufacturing investment has grown by 72 per cent 

over the same time period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have here in front of 

me a document which perhaps I shouldn’t be mentioning to 

members . . . But no, no, this is a document which the federal 

Liberal Party has released in the obvious anticipation of an 

election. And it talks about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Expensive glossies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Very expensive — talks about jobs 

and job creation. And that’s what the Liberals say in their 

campaigns and that’s what the Liberals say in the question 

period with respect to jobs, but I’ll tell you what people who 

know about what’s happening in Canada and Saskatchewan say 

about jobs. 

 

I have here in front of me a clipping from the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix of April 24, 1997. The headline says “Blind eye to 

job creation may prove Liberals’ undoing, says forecaster.” 

 

This relates to an assessment of the Saskatchewan and Canadian 

economy by a person by the name of Michael McCracken of 

Informetrica of Ottawa. And I’ll just give you this one little 

quotation, which answers the question. Mr. McCracken said, 

quote: 

 

. . . provincially, the Romanow government has done more 

to encourage employment than most other provinces. It has 

decided to reinvest surplus revenue into programs now that 

it has the deficit under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is verified by the numbers, that there are more 

people employed at the end of March of this year than last year, 

and we are on a steady, positive, upward trend for job creation 

in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what McCracken says. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

  



1132  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Resignation of Minister of Highways and Transportation 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to inform 

the House today that earlier this morning I submitted my 

resignation as the Minister of Highways and Transportation 

effective April 28. Health considerations have brought about 

this decision. The Premier has accepted my resignation. 

 

As many of you know, for several months prior to February 26, 

1997 I experienced chest pains, fatigue, and other related 

symptoms. Doctors diagnosed a blocked artery, necessitating an 

angioplasty and the insertion of a metal stint. Since that 

procedure, I continue to take the prescribed medication. 

 

While I feel I have fully and adequately performed all my duties 

since then, the stress of cabinet responsibility has often left me 

feeling tired and not performing, I believe, to the standard that I 

have set for myself. In addition, implementation of the 

ambitious goals of our government’s new 21st century 

transportation plan has exacted a high level of attention and 

energy. This added to the pressure of public life — every one of 

us will know that. Consequently my recovery has slowed. 

 

As you appreciate, health and family comes first. The only fair 

and proper thing to do is to take some time away from cabinet 

duties in order to ensure a complete recovery. With the removal 

of my additional duties as cabinet minister, I feel that I can 

continue to serve the needs of my constituents. This has always 

been one of my priorities in public life, and it will remain so. 

 

It has been a privilege to work with the dedicated public 

servants — some of you are here today — whose contributions 

have helped to turn around the fortunes of this province and 

who are committed to ensuring that Saskatchewan continues to 

prosper. In particular I would like to recognize and thank my 

staff who have, without reservation, always given me their 

loyalty and personal support — our family away from home. 

 

I would like to thank the Premier for giving me the opportunity 

to serve the people of Saskatchewan as a member of Executive 

Council. I remain strongly committed to his leadership and the 

direction taken by our government. The decisions may not have 

always been easy, but together we have made Saskatchewan a 

better place in which to live and work. 

 

Finally I would like to thank all members of the Assembly. I 

have sometimes disagreed with the members opposite; however 

I have never doubted the fact that their motivation is the same 

as mine. And I have been proud to work with the people of 

Saskatchewan. I think it’s going to be a little easier heckling 

from over there than answering some of your tough questions. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that . . . I 

can’t say that we’re happy to hear this news. And I can say this 

on a personal level, I’ve known the minister for some years and 

I’ve always thought quite highly of the efforts that he put into 

his role as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

as a minister. And I know that he has found, like many of us do, 

politics can be a very rough ride at times. 

 

And of course with the minister’s role in cabinet, you know, 

and the portfolio that he was given; it’s a tough portfolio. It’s 

coming at a time when of course there’s, you know, troubles to 

get the funding for what I guess he, as a minister, would 

consider his priority. He’s going up against other ministers and 

their priorities. 

 

I will say that all the dealings that I’ve had with this minister on 

a personal level have always been dealt with in a very 

professional manner. And I recall one instance in fact where I 

had to have a special favour and it had to do with getting a 

dinosaur statue just south of the community of Ponteix. And 

they had already done a lot of the construction and cut away on 

the hillside and spent a good deal of money, only to find out 

that the Department of Highways is not going to allow them to 

go ahead with this project. 

 

Well I wasn’t sure how to approach the minister at the time. So 

I was out in the field; I had my cellphone with me. It was late in 

the evening; I was harvesting. So I phoned his wife, Sylvia. 

And I think it was just right around midnight, and I had a chat 

with Sylvia for about 45 minutes. And I think it was about two 

days later, I got a call from Andy saying that it’s a go, but don’t 

ever phone my wife again. 

 

So I just want to give him all the credit in the world and wish 

him well. I hope he can return to a cabinet position, at least 

before we form government. And that may not be too far away, 

so don’t be gone too long. And best of luck in the future, Andy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Member, all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, this is certainly a 

disappointing and surprising turn of events. As you know, 

public life unfortunately does exact a toll from time to time on 

all of us, I think, in a very stressful vocation that we are all 

involved in. 

 

I’ve always felt that the minister has conducted himself in a 

very . . . always conducted himself in a very professional 

manner. And I would hope that we would want to wish you 

very well in the future. And we certainly, all I think, members 

of the Legislative Assembly, pray for a speedy recovery from 

your health concerns and we want to wish you very well, Andy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The Opposition House Leader requests leave 

to respond; is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

members. And I appreciate the opportunity to say a few words, 

particularly since Andy is my constituent. And it really is such a 

unique situation because over the years, the hon. member and   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

myself have been adversaries in the political arena. But I have 

to say to the House that I’m very proud to have him as a 

constituent, and more than that, he’s become a good friend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased that the member is 

remembering the priorities that we all have to remember, and 

that is your own health and your family and those issues even 

supersede the duties that we all feel to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I certainly would like to join with all the members in 

wishing you the very best and speedy recovery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1100) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, request that question no. 50 be 

converted to notice of motions for returns (debatable), and with 

leave, that questions 51 to 56 also be converted. 

 

The Speaker:  The Government Whip requests to deal with 

all items simultaneously. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker:  Items 1 through 7 are converted to motions 

for returns (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 provides a 

legislative framework for a new era in Saskatchewan. Members 

are aware that we recently released a comprehensive 

transportation strategy titled, investing in Saskatchewan. 

 

This new legislation allows us to proceed with initiatives in the 

strategy. Investing in transportation is a multi-tiered plan to 

move Saskatchewan from a province with a transportation 

system designed for the needs of the 1950s to a sustainable 

transportation system that supports economic growth and social 

well-being well into the future. 

 

I’m advised the former Act was last substantially changed in 

1949. Clearly, circumstances have changed since then. Federal 

transportation policy changes, rail abandonment, elevator 

consolidation, and increased trucking are all putting increased 

pressure on our road and highway network. 

 

Our government is clearly responding to the transportation 

challenges. In the last budget, we committed $2.5 billion over 

the next 10 years to improve our transportation system. On 

April 10 we took the next step and released our long-term plan 

to ensure the transportation needs of the people of this province 

are met well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation I am speaking about today goes one 

step further. This legislation puts into place the framework 

needed to proceed with the initiatives outlined in our 

transportation strategy. As part of our plan, we are looking at 

innovative ways of funding road improvements. Our proposal 

for partnering with the private sector will enable us to make 

much needed improvements to our highways in the province. 

 

We already need several . . . we already have several partnering 

agreements. For example, we have a partnership agreement with 

two uranium mining companies to upgrade No. 102 and 

Highway No. 905 in the North. This Bill establishes a special 

fund to accommodate revenues from these partnerships which 

will then be directed into specific highway improvement 

projects. I want to stress the voluntary aspect of these 

agreements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Companies have a choice as to whether they wish to enter into 

partnerships or not. The transportation partnership fund is a 

vehicle for those partnership agreements where our partners 

wish the government to retain custody over the fund. Even 

though the fund is in legislation, we have shown we are 

responsive to industry concerns over use of their contributions. 

 

As members, we do not want to make a practice of dedicating 

tax revenues for specific purposes. If we were to do this, we 

would be depriving the ability to spend money on needed 

services such as health care and education. But the 

transportation partnership fund is different; contributions to it 

are not tax revenues. The money in the fund will be directed to 

specific transportation system improvements. 

 

The legislation further enhances the ability of private sector 

partners to take charge of the fund’s directions, as the private 

sector will have the majority of representatives on the advisory 

committee. I can assure the members of this Assembly I will 

take very serious, all recommendations of the advisory 

committee. I will be pleased to discuss the fund and 

partnerships further in committee. 

 

One of the main objectives of our transportation system is to 

preserve the integrity of our road system. Overweight trucks 

cause significant damage to our road system, especially our 

secondary roads. This legislation establishes the concept of 

consignor or shipper responsibility. We firmly believe all 

parties to a shipment must concern themselves with road system 

integrity. In the new law we are simply saying shippers bear 

some of the responsibility for overweight shipments. 

 

In order for our enforcement personnel to have access to 

evidence of contravention of weights and dimensions rules, the 

Bill requires shippers, carriers, and receivers to keep records. 

We understand there are some concerns about imposing these 

paperwork requirements on small operations, including our 

farmer community. 

 

The Bill recognizes this concern by exempting completely all 

shipments by two- and three-axle trucks. The exemption is from   



1134  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

the requirement to keep . . . The exemption is from the 

requirement to keep records respecting weight and dimension 

shipments. It does not exclude any existing commercial carriers 

from having to keep records. 

 

The Bill grants us further flexibility by allowing us to exempt 

additional persons by regulation from the record-keeping 

requirement. 

 

The requirement for receivers to keep records applies only if the 

receiver causes the shipment to occur. A grain elevator only has 

to keep records if the grain company initiates shipments of the 

grain to the elevator. If a farmer delivers grain on an unsolicited 

basis, the elevator need not keep records. 

 

We have consulted extensively on this issue, Mr. Speaker. I will 

be pleased to deal in detail with this matter in committee. 

 

In recent years, several large concerns have established new 

roadside developments which have a major impact on traffic 

adjacent to provincial highways. The Bill proposes an 

arrangement whereby persons wishing to undertake 

developments must discuss the impact of those developments 

with the department. These discussions may come to an 

agreement whereby the developer pays part of the cost resulting 

from the development. The arrangement may form a 

transportation partnership agreement. Similar legislation has 

been in place in Alberta for several years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill raises statutory fine levels significantly. 

Our reason is to get the message out that violations of the law, 

especially when it affects safety, or quality of our road system, 

will not be tolerated. 

 

This Bill makes several housekeeping changes as well, Mr. 

Speaker, to our transportation law. The Bill includes provisions 

now found in The Highway Traffic Act dealing with certain 

regulations respecting commercial vehicle safety. 

 

The Bill also updates our practices respecting unsafe 

approaches to provincial highways. My department will 

continue to work with landowners to ensure safety is not 

compromised by approaches. I am confident we can continue to 

ensure the public safety in this area. 

 

The Bill contains a number of other updated provisions which 

recognize how my department does business. It updates 

responsibilities to reflect our new transportation strategy. It 

covers departmental purchases, tenders, and selling practices. 

 

We will be happy, Mr. Speaker, to go through these details 

when we are in committee. 

 

I now move second reading of The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the Highway minister has caught me off guard 

again here today. I was going to give a very aggressive speech 

as usual, but maybe we’ll tone it down a little. However, we’ve 

still got a lot of concerns that we’ve got to go over. 

 

I’d first like to say . . . and this part of my talk I wasn’t going to 

change because I think the minister, regardless of the news that 

he gave to the legislature here minutes ago, I think the minister 

still deserves credit and he was going to get it anyway — and 

it’s in regards to the Department of Highways finally coming 

out with a business plan. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, this business plan has not been done before 

in the department. It was something new. It came about last 

August and I guess it . . . The business plan and the document 

that came sometime later, the transportation strategy document, 

are really companion documents for the Bill that has come 

forward. And so I’m going to sort of deal with all three of the 

documents today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the business plan — and I know it’s the first one and I 

guess there is another to be brought forward . . . or annually to 

be brought forward by either the beginning or end of June in 

each year — and I give the minister all kinds of credit for 

initiating this, Mr. Speaker. And I give him this credit because 

what the people of the province don’t often get, you know, 

especially from departments, is — you know we’re moving that 

way more with Crowns, Crown corporations — business plans 

and seeing where they’re going in the future. But we don’t get 

that in departments. 

 

And what this here business plan for the Department of 

Highways will eventually, you know, once it becomes a much 

more refined document . . . is going to at least give the people 

of the province some idea in a vision sense where the minister 

would like to take his department. So I will take that amount of 

time to give the minister credit for initiating such a plan and 

getting it on the go. 

 

I guess some of the problems that I see when we look at the 

three documents in total — the business plan, the transportation 

strategy document, and the Bill — is that I think part of it is 

really to take away from some of the problems that the 

government is experiencing from the public. Now I know that 

the amount of calls that we get, especially through the pothole 

patrol hot line . . . And if you don’t mind, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to get a plug in; l 888 62l Bump — 2867 — is the line for 

those watching that would like to phone in and become a 

pothole patroller and let us know the condition of the highways 

in their area. 

 

But what is really going to come of all this, Mr. Speaker, it 

looks like it’s more of a media event. And we saw this in 

Crown corporations a few years ago. I remember the amount of 

information that was brought forward was so overwhelming, it 

was so overwhelming that just a, you know, the few members 

that I was able to work with couldn’t digest it all, couldn’t make 

much of it. And I’m not so sure if some of that strategy isn’t 

coming forward in these companion documents with the Bill. 

 

If in fact the government can have some information overload 

and say a lot of nice and fuzzy things, that perhaps they will get   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

away with actually taking action is my point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I take a look in the business plan, mandate and vision 

for the future, some of this I think becomes clear. And I think it 

becomes clear because it’s mentioned somewhat in the 

transportation strategy. But when you get to the Bill, which is 

really the meat of what’s going to happen, then some certain 

things are not there that I think should have been. 

 

And one of the things in the business plan talks about, 

emphasize improved grain and rail logistics to coordinate the 

transition of current grain handling and transportation system to 

a modern, logistics-driven system for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Well I would agree with that, that there’s got to be a . . . you 

know, the logistics of grain and the movement of grain and 

where the rail beds, railroads, are in the future, exactly how 

they’re going to utilized to their fullest. It’s got to be well 

thought through. And I’m not so sure that it is being well 

thought through. And I’m going to get into a lot of the railroad 

part of this later with short-lines and some of those problems. 

So I won’t emphasize too much more on that yet until I get into 

the transportation strategy document. 

 

Also there is, in the business plan, they really spelled out that 

they were going to develop regional transportation planning. 

And I assume that this meant that they would further what has 

come about in south-west Saskatchewan with the south-west 

transportation advisory committee and the work that they have 

done and how, Mr. Speaker, we can now expand this to work 

right across the province. 

 

And I can only say that I hope that works well and I hope that it 

actually, in the end has the teeth to do something. There again 

I’m going to touch on that later in this strategy document. I just 

want to deal right now with the business plan. 

 

(1115) 

 

You know, there’s a lot of words in here about the harmful 

effects of federal transportation policy. And, you know, we’ve 

stated publicly that there are some concerns. But the concerns 

are of . . . well are very similar to what we’re having here in the 

province as far as monies raised through motor vehicle 

licensing fees. Fuel taxes are raised at not only provincial level 

but at a federal level as well. And at some point there’s got to 

be a lot larger commitment of these taxes go to where their 

intended purpose. 

 

And now the government can argue whether or not that is their 

intended purpose, but I’m sure that the people of Saskatchewan, 

and of course Canada, would be on our side in saying that if 

you’re going to raise the fuel tax for the improvement and the 

construction of provincial highway systems and road systems, 

that that’s where it should go. 

 

Now I’ve heard several times where the government is saying, 

well it’s really not the case because this money has to fund 

education, has to fund health care. Well that’s what E&H 

(education and health) tax was all about, and many of the other 

monies that come out of, especially out of the south-west part of 

the province in oil, land lease sales, you know, millions and 

millions of dollars . . . every time we see these vast amount of 

monies whether it’s a sale of Cameco shares . . . I could go on 

and on. 

 

The government is saying that it has to go into these major 

projects. And . . . (inaudible) . . . we need spending. We need 

more spending in the Department of Health. There’s no 

question. If it means providing that service to the people for 

acute care, for long-term care, we’re not arguing that. But what 

we do argue, and we’ve made the point many times, Mr. 

Speaker, is that rather than have slush accounts — I guess for 

lack of a better term — slush accounts in Liquor and Gaming 

waiting for an election to come about, let’s put the monies . . . 

let’s direct those monies to where the people of the province 

really do believe that they are going or should be going. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at some of the stuff in the 

business plan, it sounds very good. It shows that there’s sort of 

a vision. But it really comes down to what is the role of the 

Department of Highways? It should be very simple. I mean we 

shouldn’t need a strategy and a vision to construct highways or 

to pave some secondary roads. We shouldn’t need so much a 

vision for it as we do a commitment by the government that it’s 

a priority and it’s a commitment by the government that rural 

Saskatchewan will start to receive their fair share. Because let’s 

not forget for a moment that the large portion of the monies 

raised through fuel taxes and through motor vehicle licensing 

fees come from rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And that really shows itself, Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at 

a research study that was done by the Canadian Automobile 

Association, and some of their findings about the amount of 

money that is raised in this province through fuel taxes, and 

what is spent in this province in comparison to what is spent in 

other provinces. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just quote some of the research 

findings out of the CAA (Canadian Automobile Association) 

report, because I think they really show where in fact the 

Department of Highways is going, where it’s going in 

comparison to what, with the other documents, they’re saying 

they would like to go. And I’ll quote this: 

 

Over a 10-year-period, 1988 to 1997, Saskatchewan 

Highways and Transportation expenditures have decreased 

21.6 per cent. 

 

So we’re spending less, almost 22 per cent less, down to $168 

million. And during that same time period, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan fuel tax revenues have increased over 110 per 

cent. So people are paying a lot more in fuel taxes. Revenues 

collected from motorists in the form of motor vehicle licence 

fees have increased 36 per cent. And the actual road-related 

expenditures over the last decade have decreased nearly 17 per 

cent, to $151 million. 

 

This research study, Mr. Speaker, just so you know, was done 

right here in the University of Saskatchewan. So it’s not a 

political document, although I’ll try and make it one at times.   



1136  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

But don’t confuse that with our own research. 

 

The expenditures, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at where 

the government’s going . . . and as I just said, the expenditures 

are down, revenues are going way up — but let’s take a look at 

how severe they are. 

 

In the 1996-97 fiscal year, the Saskatchewan government plans 

to collect $430.9 million in fuel tax and motor vehicle licence 

fees, but plans to spend only 168.8 million on highways and 

transportation expenditures. Now this leaves a surplus of $262 

million for the one year, ’96-97, for that year alone — $262 

million. So when we take a look at some of the announcements 

that came about in the budget . . . and the minister did his best 

to make them sound very rosy, that there was the two and a half 

billion dollars going to be spent on our highway system over the 

next 10 years. It sounded impressive. 

 

Yet for those like myself who work with those numbers and the 

Department of Highway’s numbers on a daily basis, a quick 

calculation showed that really that could even be seen as a 

substantial cut yet again in what is actually being spent. I would 

think over that 10-year period where they’re going to spend the 

two and a half billion dollars, the surplus, not just the revenues, 

but the surplus is going be somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

four and a half billion dollars. That’s the surplus. 

 

So I mean, when you come out with a statement and try and sell 

it as something very positive, two and a half billion, you’re only 

. . . it’s what, a third? It’s about a third. It stays right in line with 

what the Canadian Automobile Association report is saying, 

where in fact there is some 30 . . . well I’ll quote from it again: 

 

In its budget the Saskatchewan government will expend 39 

per cent of the revenues it collects from motorists through 

fuel tax and motor vehicle licence fees on highways and 

transportation in ’96-97. 

 

And this total compares to a decade ago, in 1988, where 94 per 

cent of the revenues collected were put back into highways and 

transportation. That is significant; that’s a significant amount of 

money. If you take a look, Mr. Speaker, here’s another 

interesting stat. Over a five-year period from ’93 to ’97, 

Saskatchewan will collect over $2 billion in fuel taxes and 

motor vehicle licence fees from motorists. During the same 

period, only 859 million will be expended back into highways 

and transportation expenditures. 

 

So you can see where I’m coming from with that four and a half 

billion dollar surplus over the next 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 

because over the last 5 they’ve had a surplus of 1.23 billion. 

And I know they would like to take credit but you know when 

you take a look . . . go out into rural Saskatchewan. Really, to 

appreciate what’s happened, you have to get out of Saskatoon 

and Regina and travel rural Saskatchewan and just see how bad 

it really and truly is. 

 

When you get out there and you start to see the damage that has 

occurred from . . . and we can’t just say it’s all heavy truck 

traffic, just the damage that has occurred by not . . . by allowing 

the highways to deteriorate to the state that they have. We have 

potholes, we have people that have phoned in to the pothole 

patrol hot line and there are potholes that were so large . . . one 

fellow was following a tandem truck filled with gravel, 

Department of Highways truck, and there was a pothole so deep 

that the truck just creeped into the pothole — and he thought he 

was going to dump into this pothole — and the entire truck, for 

the width of the road and the length of the truck, fit into the 

pothole. 

 

An Hon. Member:  That was a valley. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  So he waited . . . Well I know. They look 

like a valley, as the member across was saying. But he slowly 

creeped the truck out the other side and drove away. They 

didn’t dump . . . I guess there were worse holes that he was 

heading to. How could they be worse? This thing was axle 

deep. 

 

So when you take a look at what the government is saying and 

you look at all the rosy predictions — where they want to go; 

where they might go, or where they would hope to — and yet, 

go out and take a drive on some of these highways. Oh, it’s . . . 

I think that the government, not only because we’re requesting 

it or CAA or the truckers associations or the people of 

Saskatchewan — especially rural Saskatchewan — but at some 

point you have to accept that if you’re not going to spend the 

money on our highway system, it’s really a debt in itself. 

 

Now we all know too well the arguments for slashing hospitals 

and schools and nursing homes, and I could go on and on. The 

government has said that because of the Devine government 

there’s this huge debt. And people didn’t disagree. They know 

that the Tories, when they left office, left them in a horrible, 

horrible position. They knew that. They . . . What is it, 14, $15 

billion of debt that was left? And people accepted that had to be 

addressed. But . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Not at the expense of the Tories. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well you’re right, Mr. Member — not at 

the expense of the Tories. However, to say that we’re going to 

give up everything that the people of Saskatchewan, the 

pioneers of this province, worked so hard for, for years and 

years . . . There was tough times before when they built these 

highway systems, when they built these health care systems, 

when they built most of the nursing homes. There were tough 

times back then also. 

 

Why is it now, when things are starting to turn around, that we 

still have to be accepting cuts, that we still have to be saying, 

we can’t afford? We can’t afford to care for the elderly. We 

can’t afford hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. We can’t afford to 

fix their highway system so that they can even go and get the 

services elsewhere. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, is why we routinely ask that this 

government, when they have the ability to do so — and I say 

they have it now; they’re in their fourth balanced budget — 

they must start spending money back into rural Saskatchewan 

on that highway infrastructure. Because when you don’t, that in   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

itself is a debt. It’s a debt that somebody at some point is going 

to have to pay. And that’s coming up. It can only get so bad 

before it’s fixed. 

 

I think that perhaps there is a bit of a bigger plan here, and I’m 

sure the government views it this way as well. If the highways 

get to be in such disrepair and become in such a deteriorated 

state, the people themselves — this is what the government is 

hoping is going to happen — the people are going to throw up 

their hands and say, you know, the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, when he was Highways minister, came out 

with a plan for the reversion of highways to gravel. 

 

And I think that’s what the government is still hoping to do, is 

follow through on that former minister’s, Highway minister’s, 

plan to turn a lot of our paved roads back to gravel. Because 

they are hoping the people are just going to say, we can’t take it 

any longer. These holes are ridiculous, they’re unsafe, can’t 

haul our grain with our trucks on these kinds of roads. Fill them 

with gravel. If gravel is going to last longer than pavement, so 

be it. Well that’s no way to handle the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. It’s not. Because it doesn’t have to happen in 

other provinces. They too have debts. 

 

How many times have we heard the Minister of Finance stand 

in this House and say that Saskatchewan was the first. 

Saskatchewan was the first to get their debt in control, 

Saskatchewan was the first to have balanced budgets. And hey, 

that’s great! The people of Saskatchewan are proud of that. 

Because it wasn’t the Minister of Finance that paid that debt 

down, it was the people of Saskatchewan, and especially rural 

Saskatchewan. And I dare say the people of south-west 

Saskatchewan paid the biggest price of all because if you take a 

drive out there and see what they have left for services, it’s 

shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But when we look at what other provinces are doing with their 

debts, with their same problems that they’re getting branch lines 

abandoned, with all the like problems they have . . . and so 

we’ll pick a sister province. And I know that the government 

does not always want us using Alberta because Alberta has far 

bigger population and they have, you know, resource revenues 

that perhaps we don’t have or didn’t used to have is a better 

way of putting it. 

 

So let’s use a like population of Manitoba. Heavy into 

agriculture, having branch lines abandoned. I mean they’ve got 

all the same problems. They have the debts, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but let’s see what they’re doing. Over the last 10 

years, and this is again out of the Canadian Automobile 

Association booklet, over the last 10 years Manitoba has 

increased its highways and transportation expenditures by 10.4 

per cent. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you remember what Saskatchewan 

did? It decreased by 21.6 per cent over that same time period. 

And during the same time period, Saskatchewan increased the 

revenues it collects from motorists and fuel taxes and motor 

vehicle fees by 88 per cent while Manitoba increased their 

revenues by only 17 per cent. In the ’96-97 fiscal year, the 

province of Manitoba will expend 84.1 per cent of its revenues 

it collects from motorists on highways and transportation 

expenditures. This is comparing Saskatchewan at 39 per cent. In 

’96-97 Manitoba’s highways and transportation expenditures 

will comprise 4.17 per cent of its total provincial spending, 

while Saskatchewan — and Saskatchewan keeps bragging 

about having the most highways, and on and on; you know all 

their arguments why they can’t fix any of them — that’ll only 

comprise of 3.3 per cent. 

 

Well I could go on and on, I guess, and quote from the 

document. But it clearly shows, it clearly shows that it’s not 

even a point of just having finances available; it’s a point of 

government having priorities, and it’s a point of doing what 

they think they have to do to serve all citizens of the province 

and not just single out certain projects or initiatives that they 

have, Mr. Speaker, perhaps for . . . or Deputy Speaker, for their 

own political gains or goals. And I think that’s starting to show 

itself with the urban/rural split that this government has created. 

 

So when I look at this business plan — and please keep in mind 

the kind of numbers and figures that we have just heard — and 

where the monies are being expended — they’re going down; 

the revenues are going up so dramatic. And then start to 

wonder, what’s really with the vision plan, with the goals and 

stated objectives. It comes down to either you’re going to fix 

the highways or you’re not going to fix the highways; either 

you’re going to spend some money or you’re not; either you’re 

going to get involved in ensuring that the railroads are to remain 

in rural Saskatchewan through short-line operators or you’re 

not. And that’s what it comes down to. It doesn’t take much of a 

vision. 

 

I think the vision could be summed up, I think it could be 

summed up in a matter of a few minutes if you take . . . if you 

picked five, six of these pothole patrol sheets that I’ll get into 

later. Because I think that really says it from a rural citizen’s 

point of view, what kind of vision is really required out there. 

 

You’ll have to bear with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I want to 

just hurry through the business plan, but I don’t want to miss 

anything that . . . Oh here it is. On page 6 of the business plan, 

there’s a section dealing with capital upgrading and a few of the 

points in that business plan that the government wants to 

establish — benefit/cost analysis for project prioritization. 

 

Well I don’t know what that means to most people, but I’ll tell 

you what it means to people in rural Saskatchewan — 

especially in rural Saskatchewan and especially in areas where 

they’re not as heavily populated as perhaps closer to some of 

the cities. When you’re going to look at cost/benefit analysis 

and prioritization, what you’re really saying is those areas of the 

province that don’t have as large a population or as much 

traffic, we’re just not going to have you on any list for 

priorities. 

 

That’s what it means. You will never get your highways rebuilt, 

re-paved, new construction. In fact as the member from 

Thunder Creek has just mentioned behind me, that really your 

concerns of safety, the safety of your kids, of your mothers and   



1138  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

fathers and grandmothers and fathers, seeking health care, going 

to school in the morning on school buses, all the services that 

they’re requiring today really have to be . . . they have to go and 

seek them travelling on our provincial highway system because 

they’re losing their services out in those areas — buses, 

hospitals, schools. I could go on and on. 

 

But now they don’t have — and it’s in their government’s own 

documents — they don’t really have a hope of bringing some of 

their projects forward. And I know I’ve got a document here 

that I want to go into in a little while about just some of the 

areas of the province where I think it’s shameful even where 

they are situated in this prioritization list. 

 

It also says here, under capital upgrading, that the government 

is going to continue to consolidate operations to reflect 

declining capital programs. Well when we take a look at — oh 

here we go, infrastructure — when we take a look at equipment 

— and they have a section in this business plan about what we 

have for equipment — this really tells you what they intend to 

do as far as consolidating programs. 

 

Sounds good, but when you put it into practice here’s what it 

means to the people, is that they’re going to have less service. 

We know how many calls that the minister and the government 

members must get during the winter months when there’s ice on 

the highways, snowdrifts, the highways are impassable, but 

nothing ever seems to get done. Why? 

 

Because they’ve continued to cut back on each and every one of 

these highway depots. I can’t remember offhand just how many 

highway crews or how many depots they’ve closed. 

 

An Hon. Member:  14, 15. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  What was . . . 14, 15. It was several. That 

was in one year. 

 

An Hon. Member:  They’re not going to stop. There’s more 

that will be cut. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well exactly; there’s more coming, as the 

member from Thunder Creek mentioned. 

 

Let’s take a look at the equipment though. The department 

manages and maintains a fleet of equipment for the preservation 

and operation of the provincial transportation system. The 

current fleet consists of approximately 1,670 power units and 

1,500 sundry units. The total value of this is about $41 million. 

And then it goes on to talk about where it’s going to be in the 

future, and I’m going to quote from the government’s own 

document: it is estimated that the number of power units 

required will be reduced to approximately 1,400 — that would 

be from 1,670 to 1,400 — by the year 2000. Well the year 2000 

is coming up really quick, really quick. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Fewer jobs too. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Fewer jobs, exactly. Far fewer jobs. 

 

In addition, the total equipment usage is expected to decline by 

approximately 25 per cent. So not only are we going to have — 

if I can read the government’s own document correctly . . . 

we’re going to have far, far fewer power units. By power units, 

I guess we’re talking whether it’s graders or trucks, 

snowploughs, on and on; we’re going to have far fewer in a 

couple of years. 

 

This is from a government saying that we’re going to spend so 

much more in the next 10 years and our highways are going to 

be so much improved. And they’re talking safety, and on and 

on, and yet their own document says no, it’s going the other 

way. 

 

So not only are we going to have a lot fewer units to do the 

work, it states in here that the equipment usage is expected to 

decline by approximately 25 per cent. So what does that mean? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well how many jobs are going with 

that? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well that’s right, as the member from 

Humboldt has just said, how many jobs are going with that? 

And I know she’s raised many of these concerns with me to 

raise with the minister about the highways in her area. Many of 

those highways are deplorable. All of our members are 

continuously talking about the state of highways in this 

province. 

 

And I can only see by the business plan that this government is 

putting forward, where you’re going to cut some 300 units in a 

couple of years and have the workload that those remaining 

units are going to have cut by some 25 per cent. And it says in 

here why, Mr. Deputy Speaker: these decreases can be largely 

attributed to declining budget levels. 

 

Well isn’t that contradicting what the Finance minister has been 

telling us? It’s one thing to say that over a 10-year period our 

spending is going to be where, but . . . you know, two and a half 

billion dollars. 

 

But what really is $200 million in 10 years compared to today’s 

dollars? What could $200 million buy today as compared to 

what it will buy 10 years from now? You can only assume, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that it’s going to be not very good. 

 

I see there’s customer satisfaction surveys. I think I’ll touch on 

those later because I believe I have a more interesting document 

to go over. 

 

By the year . . . objective by the year 2000, at least 85 per cent 

of the highway traffic will be on an infrastructure of satisfactory 

quality with no more than 2 per cent on unsatisfactory quality. 

 

That’s a great objective, a great goal. It’s one that I could only 

hope from the bottom of my heart that they would achieve. But 

is there even a remote chance of that happening? There can’t be. 

There can’t be when you’re cutting back on the equipment. You 

know your dollars are going down. Take away how glossy the 

announcement sounds, there’s fewer and fewer dollars; there’s 

bigger and bigger surpluses. 

 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

There’s less equipment; there’s less men. You’re consolidating 

the depots. How can you expect that 85 per cent of the highway 

traffic will be on a very satisfactory infrastructure? Impossible. 

Impossible. 

 

Their own document tells you why it’s impossible. Spending is 

going down. Page 13 of the business plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it talks here about quality road network. And it gives some 

performance . . . I guess this was done on a survey that the 

government takes each and every year, or they’ve started it 

looks like ’94-95, ’95-96, and then since then they don’t have 

anything filled in. 

 

But let’s take a look at really what people, the people that 

they’re surveying, at least those that are responding, and let’s 

hope that . . . I can only assume that many of those are people 

that are more inclined to be more positive, if they can be, to the 

government. Others that respond to surveys . . . and we’ll get 

into that, pothole patrol ones later. I don’t think the government 

wants those on any sheet of their business plan because they’re 

not as good. 

 

Pavements, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And these are the people that 

said that they feel the paved highways are in a satisfactory 

condition. The survey in ’94-95, 65.4 per cent felt that their 

highways were satisfactory. Then it goes down — tolerable, 

unsatisfactory, unranked. And those figures are quite amazing 

really. But the following year in ’95-96, satisfactory on 

pavements fell to 57.8 per cent. So in one year we’ve dropped 

almost 10 per cent of the people feel that the highways were 

drastically deteriorating. 

 

On thin pavements, only 31.6 per cent in ’95-96 felt that the 

thin pavements were satisfactory. On gravel roads, 18.7 per cent 

of those responded, felt that the gravel roads were satisfactory. 

Total system overall, 51.3 per cent felt the total highway and 

road system of this province was satisfactory. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government members opposite 

would have to stand in their place today and tell us how they 

really expect the people of the province to believe that when 

you’re going downhill, it’s going down, Mr. Members . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s going down into a pothole, as 

the member said. It’s going downhill, and yet your projections 

and your objectives in a business plan are saying, in a couple 

years it’s going to be going uphill. And you’re going to take it 

uphill with a lot less equipment and a lot less money and a lot 

less people. Well nobody is buying into that; nobody is buying 

into that. 

 

In fact when we take a look at some of these target results and 

client satisfaction, page 15 of your report, and I hope members 

have a copy of the report so they can follow along . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well thank you. 

 

We’re looking, general users targeted results, okay, for the 

’95-96 year that I quoted a moment ago — 51 per cent, as I’ve 

said. The following year they expect that to drop 1 per cent, 

down to 50 per cent. But in ’97-98, up to 60 per cent; ’98-99 up 

to 70 per cent. I think what they’re trying to do is paint the 

picture that, just hold on folks; we’re going to be there to help 

you and it won’t be too long, perhaps in election year or the 

year before and the year of the election. Well that’s what it tells 

me. 

 

Mr. Member, let me give you an example of another rosy 

picture that I deal with in my critic area and that would be in 

crop insurance. Crop insurance contract holders were in the 

neighbourhood of 52, 53 per cent of the farmers were into . . . 

had crop insurance contracts. When the government changed 

the program recently, they were saying we think, or were 

hoping beyond all hope I guess, that we’ll get it up to 75 per 

cent. And yet when all the numbers and facts and figures came 

in, they found that it had decreased very, very little. I don’t even 

know if it rates. It’s a few hundred more contracts. We’re 

talking thousands of farmers, but only an increase of a few 

hundred more contracts. 

 

(1145) 

 

Now I don’t want to accuse you . . . and I don’t want to rain on 

your parade in saying don’t ever come out with a rosy 

prediction. I don’t want to do that. I hope you do have a lot of 

rosy predictions. I just hope you start to follow through on a 

few of them. I hope that you will start to put the priorities of 

your government, and follow it where your predictions or your 

rosy predictions say you’re going. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ll leave the business plan 

alone for awhile. Once again, I’m glad to see that the minister 

initiated something that I think in the future is going to be very 

positive for the people of this province. However, as the 

member from Humboldt has suggested, there’s something 

called follow-through and follow-up on some of the 

predications instead of going out and saying we believe we’re 

going to be up here and we’re going to do all these warm and 

fuzzy feeling things to have the people of this province believe 

that we’re doing much better. Yet cutting monies out of these 

departments is not the way to go. 

 

You think it isn’t causing stress out there? We had the minister 

give a bad news announcement today, that he himself can’t take 

any more of the stress and pressure because of what’s 

happening in that portfolio. It has got to be a terrible portfolio if 

the rest of the cabinet is saying no, we don’t believe that there 

should be highways that are satisfactory to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hey, it wasn’t the opposition that created the problems; it was 

the government that created problems for the minister. And I 

wish him well in the future, and I give him lots of credit for 

what he endeavoured to achieve in his department, and we 

really wish him well as far as his health concerns and such go. 

But it’s the government, it’s the government, not the minister, 

that has got to take any blame that’s going to come their way 

from the citizens of this province in the bad news that’s coming 

about for them in the future. 

 

Why some of that bad news? Why some of that bad news? And 

before I forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you think it’s just the 

opposition or some rural folk that are doing it, it’s not. Let’s 

think back to this past winter, when SGEU (Saskatchewan   



1140  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

Government Employees Union) members who were in the . . . 

the highway workers who were members of the SGEU union, 

were putting on I guess some forums, or they were travelling 

throughout rural Saskatchewan, raising public awareness of the 

safety issues, of the state of our highway system. 

 

They too can see where this is going to go. It’s not beneficial. 

 

An Hon. Member:  You’ve got to give them credit. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, of course, as the member for Thunder 

Creek said, you’ve got to give them a lot of credit. They stand 

up against the government for whom they work and just say, 

listen, it’s gone on too long. They’re not unlike the nurses of 

this province, who time and time again have taken a very tough 

line against the government who employs them and say listen, 

we’ve got people that we do work for, whether it’s seniors or 

whether it’s the people that use the highway system. And if 

you’re going to cut, cut, cut, continuously, they can’t provide 

the services that they were hired to provide. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s become obvious then, when you 

look at sort of where this is all going, is that we have a 

government that wants to put far more policy . . . want to deal 

far more in the policy area than in the area of pavement. So it’s 

policy versus pavement. 

 

When I take a look at this so-called comprehensive plan that the 

government, the government, the cabinet put out I guess a few 

weeks ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they make a strong case. 

 

They make a very strong case for rural Saskatchewan having a 

very up-to-date transportation system. They make a very strong 

case as to why, when we have two-thirds of our exports . . . 

Well our exports account for nearly two-thirds of our GDP 

(gross domestic product). 

 

And when you look through this document and it speaks about 

the need in rural Saskatchewan to retain a rail service, I 

expected when I got to the back of the book that there would be 

some fairly impressive directions given. Or if they weren’t in 

here, that in fact they would show up in Bill No. 46 with what 

we’re discussing here today. 

 

That, I’ll have to say, was very disappointing; to find out that 

really in the end we’re . . . there is no direction. It’s just part of 

saying something to make people feel good that there’s 

something coming. And they catch people off guard. 

 

I mean take a look at our own opposition. We held back some 

Bills for some time that we wanted to present to this House and 

didn’t do it because we too we’re expecting far more in this 

comprehensive transportation strategy document. 

 

So now we’re in a dilemma as to whether to try and convince 

the government to do something with a Bill that we’ve given 

notice of first reading to — an Act to facilitate short-line 

railroading in this province — or to try and inject it with 

amendments into the Bills that they’re bringing forward, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So if we were caught off guard as people that work and 

basically live in this political system, how do you think the 

people of this province felt? Of course they were caught off 

guard. There’s communities after communities after 

communities out there that actually thought that the government 

was going to set some . . . well some substantial direction in the 

area of short-line railroading. They didn’t get it. 

 

In their own document, the “Investing in Transportation” 

document, page 5: 

 

More than any other province, Saskatchewan producers 

and shippers are dependent on rail transport. 

 

I couldn’t agree more. 

 

Some of the other things that I noticed in here is that they’re 

talking about the immediate need to find efficiency in grain 

handling and transportation industry. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you read the document, or the first 

time you read it, wouldn’t you have thought that either in the 

Bill or later on something would become very clear, that there’s 

an overall plan and it’s going to be very clear for the people to 

see? It never showed up. 

 

I mean we look through here. We look through here and we see 

where the government takes stock of what we have here in this 

province, the state of our highways, the needs of our producers, 

the needs of our communities, especially rural communities. 

 

But where’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, exactly. 

Where’s the plan to do something, to make sure it’s going to go 

into the new millennium that they are trying to drag the people 

into, I guess, kicking and screaming because, just like in the 

health care reform, the plan isn’t clear. People aren’t willing to 

go blindly with you and be taken somewhere where they don’t 

think that it’s going to be beneficial for them and their families. 

 

Now the document also talks about the global challenges. Well 

there are those. I don’t know what this province intends on 

doing about them. 

 

There’s national challenges. And there, to the minister’s credit, 

I know he has done his utmost in trying to get more federal 

monies into the highway system. And we agree with that, that 

there should be a national highway program for those highways 

— I guess it would be 1 and 16 — where, you know, they’re 

inter-provincial highways. Four-lane them. 

 

I think a 15-year plan that this government is undertaking . . . 

and I can’t remember the amount that that plan is going to cost. 

Do you remember it? Thirty million? Well, whatever. I don’t 

remember the amount of money that that 15-plan was going to 

take. But 15 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to four-lane our major 

highways? Fifteen years at a time when they’re giving the bad 

news about abandoning rail lines and having people not sure 

where farming and agriculture is going to be? I have no idea 

what to expect on my farm in 15 years in so far as 

transportation is concerned. So I think 15 years is just 

something that is really and truly unacceptable. 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

I do believe that on the Highways 1 and 16 that there should 

have been more federal monies available. But let’s not forget 

the kind of surpluses that this provincial government has to deal 

with. They are going to, over that 15-year . . . Let’s imagine 

where we’re going to be in 15 years. If they’re going to have a 

surplus of about a half billion in the next 10 years while they’re 

only spending two and a half billion, I can only assume then 

that in another five years from there we’d probably be looking 

around 8 to $10 billion of surplus in the next 15 years — 

surplus money. Surplus. 

 

Well that, I think, shows how unacceptable it is that we would 

put our residents and in fact tourists, people from other parts of 

Canada, at risk on our provincial highway system. That’s 

unacceptable. Safety should be first in the minds of the 

government. 

 

An Hon. Member:  More economic activity will put more 

trucks on the road, more traffic. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Exactly. When we take a look at what they 

have for provincial challenges I was quite surprised to read in 

their own document what they view as some challenges, that 

being the amount of branch lines that are going to be 

abandoned, announced for abandonment. And in the 

government’s own document I’m going to quote from: 

 

While some rail rationalization may be required as part of 

the modernization of grain handling and transportation 

system, abandonment of rail lines will cause . . . 

 

And then they go on, and I guess we all know they’re going to 

make some case that they’re really concerned about those lines. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that when you read a government 

document which says that some rail rationalization should 

occur, that means somewhere somebody has sat back and says, 

okay, let’s decide which ones. And I would ask the government 

members, if you have a list of which ones your provincial 

government — not the CN (Canadian National), CP (Canadian 

Pacific), federal government — which ones your government 

feels should be abandoned, would you please table those today. 

Because you would not make these kinds of statements unless, 

government members, you’ve already thought about it. 

 

And I think that if you’re already thinking that we can afford to 

rationalize or abandon more railroads in this province after the 

first front section, the front section of your booklet tells about 

how important railroading is, railroads are, to the export of our 

commodities, well that’s shameful. Table the document. Maybe 

you’re right — I doubt it and I don’t think the people would be 

on your side either when you start tabling documents about the 

provincial government supporting the abandonment of branch 

lines. Shame. 

 

Quoting right out of their booklet: 

 

Nearly 30 million tonnes of product, valued in excess of $5 

billion, is exported . . . annually (30 million tonnes). The 

physical characteristics, distance to market, and relatively 

low value of the commodities shipped from 

Saskatchewan dictate rail transportation as the only 

economical mode of transport. Much of this rail captive 

traffic is served by only a single railway carrier. This 

combination has resulted in excessively high freight 

charges paid by Saskatchewan shippers. Saskatchewan 

shippers, on average, pay freight rates which are 45 per 

cent higher than shippers of commodities moving similar 

distances in other parts of Canada. 

 

You know, the people find this so confusing. On one hand, right 

on the same page, page 14 of your own document, you talk 

about nearly 30 million tonnes of product having to move 

across our transportation network, and not only three 

paragraphs before that, you talked about yes, you agree there 

should be some rationalization. 

 

Do you know how many trucks it takes to move 30 million 

tonnes of product? Do you have any idea how that could 

possibly come about — even in certain areas of the province 

and if you took a far less amount? It can’t happen. It can’t be 

handled. 

 

And while we’re looking at and while what we’re looking at the 

amount of product that we’re going to move, I think one other 

things that’s got to be made mention of, page 15 on your 

booklet. I’ll quote again: 

 

It is anticipated that the elevator system will continue to 

consolidate over the next decade, perhaps as few as 100 

grain delivery points province wide. 

 

(1200) 

 

One hundred delivery points province wide? That’s over the 

next decade. 

 

So let’s just think back to what the business plan said, and it 

was stating that in the next few years, we’re going to have a 

satisfactory rating . . . What was it? Eighty per cent or 

something of the people are going to say we’ve got great 

highways in this province? 

 

And yet on the other hand we’re saying we are going to do it 

with less equipment, less money, we’re going to do it but with 

the provincial government admitting with less rail, and we’re 

going to do it with far fewer grain gathering facilities. 

 

And I see now they’ve got grain delivery points, a little graph in 

their booklet, where we went, 1972-73, from it looks about 900 

to today where we’re looking approximately 475 elevators — 

we’ll call them elevators — in this province. And yet in the next 

10 years we are going to cut that back to 100? 

 

You’re going to cut it back to a hundred, you’re going to help 

close or suggest which branch lines should be closed, and 

you’re not going to put the monies necessary in your highway 

system. Do you know what that is going to . . . do you have any 

idea what that’s going to do to the highway system? 

 

I think back to some of the farmers in the Climax area that had 

actually calculated out the amount of bushels that would be   



1142  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

moving — and I believe this is on line from Val Marie to 

Consul, the one that was in the announcement, I guess, of a few 

weeks ago of one of the branch lines proposed for 

abandonment. And I believe if I remember right, it was 7 

million bushels of product moved from that line north — 7 

million. So now if we don’t have the rail system to do it . . . and 

let’s not forget what rail system we’re talking about; we’re 

talking about a rail system of which is in excellent condition. 

 

Taxpayers, I would say in the last . . . well when was that rehab 

program about, you know . . . I think it was $575 million was 

spent rehabilitating the branch . . . or the, you know, branch 

lines, maybe the main lines, in Saskatchewan alone. That rail 

line that they’re talking about down there, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Don’t let it go to waste. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Oh, you can’t let it go to waste. That rail 

line would probably last 50, 60, 70 years, with little to no 

maintenance. 

 

The highway system which would have to accept that traffic . . . 

well there would be two main highways. It would be No. 4 

heading from Val Marie north up through Swift Current; or No. 

37 which is heading from Climax, through Shaunavon, up to 

Gull Lake, if that’s what the plan is, to start trucking it up on 

those highways to move 7 million tonnes of product. We were 

talking about a semi-trailer truck unit hauling . . . they’d be 

running night and day every day of the year, 24 hours a day, to 

move that product. 

 

Does that not surprise people that that firstly would jeopardize a 

lot of people’s lives. If you’re going to put those amount of 

trucks, that amount of trucks on our provincial highway system 

on one or two highways, you can’t tell me that we’re not putting 

someone’s life at risk — some school kid, just residents, at risk. 

I think that is shameful. 

 

I say that there is no option. There is no option available to this 

provincial government. They have got to come to the forefront, 

do the right thing. You can’t allow that line to be abandoned. 

It’s fine to say, well we put on a short-line rail conference and 

that’s it; that’s all we’re going to do. That’s not all you can do. 

That’s not all you can do. 

 

One other thing that we have raised with many of your 

members at times — we’ve raised it with some of the grain 

companies and it was part of what we were trying to work into 

our . . . the Act that we gave notice of first reading to on the 

facilitation of short-line railroads Act. And that is, should the 

elevator companies not have to put some of these elevators up 

for sale to the community, to farm organizations, to an area, to 

the people that live and work and produce in an area or in a 

community. Should they not have to put those elevators up for 

sale before they abandon them, before they tear them down or 

burn them down or whatever they’re going to do? 

 

Do you not realize the impact you’re going to have and where 

this is all going to lead? You’re having, you’re having the 

railroads on one hand saying, well we’re going to abandon line, 

and they’re saying really a lot of it has to do with the fact that 

elevators are disappearing. That we have these huge cement 

terminals going up on main lines. So you can’t expect us as the 

railroads to keep our branch lines and our railroads running out 

there in rural Saskatchewan and people are trucking right by 

them. 

 

Hey, we agree with that. We agree with that. You talk to the 

grain gathering companies and they’re saying, well when we 

see the railroads putting forward their plans to abandon track, 

branch lines in the province, well you can’t expect us to let 

some other, you know, ConAgra or whoever, go and build 

terminals at all the choice locations up on the main line and 

we’re sitting out there with these, you know, old wooden 

elevators. We’ve got to keep up, in a business sense. 

 

And well we agree with that too. The fact of the matter is we 

think, I think they’re working hand in glove. It’s beneficial to 

both railroads and the grain gathering companies to close down 

their services off of the very heavy lines, the main lines. But is 

it, exactly? 

 

An Hon. Member:  It doesn’t mean the government has to 

go along with it. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Exactly. Good point. The member from 

Thunder Creek says that doesn’t mean this provincial 

government has to accept that philosophy. They shouldn’t 

accept it, they shouldn’t accept it because of the risk that they’re 

going to be putting their own residents at. They shouldn’t 

accept it because of the costs that they’re going to be offloaded 

onto their highway system. That shouldn’t be acceptable. 

 

If they can put on restrictions . . . well let’s just think about it. 

There are restrictions on the railroads as to what lines I guess 

they can abandon, when they can abandon, their process to 

abandon. Why don’t we have that on our elevator systems as 

well? What would be wrong with that? 

 

You see if you just allow it to be taken down, lifted apart, 

bulldozed over, if you allow that to happen then what you won’t 

have, you won’t ever have the ability to have specialty crops or 

organizations or cooperatives. Pick these elevators up in 

communities such as Val Marie or Climax or Consul. They 

could use those elevator systems for grain drying, for cleaning 

of product, for storage and handling of specialty crops. Who 

knows where it’s going to end. But I’ll tell you where it’s going 

to end if they’re not there. Nothing will ever happen. Nothing 

will or can ever happen. So . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  And this government can put the skids 

on that if they want to. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well that’s right. As the member from 

Thunder Creek says, this government is in the position and has 

the ability to slow that process up. What we have been doing, 

what we have been doing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

the member says, and what about the federal government? I 

agree. 

 

  



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

And that is why, that is why there have been discussions 

between myself, the member from Thunder Creek, and the 

federal Minister of Agriculture to do just that — to slow it up. 

To slow it up. We’ve written letters; we’ve had personal 

meetings. We’ve tried to encourage your own government here 

in Saskatchewan to also take this path. 

 

Let’s talk about what’s going to happen then if you don’t buy 

into what I’m saying, if you don’t buy into the fact that we must 

— we must — keep these branch lines from being abandoned 

and we must keep some grain-gathering facilities out there in a 

real way. 

 

Well it says it all on page 16 of your transportation document. 

And there’s a graph in there. It has total travel, truck travel, 

road damage on Saskatchewan highways. Now we show a 

percentage increase in total travel, truck travel, or road damage 

to paved highways from year 1961 — I guess that’s when they 

started to monitor or keep track — and it shows that by 1995 

total travel on these highways had increased. And I’m going to 

have to guess here. It looks about . . . well it’s a little less than 

200 per cent. That makes sense. The total truck traffic has 

increased, I would guess it would be around 225 per cent. 

 

But the amazing one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is road damage. 

From ’61 to 1995, the government’s own figures show that road 

damage in that time period, with those increases to truck travel, 

total travel, the road damage has increased to, it looks to be a 

little over 1,500 per cent — 1,500 per cent. 

 

So if you’re going to now take a look at what’s going to happen 

if you’re going to allow, if you’re going to allow more 

railroads, more branch lines to be abandoned, put less into our 

highway and road infrastructure . . . and you’re doing it on a 

daily basis. Not just to your provincial highway system either. 

What about our municipal governments? On one hand you’re 

saying that you’re doing so much — you’ve got plans here; 

you’ve got business plans. You’ve got strategies saying that 

we’re going to go somewhere in rural Saskatchewan — right? 

— with your infrastructure, highway infrastructure. But on the 

other hand, you go and you’re cutting — what is it? — 12 

million this year. Twelve million dollars out of rural municipal. 

And how much more out of urban? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Seventeen. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Seventeen million. And a lot of that would 

be for those smaller communities, but 12 million out of rural 

municipal governments. 

 

You see this is the problem people have with your government. 

You’re saying one thing, but your actions are going completely 

the other way. And they’re all . . . you know, people go back 

and read news releases of months previous thinking, well I 

guess I must have read it wrong and I heard it wrong because 

they said they were going to do just the opposite. They were 

going to build the system up. 

 

How can we allow such an increase that we’re talking about, an 

increase of truck traffic on our provincial highway, municipal 

road network, and expect that we wouldn’t see this damage to 

our roads and highways increase not by 1500 per cent, we’d be 

talking 15,000 per cent. You and I both know that there would 

be no way of repairing it. How would they keep up with the 

repairs? You can’t do it today. You can’t keep up today. 

 

But the government is trying to convince us with their 

document, in a nice, slow fashion, that change is coming, 

change is necessary — same kind of change arguments that we 

heard when they wanted to close down our hospitals. 

 

Let me quote here: 

 

Our transportation network was built over the last 50 years 

to serve a widely dispersed population. It has served us 

well. However, rural Saskatchewan’s transportation needs 

are changing and our transportation system must evolve 

with these (changes). 

 

What does that mean? What does that mean? Because we, I 

don’t think, we weren’t like France, you know. It’s not that our 

population rode the rails a lot any ways to go from community 

to community. They weren’t like a lot of European countries 

that use the rail system for transportation of themselves and 

family. 

 

What our transportation system is used for is to export our 

commodities. And we all know . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Exporting — it’s our lifeline. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well exactly, it’s our lifeline in rural 

Saskatchewan, those exports. 

 

And so it’s one thing to say, well we don’t have the population 

so you’ve got to change your transportation needs. Why? 

Because the population went down, does that mean we’re 

growing less product? Well no, we’re growing more product; 

we’re growing more than ever. It makes no sense. It would be 

different if what you had out there were a lot of passenger trains 

and very light rail to carry light loads and passenger loads. But 

that wasn’t the case. 

 

What this is for is to move bulk commodities of tremendous 

weight. Weights that our highway system will hold. Just 

imagine what it would be like if we had only our highway 

system to rely on and the flooding that we have witnessed this 

spring — and I guess some last spring. If that was an annual 

event, do you for a moment think that we could move our 

product at all? 

 

At least when it’s a wet year, we still have lines, we have 

branch lines that can still move a great deal of our agriculture 

commodities and our products that we’re growing out there for 

export. That won’t happen on our highways. People have not 

thought that through about the bans on our highways . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  We don’t have enough weights and 

measures supervisors. 

 

(1215) 

 

  



1144  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

Mr. McPherson:  Well exactly. We don’t have enough 

people to supervise or police it. 

 

So there again, another section of the document that just . . . it 

just doesn’t fit with reality out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now we’re into the vision section of this document. And the 

reason I’m referring to the document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

because the Bill is really compiled from that business plan and 

this document. So it’s sort of a companion document that really 

built the Bill, I guess. 

 

They have a vision of trade corridors, and that’s great. I think 

we do have to expand this north-south trade. We can’t rely on 

east-west, you know, especially in a province like 

Saskatchewan because we are so land-locked. We’re talking — 

what? — 1,000, 2,000 miles . . . or kilometres of movement of 

commodities in any direction. 

 

So we’ve got to utilize all the tools at hand. And I think using 

those tools of moving our product straight south through North 

America into Mexico — that’s great and we’re supportive of 

that. But it’s no good to just have in a general sense that we’re 

going to promote corridors, unless of course with that 

announcement you’re going to say which corridors you’re 

going to promote. 

 

And we’ve heard for a few years now that there’s different 

corridors, and I don’t remember what they’re named or exactly 

where they go by. I know one, one of the corridors that was 

being looked at was heading south on No. 4 Highway, south of, 

you know, Rosetown through Swift Current through Cadillac, 

Val Marie, and straight south. 

 

So unless this document — if they really and truly wanted 

people to believe that they had any intention of following 

through on this — unless this document were to show that that 

corridor would be built up and beefed up near immediately and 

that Highway No. 4 would have massive, massive undertakings 

right away, what does that really mean to the people? 

 

Well maybe they don’t mean it’s going to move by highway. 

Maybe what they mean is this trade corridor will be by rail, and 

in fact it makes some mention of that but very vague. Well 

where would that rail be? Now they have an opportunity to go 

from the community of Consul heading south and linking up 

with Burlington Northern. And I’ve heard some say that that 

linkage could be done for approximately $20 million. 

 

But do you know what that would mean? We’re not talking 

about then just having the product from Val Marie to Consul 

moved by rail. It can . . . instead of places like Shaunavon and 

all along the line moving all the way up to Moose Jaw, we’re 

now moving it the other way. We’re moving it down Burlington 

Northern. It gives us an option as far as getting things either to 

the port or down to Mexico. There’s all kinds of options. 

 

But are they even considering south-west Saskatchewan? I see 

nowhere in here any indication that the south-west part of this 

province is part of that plan. 

It talks here about a competitive rail sector. And I guess I might 

as well get into part of that right now. There was . . . Oh here 

we go — branchline abandonment strategy. Well I tell you, you 

sort of have to bounce all over the document to get an 

appreciation of where it’s going. 

 

But on page 31 of their document — and here again they talked 

about “While it is recognized that some level of rail 

rationalization is necessary . . .” They go on about that theory 

again, that somehow this provincial government is promoting 

that. I think that’s wrong. 

 

Here’s what the government has done. After stating for pages 

and pages and pages the importance of moving our exports by 

rail because our provincial highway system can’t take it, here’s 

what they’re going to do. Here’s their strategy: 

 

The government has established a Shortline Advisory Unit 

within the Department of Highways and Transportation to 

provide advice to potential investors. 

 

Advice. And you feel that’s your role as a provincial 

government — to provide advice only? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Talk is cheap. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  As the member from Thunder Creek has 

said, talk is cheap, talk is cheap. 

 

In too many instances have I seen in your documents, that talk 

is far too cheap. It takes more than advice. Do you members, as 

members of provincial cabinet and your back-benchers, do you 

not feel that the provincial government should and could take a 

role in — an aggressive role — in dealing with these abandoned 

or proposed for abandoned branch lines? I think you should. 

The people out in rural Saskatchewan think you should. 

 

Why? It’s not that the . . . it’s not that the people really and 

truly want to see the government continuously get into the 

ownership of things, but the alternative is absolutely 

unacceptable. And even with your own actions — if you would 

have taken it, if you would have taken it another step further — 

with your own actions you have had all kinds of pressure from 

groups, from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), from a lot of individuals, people that have been 

in the short-line business. You’ve had a lot of pressure, I know, 

to do something with legislation that in fact makes it very 

difficult for short-line operators to exist in this province. 

 

So to try and help along . . . so to try and help the government 

along, I guess because you didn’t have the courage to deal with 

it yourselves, we brought forward a Bill . . . and you know you 

only have some weeks. You know we all know that it’s going to 

be a shorter session. You people want out of here earlier to help 

your federal cousins try and win more than a small, small 

handful of members in the federal parliament, and so you don’t 

have a lot of time left to deal with some of these issues. 

 

And here’s the Bill that I brought forward on behalf of the 

official opposition. It was an Act respecting the suspension of 

successor rights in relation to the acquisition of short-line   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

railroads, and to amend The Trade Union Act in consequence 

thereof. And let me tell you why we’ve brought this forward 

and so many others, so many others have also asked that you 

deal with this. 

 

Here it is — a group called the Moose Jaw/Outlook 

transportation council and SARM; I’m going to quote from 

them: 

 

Successor rights have been holding up the development of 

short-line industry in all parts of the province, says 

executive director of SARM. “Really, we’ve seen little or 

no movement by the provincial government,” said Sinclair 

Harrison. 

 

And this is in the — what’s this in? — the Leader-Post, an 

article on successor rights. 

 

So that’s why we’ve brought it forward. It’s not to try and 

create a problem between the government and the unions. I 

think what it does, it adds a lot of common sense. And what we 

try and do with such legislation is have a win-win-win situation. 

Everybody can enjoy the benefits of this. 

 

We know full well, and so do you, that if in fact portions of 

railroad are let go in this province and going to be turned into, 

you know, a hopeful short-line rail operation, that under present 

legislation . . . And I guess there are some ways to getting 

around that, but I don’t know how many lawyers you have to 

have on stream to help you accomplish this, so that would make 

one wonder why you’d have to go that route at all. But you 

have to honour the collective agreements that the union had 

with CN and CP. 

 

Now it’s not that we’re opposed to the people that have to work 

on these rail lines because let’s be honest: if short-line is going 

to take over in the province as much as many communities and 

areas would like it to, we’re going to have to use some of those 

people that have the knowledge and the ability to run the 

equipment. I mean, I don’t think any of us in this room would 

want to go out and jump on a train and hope that we could drive 

it down some track and be able to stop it right at the appropriate 

elevator. 

 

All we’re saying with this Bill is when the sale is made that the 

. . . We’re not asking that the unions be busted up. That’s not 

our game, so I don’t want to be heckled back on that one. But 

that the collective agreements are too restrictive . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I will have to call the 

member on the relevance to the Bill — he is referring to another 

Bill that is not before the House at this time — and remind the 

member that we are debating Bill No. 46. When and if that Bill 

comes before the House, there will be ample time for it to be 

brought forward. So I would ask him to get back onto . . . and 

hold his remarks to Bill No. 46. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So my 

point in what should be in Bill No. 46 that I don’t see in Bill 

No. 46, but of course we have created avenues for the 

government to deal with it anyway, is to deal with some of the 

restrictive collective agreements that short-line operators would 

find themselves in. 

 

We’ve got to create an environment, we’ve got to foster an 

environment that is really reality today in Saskatchewan. And is 

it . . . And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people that 

work on these lines themselves agree with this. 

 

We’ve had these discussions with some of the people that are in 

these working positions and they agree. You have to have some 

latitude. You have to allow . . . And the examples I’ve used 

before where the engineer of a short-line railroad can go back 

and do some repair work, say, on a hitch on the last car of the 

train, or in fact have it where the flagman could perhaps go 

ahead and fix the light on the front of the train. All we’re asking 

is to show that there is some flexibility to take this part of the 

argument out of this bigger equation. 

 

So I’m asking that the government consider that either 

amending their own legislation that they’re bringing forward, or 

consider some legislation that may also be here before this 

House, because I’m telling you, advice only is not going to cut 

it. 

 

I guess that . . . I know I skipped over the document rather 

hurriedly, but that’s not to say that I haven’t given it perhaps 

more than it deserves; because maybe it didn’t deserve as much 

as I’ve given it. 

 

Suffice to say that at least the minister showed that he was 

wanting to move in a certain direction. I don’t think that he 

could move cabinet in direction . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

don’t think he could move cabinet in the direction where he 

knew it had to go. 

 

So I guess there is a few of the other things that the government 

should and could be considering in this Bill No. 46 that, as we 

believe, the province should be playing a bigger role in what 

happens with these branch lines. 

 

Well the member across is hollering that the feds should put up 

their money. But if the member would have listened long, long 

ago, to comments that we’ve all made publicly, we wished 

more than anyone that there could have been money for a 

national highway program. 

 

But truthfully, the people of this province gave your provincial 

government a period of time to get their fiscal house in order. 

You’ve had four balanced budgets. You’ve done that. 

 

Now the people are saying it is the time. The time is right to 

start taking care of another deficit that you have raised and 

you’ve been part of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And you’ve 

been part of, Madam Member, you’ve been part of it, of 

allowing our highway system to deteriorate to the point it has. 

Well I hope your heckling will soon turn into a speech and you 

will get up and tell the people in your constituency how proud 

you are of the highway situation. I’ll get into some of the calls 

up in your area real soon. 

 

Let’s take a look at . . . This was a slide presentation of which   



1146  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

the deputy minister, Brian King, gave me a copy of from the 

short-line rail conference. And I appreciate, I appreciate that. 

But when we take a look at your own slide presentation and it 

talks about road conditions year 1995, there are . . . and it shows 

good condition, poor condition for pavements, thin pavements, 

and gravel. 

 

(1230) 

 

Then we have poor condition from pavements. We have some 

pavements that 30 per cent are considered to be in poor 

condition. And what we’re talking about there, it looks like 

about 3 . . . about 4,000 kilometres are in poor condition. 

 

When we look at our thin pavement, 50 per cent of the road — 

your own document says 50 per cent of the roads are in poor 

condition. And that would take in about 9 . . . well it’s got to be 

about 6,000 kilometres. 

 

And of gravel roads, we’ve got 59 per cent are considered by 

your department to be in poor condition — 60 per cent of the 

gravel roads in poor condition. An admission by your own 

government. 

 

You should be ashamed because there is no way that you can 

convince any of us or the general public that the cut-backs to 

rural governments of some $12 million this year should have 

occurred. How does your own document contradict things that 

you do? And you sit there and have the nerve to heckle and try 

and, well, I don’t know what. I can’t wait till you get up and 

answer your own, your own heckling and questions, Madam 

Member. 

 

Delivery points in Saskatchewan. Straight downhill. Take a 

look. And I know I touched on that one earlier; I won’t get into 

it again — but 100 delivery points? And we expect that the one 

that we just looked at with the poor condition of gravel is not 

going to be far worse? It will go from 60 per cent to a hundred 

per cent. 

 

Well the slide presentation talked about the importance of rail 

to Saskatchewan, markets over a thousand miles, freight rate 

bills exceeding a billion dollars a year. It’s as though you’ve 

recognized the problem but refused to deal with it. You’re just 

refusing to deal with it. The damage . . . And if any of the 

members would like some of these charts, I got them from your 

own government. And perhaps you don’t have a copy. Talk to 

me later or get a photocopy because I think these speak loud 

and clear. 

 

Would you like a copy? Okay. I’ll take care of this because . . . 

I’ll send that over because you will be absolutely surprised at 

how severe some of these graphs show our system to be in. In 

fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, we’ll get into potholes I 

think a lot of times, Mr. Member. 

 

If I could get one of the pages just to please make a . . . 

photocopy this and send it over to that member who 

continuously heckles, and we would see if we can’t take up a 

little of his time reading along and then he’ll follow. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we take a look at . . . and I often bring a 

lot of my arguments back to ’90-91, and there’s a reason I do 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is because the present 

government, when they were in opposition — when they were 

in opposition — time and time again made the statement that 

what we had for a highway system in Saskatchewan was one 

long golf course. And they called them Grant Devine’s golf 

courses. 

 

Remember all the speeches, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I’m not 

saying you gave any, but you may have. Time and time again 

they made the statement that these highways had 18 holes to the 

mile — Grant Devine’s golf courses. 

 

What do you think we have today? What do you think we have 

today? Because when you were saying we had golf courses out 

there, there was an amount of money being spent of $155 

million. And this is for maintenance and construction. So you’ll 

have to do a little bit of work if you’ve got your Estimates 

there, Mr. Member, to follow along because we actually pulled 

out exactly the figures which go into maintenance and 

construction — $155 million. 

 

So shortfall from that ’90-91 to ’91-92, now we’re talking about 

when the change in government occurred — 15 million; the 

following year —41 million; the following year — 31 million; 

the following year — 37 million; ’95-96, the following year, 45 

million; ’96-97 — 16 million. That’s the shortfall from ’90-91 

when the present government in opposition was saying these 

highways are in terrible shape and have got to have something 

done with them. 

 

You know what that amounts to — $187 million shortfall, from 

when you said those highways need to be repaired immediately 

to today; 187 million. This year in your budget you brought 

forward $30 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ monies — not 

yours — Saskatchewan taxpayers’ monies. Out of a $262 

million surplus, you pumped in an extra $30 million — only 10 

per cent, roughly 10 per cent of the surplus — and you want 

credit? Well credit is not due. Credit is not due. 

 

What we have raised time and time again is the fact that you 

can’t even get up enough flags, warning signs, danger signs, 

whatever they are. What many of the people think they are — 

those little orange signs — they think that there’s an election 

coming up because they look like little New Democrat lawn 

signs. But they’re all over our highway system. And I’ve been 

asked on more than one occasion: who are these two candidates 

all over the province — Bump, and Danger? 

 

Through the freedom of information Act, the member from 

Thunder Creek . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well and you 

too, I see you’re chuckling. The member from Thunder Creek 

through freedom of information got some interesting facts. 

 

During the ’95-96 fiscal year, the department purchased 6,585 

warning flags — thanks, send one across please — warning 

flags of various types and sizes at a cost of $22,000. And I’m 

sure, you know, that was ’95-96, we can assume that there was 

more purchased this year. Now the question is, the question is, 

Mr. Member, when you purchased the 6,500 flags, was it   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

enough? How many times have we raised in this House the fact 

that you don’t even put up warning signs when bridges are out 

and people are destroying their vehicles? 

 

Kids on their way to school with their mothers hitting bridges 

that are being washed out. No signs, no nothing. The question 

is, do you really think that you even have enough warning 

signs? The public don’t. You get out and travel some of those 

highways and run into them. 

 

I wish I had more time today because there are so many 

interesting calls that we’ve had to the provincial pothole patrol 

line talking about . . . I’ll tell you what several of these calls are. 

People that have hit some of these potholes on our major 

highways in this province, and you know what? They’ve had 

wheels ripped right off their cars. They’ve lost transmissions; 

they’ve lost rear ends, axles . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well sure, look at the amount that we’re getting in. 

 

You think people aren’t concerned? You think people, when 

they’re filling out your survey and saying, oh yeah, we’ve got 

80 per cent of the people are satisfied with your highway 

system and then in the same document it shows just the 

opposite to be true — where is it all going to end? 

 

Well I know the member opposite now, he’s enjoying reading 

the stuff I sent across. You should come over here and see some 

of the information that I have yet to use. You’ll enjoy the 

upcoming week I’m sure, Mr. Member. 

 

But when we take a look at the amount of money that’s being 

cut back, we can’t even get out . . . or your government. I don’t 

want to say we, because we would take some of those rural 

roads, no question. But your government can’t even get out and 

take care of some of the potholes. And yet you’re bringing 

forward documents saying, we have a vision. Well, you get out 

there and drive some of those roads, you end up with a poor 

vision. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Double vision. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Double vision. There we go. 

 

And in many cases I’ve asked the Minister of Transportation 

and Highways to, you know, without being political, because 

it’s not good to always to be political, and so I’ve asked the 

member to please, at my expense, will you not get into the 

vehicle with me, and at my expense we’ll go out and take a 

drive down some of these roads, especially in the south-west. I 

know them well. And I would pick up all the expenses for the 

day or the week or whatever it was going to take. 

 

And in fact then, when I sent him across the probably couple of 

hundred of the first pothole patrol calls, I said once again, come 

along with me. Let’s go out there and see what these roads are 

like. See if the people, when they’re complaining, really and 

truly have a complaint. 

 

And the response I guess should have been expected. A written 

response back to me that as Minister of Highways and 

Transportation, I drive extensively in all areas of Saskatchewan 

— I thought they flew by government air, but — as a result, I 

am fully aware of the condition of most highways in our 

province and in addition my officials provide me with updates 

on road conditions on a regular basis. As such I must decline 

your offer at this time. 

 

Well, if the member . . . if the ministers, if cabinet ministers are 

so fully aware of the situation on some of those roads and 

highways out there, why then, when we have bridges being 

washed out, roads being washed out, vehicles being damaged, 

why isn’t something being done? Why aren’t you at least 

putting up some warning flags? 

 

One thing I will say about this legislation, and I read through it 

again last night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as long as the government 

doesn’t try and pull out of some of their responsibilities later, it 

talks about liabilities of the minister, the role of the minister, 

responsibilities and powers. 

 

But liabilities . . . and there was one section in the Bill that deals 

with just these kind of damages that we get several calls about; 

and if we’re getting several calls about them, we know that you 

are also. But this section in the Bill deals with people that are 

using our provincial highways system, and through no fault of 

their own and driving a roadway which they feel should be 

reasonably expected to accommodate their travel, and if damage 

is the result then the government is going to pick up that tab. 

 

Now the only question I’m going to have on that section until 

we’ve been to Committee of the Whole — I want you to 

consider this — is perhaps making that section retroactive. 

Because I’ve raised this with many of the members that there is 

quite a number of people that have had, you know, as I said, 

wheels ripped off, and axles bent, and on and on . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Where? Oh, here. 

 

Well here’s an example of what we’re talking about, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Constituency case file: car damage on a 

pothole patrol — I guess there is no need to mention the name, 

address in Hodgeville. The other night he and his wife were on 

Highway No. 19 near Hodgeville returning from the hospital 

where his wife was being treated for medical problems, an 

oncoming car, could not dodge the potholes which were full of 

water due to rain, both tires hit potholes bottoming out a 1991 

model vehicle; the fuel line was spurting out gas and the oil 

system was damaged, on and on and on. 

 

We’ve got several of those that we’re going to touch on. But 

perhaps what we want to do is consider making some of these 

damage claims retroactive to, I think it would be fair to say, 

back it up to ’90-91. Is there a problem with that? I mean, that 

way we know exactly if I’m wrong or you’re wrong, whether or 

not the highway system is getting much worse and going 

downhill or not. If you don’t think it does, and you don’t think 

there’s been this kind of damage, then make that damage claim 

retroactive to ’90-91 when you took office. And I guess the 

facts themselves will bear out, will they not? 

 

With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have so much more to say. In 

fact, I really didn’t get into any of my notes. I guess we’re just   



1148  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

warming up here, today. But I would like to adjourn Bill No. 

46. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1245) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. The issue in 

the Act which of course appears to be of the most public 

concern is the question of the psychologist designation of being 

granted to both doctoral and master’s level professionals. So I’d 

like to ask a couple of questions of the minister in that regard, if 

I may. 

 

First of all, if he could give me the figures, at least approximate, 

as to the number of doctoral level psychologists in the province 

and the number of master’s level psychologists. 

 

And also I did make reference in my speech yesterday and I 

wonder if the minister could talk a bit on it, that my 

understanding is that we have had doctoral level positions in 

this province go vacant for very long periods because we have 

simply been unable to recruit doctoral level psychologists. And 

I would like it if the minister would please talk on that for a 

minute. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the 

member for the question. With me by the way is Mr. Drew 

Johnston, who is the senior health professions analyst in the 

Department of Health. 

 

There are 109, approximately, psychologists in Saskatchewan 

with a doctorate. There are about 150 psychologists in the 

province with a master’s degree. Most of the psychologists with 

master’s degree are actually in clinical practice. Most of the 

psychologists with the doctorate degree, or certainly roughly 

half of them at least are not actually in clinical practice but 

would be occupying academic positions. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I wonder if the minister would just carry 

on with the second part of my question, would be that we’ve 

had difficulty recruiting doctoral level persons for certain 

positions. Does he identify that as a problem in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that is a problem in this province, and 

also in other provinces too. We have found for many years that 

to meet the needs of the public, we need to rely on master’s 

level people to provide psychological services. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — I understand that there is uniformity of practice 

across Canada as to the designation of psychologists; that in 

Alberta, master’s level professionals do have the designation of 

psychologists, and in Ontario they do not. I wonder if the 

minister could just fill me in as to whether there is any 

agreement, any standardization across the country as to what in 

fact a psychologist is? 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  There are currently five provinces that 

regulate a master’s level as well as Ph.D. psychologists, 

namely, Quebec, Ontario, Alberta, Nova Scotia, and New 

Brunswick. In four of those provinces all of the psychologists 

can call themselves psychologists. In Ontario a distinction is 

made. Of those provinces, that five provide the regulation of the 

nature we would provide, and so if you add us we would be six, 

I suppose. 

 

Then out of those six, if this Bill was passed, there would be 

one that would draw a distinction as between master’s level and 

Ph.D. in terms of who could call themself a psychologist, and 

the rest would allow all of them to refer to themselves as 

psychologists. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — So in point of fact if this Bill passes, we will be 

firmly with the majority in terms of Canadian practice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — May I ask the minister: obviously every 

profession is going to have the odd practitioner who is going to 

be a problem, but does our experience here or in other provinces 

indicate that there is more cause to be concerned with a 

master’s level practitioner versus a doctoral level practitioner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there hasn’t been any suggestion of 

that and we don’t have any evidence to suggest that. Our view 

is that all of the psychologists should be licensed and regulated 

as a matter of public policy and protection regardless of the 

nature of their academic credential. But we don’t really say that 

one needs to be regulated more than the other. We’re saying 

that they should all be regulated equally. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, given that we will in 

the new professional association have a clear majority of 

master’s level practitioners, is there any concern, in view of the 

fact there frankly appears to be a cleavage between the two 

levels, is there any concern that the professional association will 

be tilted to one group as opposed to the other. Or will they be 

able to work on behalf of the profession as a whole as opposed 

to what, frankly, we seem to be seeing right now, namely that 

there are two distinct groups here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I believe that they will, all of the 

psychologists will be able to work together cooperatively in the 

interests of the profession and the public. 

 

The cleavage is not quite so simple as the member may think. 

Let me explain. Although the Saskatchewan Psychological 

Association, which is an association of doctoral members — 

which are the only psychologists that can now be regulated in 

our province — opposes in the main the legislation, there are 

many people who have a doctorate that support the legislation. 

The association however does not; and the majority, I believe 

it’s fair to say, do not. But I should advise the member that 

there are two other organizations that support the legislation. 

One is the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan; the other is 

the Saskatchewan Educational Psychologists Association. 

 

And the reason I say it’s . . . the matter is slightly more   



April 25, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

complex than simply a cleavage between the Ph.D. people and 

the master’s level people is that some doctoral level people are 

members of the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan and 

support the position of the PSS (Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan) that this legislation should go ahead. So that in 

the main, the master’s level people dominate the PSS, but there 

are also people with their doctorates in psychology who join 

with them in supporting the legislation. And one of them, for 

example, was in the gallery yesterday. 

 

What I have said to some of the doctorate level people who are 

concerned that master’s level people should be able to call 

themselves psychologists, and they also are concerned about the 

possibility of being dominated by a master’s level psychologist, 

is that there will be a transitional council set up of nine people. 

And some of those people will be appointed by the 

Saskatchewan psychologists association. They will be 

doctorate; so that will be three. 

 

We will ask the Psychological Society of Saskatchewan, the 

master’s level people mainly, to nominate a member who is a 

doctorate member of their association to be on the council. We 

will make a similar request to the educational psychologists. So 

that it’s by no means clear that we wouldn’t be able to actually 

have a majority of doctorate level people on the transitional 

council because neither the . . . neither of the two groups that 

support the legislation wish to use it unfairly to dominate any 

other group. They all wish, I think, to proceed in the interests of 

the profession and the public as a whole. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The minister is aware that I spoke in the House 

yesterday at some length about the fact that this legislation 

gives the minister bylaw powers over the association. This is 

not a power, for instance, that the minister has in the case of the 

profession to which you and I belong. What is the thinking as to 

why the government should have bylaw-making powers over 

the association here, where I say that’s certainly not standard 

with all self-governing professions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Part of the thinking relates to the question 

that the member asked previously, which is about whether one 

group will be able to dominate another. If that was the case, if 

for example the bylaw-making provisions of the council of the 

profession were used in such a way as to discriminate against 

the doctorate level people — which we don’t have any reason to 

believe they would be and we don’t think they would be — but 

if that was so, then we would have . . . the minister would have 

the ability to prevent that kind of abuse. So I want to make that 

point. 

 

The other point I want to make is that this provision is not 

unique to this legislation. Other professions, including the 

pharmacists, the medical laboratory technologists, the medical 

radiation technologists, the opticians and the optometrists, have 

similar provisions in their legislation and have had for more 

than a decade. This is not an unusual provision. 

 

We don’t anticipate that it would be used, but if a council of a 

profession used their powers in a way that was not in the public 

interest or discriminated against any aspect of the profession, 

then in that rare event, we would have the ability to interfere 

with the bylaw-making process. We don’t anticipate that that 

would be necessary, but it actually is not as unusual a provision 

as has been suggested. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Minister, you informed me that there are 

109 doctoral level practitioners in the province. Would I be 

correct in assuming that they are by and large in the two cities? 

And I wonder if you could tell me how those numbers of 109 

and 150 link up, in your view, with need? Do you consider 

Saskatchewan to be adequately serviced for the two categories? 

Do you consider there is a shortage? A surplus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Of the 109 Ph.D. psychologists in 

Saskatchewan, 57 are in academic positions and 20 are with 

health districts. Of the ones that work for health districts, who 

would be people providing clinical service, only two or possibly 

three are located outside Saskatoon and Regina, whereas 34 

master’s level psychologists are located outside Saskatoon and 

Regina. Therefore there is a need outside Regina and Saskatoon 

for master’s level psychologists, clearly. 

 

And also, in answer to the member’s question more specifically, 

I think it would be desirable to have more doctorate level 

psychologists too. And the legislation, I think, will not prevent 

the education of more doctoral level psychologists or their 

ability to practice, but in the meantime we will recognize the 

reality that exists, that the master’s level people are acting as 

psychologists. 

 

In the same way, I might add, and the member will be familiar 

with this, that at one time you could teach school with having 

gone to normal school or a Standard A certificate, and gradually 

the criteria was raised to a Bachelor of Education degree. But 

we never, although we wanted to attain that, and I think we 

want to attain more Ph.D. psychologists in time, we’ve never 

. . . we’ve tried not to take away the ability of other people to be 

properly licensed and regulated in their profession. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1300) 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With leave, to bring greetings. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ukrainian Easter Greetings 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as many people in Saskatchewan know, of course, 

today is Good Friday for those celebrating Easter under the . . . 

for Ukrainian Orthodox. And as I indicated last year at this 

time, I know many people who will be celebrating the 

Velekden, the Easter Sunday, will be doing so by attending a 

religious church service and then of course followed by the 

blessing of the traditional Easter baskets, baskets filled with 

freshly baked holachi or the traditional, beautifully decorated   



1150  Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1997 

Easter eggs, the pysanku. 

 

To the members of the House who are celebrating Good Friday, 

as I am today, I wish each and every one of you the traditional 

Chrystos Voskres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  . . . remarks made by the member from 

Canora-Pelly. And I want to add to his remarks. My family 

traditions, we . . . many of us have met with our families, and 

we take this opportunity to get together and celebrate in the old 

traditional ways, ways that have been brought to Canada from 

parts of Europe. And it’s quite interesting to observe those 

traditions. 

 

And I do also want to wish everyone who is celebrating in this 

way this weekend the best, and the best in their gatherings. And 

also to those who may have friends who may get invited to an 

Easter dinner, it would be a real treat. 

 

And so I respond to my colleague there. In his address he said, 

Chrystos Voskres, and I respond to him, Voyisten Voskres, 

which means, indeed Christ is risen. 

 

The Speaker:  With those positive wishes for members, the 

Chair would join in extending wishes for a weekend of 

meaningful celebration and joy to all members, whether or not, 

whether or not they’re celebrating the Easter weekend, in your 

constituencies and with your families. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:06 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1123 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1123 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1123 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Murrell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1123 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Scott ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Youth Association on Tobacco Prevention 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1124 

 YWCA Women of Distinction Fund-raising Banquet 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 

 Construction of Balcarres Grain Terminal 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1125 

 National Soil Conservation Week 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1125 

 Cancer Month Recognition 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

 News Media Accountability 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

  l997 Anavet Cup Winners — Weyburn Red Wings 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

 Ukrainian Easter Greetings 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1150 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Hospitality Network Movies 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1126 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

 SaskTel Blocking Fee 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1127 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

 Health Board Information Availability 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1128 

 Condie-Queen Elizabeth Power Line 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1129 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1129 

 Voting Hours in Saskatchewan 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1130 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1130 

 Law Society Investigation 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1130 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1130 

 Manufacturing Employment Levels 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1131 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1131 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Resignation of Minister of Highways and Transportation 

  Renaud ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 



 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1132 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1133 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 46 — The Highways and Transportation Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1133 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1134 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 47 — The Psychologists Act, 1997 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1148 

  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1148 

 

 


