



















































Hansard: May 12, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1533 

 May 12, 1997 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens from the communities of Kamsack and Melville. Our 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

establish a special task force to aid the government in its 

fight against the escalating problem of youth crime in 

Saskatchewan in light of the most recent wave of property 

crime charges, including car thefts, as well as crimes of 

violence, including the charge of attempted murder of a 

police officer; such task force to be comprised of 

representatives of the RCMP, municipal police forces, 

community leaders, representatives of the Justice 

Department, youth outreach organizations, and other 

organizations committed to the fight against youth crime. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions on behalf of the many citizens of the 

province concerned with the problem of child prostitution. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places, and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

The petitioners are from Swift Current and Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I also have petitions to present 

from people who are concerned about child prostitution: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reform provincial legislation 

that may help save the lives of children who are being 

exploited for sex in public places, and stop prostitution 

which jeopardizes the safety of all citizens and their 

children. 

 

I present these. 

 

The people who have signed this petition are from Saskatoon 

and from La Loche. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on 

behalf of citizens of northern Saskatchewan; if I may read the 

prayer into the record: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the rebuilding of 

Highway No. 155, thereby ensuring adequate access for 

residents of the communities linked by this road including 

Dillon, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, and Pinehouse, and an 

access road to Garson Lake. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of Buffalo 

Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Amyot Lake, and Turnor Lake. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on 

behalf of citizens concerned with rising farm input costs, rising 

actually to unjustifiable levels. And the prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to stop 

contributing to rising farm input costs and begin using its 

influence to hold farm input manufacturers accountable for 

their decisions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those who have signed these 

petitions are from communities throughout the Thunder Creek 

constituency, communities like Vanguard, Cardross, Caron, 

Briercrest, and also from the Moose Jaw district, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk:  According to order the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 

read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly 

praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the rebuilding of Highway No. 155; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to protect the Dore, Smoothstone lakes area by declaring it 

an accessible protected wilderness area; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to establish a task force to aid the fight against youth crime 

in Saskatchewan; 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to support the creation of regional telephone exchanges; 

and finally 

 

Humbly praying that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased 

to urge the government to commission an independent 

study to review the social impact of gambling. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all  

  



1534  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

my colleagues in the legislature, a group of 50 bright young 

men and women seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are 

participants at the Canada-wide Science Fair which, as you will 

know, is being held at the University of Regina. 

 

I had the great pleasure of attending the regional science fair in 

Moose Jaw a month ago and I was most impressed with the 

projects there. So I can only just image what a variety of 

projects there will be at the university. 

 

The Canada-wide Science Fair is the national exhibition and 

forum created by the Youth Science Foundation of Canada to 

showcase the achievements of Canadian youth participating in 

the National Science Fair program. There are currently 109 

regions in Canada, Mr. Speaker, including 11 in Saskatchewan, 

which are eligible to participate in the National Science Fair 

program. So there are over 600 young scientists, ages 12 to 19, 

with over 300 science projects, gathered at the university this 

week. 

 

Please join me in extending to all of them a very warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 

to you and to other members of the Assembly, some 47 students 

from Martensville. They’re in the east gallery, along with their 

teachers, Jim Golding and Vanessa Goodwin, and 10 chaperons. 

They come from the Sask Valley School Division, which is a 

very well-known school division throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

And I love the theme that they have for their school, which is 

“on track to excellence;” they are doing things right in Valley 

Manor Elementary School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the first day of 

Child Care Week in Saskatchewan — a week where we take the 

time to recognize the importance of quality child care and the 

commitment of child care workers in the province. 

 

Caring for our children is without a doubt one of the most 

important and sometimes difficult jobs in our society. The 

people who dedicate their lives to the child care profession 

deserve our extreme gratitude and recognition. These are very 

special people to whom we entrust our most valuable resource 

— our children. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, all too often, as leaders in this province we 

arbitrarily pick a day or a week to recognize certain groups in 

society. And while I agree that it is important to recognize the 

work of all involved in the many day care centres throughout 

the province, I also would like to commend those parents who 

devote their total care and dedication and nurturing of their  

children constantly on an everyday basis. 

 

Children with positive experiences early on in life have a 

greater chance of becoming strong — physically, emotionally, 

and intellectually. And, Mr. Speaker, there are too many 

children in this province who do not have access to quality child 

care because their families live in extreme poverty. 

 

If the government is serious about quality child care, they must 

do something to alleviate the child poverty which presently 

exists in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Weyburn Red Wings Do Well in Royal Bank Cup 

Tournament 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve stood here two 

previous times to comment on the success of the Weyburn Red 

Wings hockey team — once for capturing the Saskatchewan 

Junior Hockey League title and a second time to congratulate 

them for winning the Anavet Cup. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the Red Wings were in 

Summerside, P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) playing in the Royal 

Bank Cup tournament. Approximately 116 teams began the 

season with the hope of reaching this tournament; only five 

made it. 

 

The Red Wings proved throughout the round robin portion of 

the tournament that they deserved to be there, as they finished 

in first place. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they are not able to 

capture the championship as they were defeated in double 

overtime by the host and eventual champion Summerside team. 

 

I want to congratulate the Red Wings for a terrific season. They 

have given the people of Weyburn and Saskatchewan many 

fond memories of their past hockey season, and were fine 

Saskatchewan ambassadors in Prince Edward Island. 

 

I also want to congratulate Geoff Derouin, who was named 

outstanding goalie, and Mark Hartigan, who was named most 

valuable player and top scorer in the tournament. 

 

I’m looking forward to attending the homecoming celebrations 

in Weyburn on Thursday. I’m sure members of the community 

as well as team representatives are eagerly awaiting the start of 

next season so that the Redwings can begin defending their 

titles. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rising Costs for Farmers 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I 

presented petitions from farmers and ranchers in Thunder 

Creek. Earlier this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I surveyed the 

producers in my seat to see whether they were concerned about 

the rising cost of farm inputs. Many not only responded, but  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

took the time to look through their books and provided detailed 

accounts of just how much these rising costs eroded their 

bottom line. 

 

Farmers from communities like Avonlea, Assiniboia, Chaplin, 

Rouleau, Moose Jaw, Herbert, Vanguard, Pense, and many 

others, told me that they’re worried rising costs for fertilizer, 

pesticides, and machinery parts are harming their farms. 

 

In addition they were angry about the rising costs for 

government-provided services, particularly electricity through 

SaskPower. 

 

I wrote to the input manufacturers themselves and made them 

aware of my constituents’ concerns. I also asked them to justify 

their pricing decisions. I also wrote to both federal and 

provincial ministers of Agriculture to ask them to address this 

issue. 

 

I urge the provincial minister to act. This government, which 

rakes in multimillion dollar profits from the sale of farm inputs 

like power, fertilizer, and gas, might begin that process by 

examining how its own policies harm farm families by 

contributing to the rising cost of farm inputs. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada Health Day 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is Canada Health Day, and it’s also the anniversary of Florence 

Nightingale’s birth. This is a welcome opportunity to review 

Saskatchewan’s contribution to health care renewal and to 

consider in the midst of the federal election campaign what role 

our national government can and should play in health care in 

this country. 

 

In 1991 Saskatchewan had empty hospital beds while important 

community services like home care, physiotherapy, mental 

health counselling, and drug and alcohol abuse, went 

underfunded. 

 

We increased funding in those areas while still maintaining the 

highest number of hospitals per capita in the country. We 

passed legislation to prevent a two-tiered health system. Health 

districts boards, whose members are elected and nominated by 

the community, ensure that decisions about health care are 

made by people who live in those communities. 

 

In renewing health care, Saskatchewan took a broader view of 

health, recognizing that people need shelter; education; food; a 

decent income; safe streets, homes, and workplaces; and clean 

air and water, to enjoy good health. 

 

Under the Canada Health Act the Government of Canada is 

responsible for enforcing the fundamental tenets of Canadian 

medicare. 

 

Saskatchewan people, and all Canadians, should take the  

opportunity in this federal election to remind the Liberals of 

their responsibility to provide adequate funding for our most 

cherished national program. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Watson Liquor Store Receives Award of Excellence 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As a business 

person, I know the value of an employee who provides 

exemplary customer service. 

 

Today it gives me great pleasure to bring to the attention of this 

Assembly one such employee, Audrey Painter, who works at 

the Watson liquor store. Audrey was recently recognized by the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority for her 

outstanding customer service, by the presentation of the 

President’s Award of Excellence. 

 

Audrey, who has been acting manager for the last eight years, 

has greeted customers with a smile and friendly service. One 

customer noted that Audrey has a better memory for his likes 

and dislikes than he does. 

 

The Watson liquor store has recently received the SLGA 

(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) Retail Award of 

Excellence for the class of this store. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the hon. members are aware, I come from the 

Watson area, and even though I disagree with most decisions 

made by this government, I can wholeheartedly endorse the 

presentation of these awards to Watson, and to Audrey Painter. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to add my personal 

congratulations to Audrey and the staff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Estevan Miners Commemoration 

 

Mr. Ward:  Mr. Speaker, the names of Nick Nargan, Julian 

Gryshko, and Pete Markunas are hardly know to most 

Saskatchewan citizens. And that is unfortunate, because these 

three Estevan coalminers were the miners killed in 1931 

because they wanted a fair wage for a day’s work and decent 

working conditions for workers at the time at the mines. 

 

On Saturday, I was proud to take part in a ceremony which we 

hope will help remedy this oversight and allow these three men 

to take their rightful and identified place in Saskatchewan 

history. 

 

A commemorative service took place on Saturday, first in front 

of the Estevan court-house where the Estevan riot took place, 

and then at the grave site of the three men where a plaque was 

unveiled. A large crowd was there, including labour leaders, 

present day miners, family and relatives of those who took part 

in the riot, and one survivor of that day — Mr. Pete Gimby. 

 

  



1536  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, an act of senseless violence like this still shocks us 

— or should shock us — because in Saskatchewan we do not 

approach differences of opinion with violence. The fact that we 

let it happen once should keep us on guard so it does not happen 

again. 

 

As we know, history has a way of repeating itself to those who 

do not remember its lessons. The last words on this day should 

go to Mr. Gimby when he said: 

 

It was my dream of having such a day as this, so we can 

pay respect for the three miners who died for us. I beg the 

young miners to keep this tradition every year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Students Support Manitoba Flood Victims 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am sure 

that most members of this Assembly have shared my horror at 

the devastation wrought by the flooding in Manitoba. Over 

27,000 people have been forced from their homes. 

 

Such tragedies however, tend to bring out the best in people. 

Victims of the Manitoba flood have received help from all over 

Canada, and especially from right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of attention is focused nowadays on 

problems caused by a small number of our young people. But 

the response of many young people to this tragedy reminds us 

that most young people are decent, caring, compassionate 

individuals. The students of Lashburn High School in my 

constituency fit that description and they have pitched in to help 

in the crisis. 

 

Students participated in a combined bike-athon-walkathon to 

help raise funds for the victims of the flood. Approximately 90 

students in grades 7 through 9 will be sponsored for the number 

of kilometres they run, walk, or bike around the school’s track. 

Their goal is to reach 1,100 kilometres, the distance from 

Lashburn to Winnipeg. 

 

Saskatchewan people have always been known for the . . . have 

known the value of working to help their neighbours. We know 

that cooperation and compassion helps to forge . . . foster 

stronger and supportive communities and benefits each and 

every one of us. 

 

By helping our neighbours in Manitoba, the students of 

Lashburn High are doing their bit to build a stronger and more 

compassionate Canadian community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr.  

Deputy Speaker, another day and more revelations about the 

NDP government and the NST-SaskTel mismanagement of 

public funds. 

 

Last month the minister in charge of SaskTel indicated that the 

Crown company did not withdraw from this lame duck 

investment earlier than it did because, and I quote: 

 

What was paramount in our minds was that if we were 

going to withdraw from the project, that it would be an 

honourable withdrawal and that no contracts left unfilled, 

no bills left unpaid, and no employees would be left 

unpaid. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, NST executive Merv Hussack 

contends that SaskTel is not telling the whole story, claiming 

SaskTel backed away from a handshake agreement to sell the 

U.S. (United States) company and did not fully pay almost 200 

employees who were thrown out of work. 

 

Will someone in authority explain why this government misled 

this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to 

respond to the member opposite: has been indicated by 

management of SaskTel that they have met their obligation to 

employees. I am told that there are some outstanding issues 

with management with respect to some expense accounts. I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, the employees of that corporation 

were treated fairly. Any outstanding disputes with management 

will be treated through negotiations and a final resolve will 

come to pass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, NST officials have 

obviously discovered what Saskatchewan people already know: 

this government has absolutely no honour. Mr. Minister, what 

kind of message do you think this sends out to other potential 

investors in Saskatchewan projects? More importantly, please 

explain why you continued to sink million of dollars into this 

project when you had no intention of honouring an agreement 

with your partners. Why did you not get out while the going 

was good and save Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of dollars? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me comment first 

on the, I guess, the reaction of people outside of this province to 

what’s going on in this legislature. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a 

jurisdiction where people do not feel proud and support the 

assets that they own. Members opposite are shareholders, as all 

of us are, and I want to say that these Crown corporations have 

done very good on behalf of the taxpayers and the shareholders 

of this province. But I want to say it’s quite clear that members 

of the Conservative and the Liberal Party are certainly alone in 

the support for the advancement and the proper management of 

these Crown assets. 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to SaskTel and the 

people who were working for NTS in Chicago, they were 

treated fairly as the law of that jurisdiction would demand they 

are. I’ve indicated that there are some outstanding 

disagreements with the management of that corporation, but I 

want to say not only related to the expenses of the management 

of that corporation, but to the way they ran that company. 

 

SaskPower’s Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Saskatchewan should thank the Government of Guyana for 

being upfront and honest about the sale of its power company, 

because the NDP (New Democratic Party) certainly aren’t. 

 

While the minister in charge of SaskPower refuses to provide 

details about a deal to purchase 50 per cent of the Guyana 

electrical corporation, the Government of Guyana . . . And they 

suggest the final deal is expected to close on July 1. 

 

Price Waterhouse, which is advising the Guyanese government, 

initially arrived at a sale price of $20 million. Yet the NDP with 

its proven business wisdom has agreed to purchase it for some 

$31 million. 

 

Will the minister explain why SaskPower would get into this 

venture in the first place, and why the Crown company would 

agree to a purchase price that’s $11 million more than Price 

Waterhouse has suggested? And, Mr. Minister, have you been 

suckered once again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite, I’ve read the musings of the journalist in 

Guyana as well. But I want to say that there are some 

inaccuracies in this article. 

 

I also want to say to you that the honourable thing to do would 

be to honour the letter of intent that we signed with the 

Guyanese government not to disclose the details of this letter of 

intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to do that, nor is SaskPower 

Commercial, nor are any people who work within SaskPower, 

because the honourable thing to do is honour the agreement that 

we’ve signed with them. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, let me remind that member 

one more time: there has been no deal signed; there is no firm 

price at this time through a negotiated agreement. It will have to 

come to the board of SaskPower Commercial, at which point it 

will be looked at. It will then go to the board of SaskPower, 

who will look at it again. And a decision will not be made until 

we are assured that we have bought it for the cheapest possible 

price, that the return on investment will be adequate and 

appropriate, and that any investment, if there is — and there is 

at this point not one nickel’s . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is not only paying 

11 million more than what Price Waterhouse has recommended, 

it is also investing in a utility company that requires a $210 

million investment according to the Guyanese ambassador to 

the U.S. He suggests the electric company of this third-world 

nation is riddled with obsolete systems. 

 

At the same time, the Inter-American Development Bank 

suggests Guyana’s electrical sector is in a severe crisis. This 

investment would appear at best to be a black hole, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Adding insult to the people of Saskatchewan is the fact that you 

refuse to release information which would justify an investment 

of millions of their tax dollars. 

 

Mr. Minister, what proof can you give the people of 

Saskatchewan that this deal is not going the same route as your 

gigatel fiasco; how many millions of additional tax dollars will 

you have to go into this black hole before you admit it’s a bad 

deal? 

 

Get the hell out of it now and stay out of it. You’d be better off 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to bring to 

this member’s attention that this unparliamentary language is 

not allowed in the House and I would ask him to retract that 

statement, please. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well, whatever the statement, Mr. Speaker, I 

will retract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, I can tell . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, it amazes me that the member opposite can get as 

excited as he does over a newspaper article. And I tell you, if 

you take verbatim everything that’s written in a newspaper 

article and believe it to be the truth, maybe you might have 

some cause to be upset. 

 

But I told the member opposite before, the details of the 

agreement will come to the boards — both Commercial and 

SaskPower. We will do due diligence and based on due 

diligence and analysis of the agreement, we will make a 

decision as to whether or whether not to invest money. 

 

Now I’m certainly hopeful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we can 

conclude this arrangement and make a decision one way or the 

other soon because I hate to see that member as upset as he 

apparently is today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Natural Gas Rates 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we’re after 

the minister for SaskPower, we’ll go to SaskEnergy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in late January the NDP government proposed a 

2.3 per cent rate increase for natural gas customers. The 

proposed rate increase was subject to a 45-day review process,  

  



1538  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

which is a hoax in itself. It was then to be rubber-stamped by 

this government to take effect on April 1. Mr. Speaker, today is 

now May 12 and there has been no official announcement. 

 

Will the minister in charge of SaskEnergy explain if the delay is 

an indication that cabinet is rethinking the proposal? Or is it a 

case of not wanting to make a bad news announcement which 

might harm their federal counterpart cousins in the federal 

election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you 

with respect to the federal election that the bad news 

announcement for your political party came with the “red book” 

in 1993 — a GST (goods and services tax) commitment they 

never took; $390 million a year in freight out of the pockets of 

the people of western Canada. Mr. Speaker — that’s the bad 

news federally. 

 

With respect to SaskEnergy, I would suggest to the member 

opposite that the April 1 was a request made by SaskEnergy. 

Cabinet has not had the opportunity to review in detail their 

request. We will make a decision at the appropriate time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Auto Insurance Rates 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Deputy Speaker, if they don’t like us quoting 

the newspaper, I’ll quote the government. The minister in 

charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has told 

us repeatedly that in spite of over 70 million a year being paid 

out to accident victims due to no-fault, that they’re still $112 

million in the glue. They have lost as much money. We’ve been 

told repeatedly that they’re going to have to jack up rates and 

we’re going to be facing higher auto fund rates. 

 

In view of the minister’s continual hints that we’re going to 

have our rates jacked up, he still won’t tell us exactly how much 

or when. My question to the minister is, what’s the delay in the 

announcement? Is he delaying it till right after the federal 

election? Or is he delaying it until this House closes so he won’t 

have to face the music in this House? What is the reason for the 

delay when he says we’re going be hit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member . . . 

the minister responsible for SGI has clearly indicated that the 

auto fund is in a deficit position. And I think we all recognize 

that. And there are good reasons for that. 

 

The repair costs have been increasing very dramatically. Air 

bags have been a major cause of costs with respect to the repair 

of vehicles. And those are issues that will have to be addressed. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we will look . . . It will 

come to CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) as a proposal. We will have a look at what may 

or may not be required. Our goal and our aim is to minimize the 

impact on our client group. 

 

But I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, to members on that side 

of the House, if they can’t understand the concept that these 

corporations will at some point in time have increases . . . and 

they will have decreases. 

 

SaskEnergy gave the people of this province, because the price 

of natural gas dropped, a decrease of 12 per cent in the last two 

years. They don’t want to talk about that. When the price of 

natural gas goes up, the price to the consumers are going to go 

up. It’s business, it’s common sense . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — The hon. minister has been good enough to 

explain some basic economics to us and why he has to jack up 

rates, but there seems to be an enormous conflict in our friends 

opposite over there. 

 

Every time the minister in charge of SGI tells us he’s going to 

jack up our rates, he points to the bad experience with auto 

thefts. Every time the Minister of Justice speaks up he says that 

car thefts are not a problem. He’s pointed out repeatedly that in 

point of fact several people in Regina have not had their cars 

stolen. 

 

What is the problem? Is the government not talking to each 

other? Do the ministers not communicate? What in fact is the 

line? Is the minister of SGI right that we’re going to have to pay 

higher premiums because of car thefts and house break-ins, or is 

the Minister of Justice right that it’s not a common problem? 

Which is the line the government is using today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me understand 

where the members of the opposition come from. Are they 

wanting to see rate freezes across the board? Are they wanting 

to see rate decreases across the board? Or do they want to see 

rate increases? And I think they should stand up and they 

should clarify what their position is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they want more money for health care; they want 

more money for education; they want more money for 

highways. And they want to see balanced budgets. They want to 

decrease the tax load of this province by harmonizing the GST 

— which would increase it by $180 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a little difficulty in determining 

where these members come from. I think what they want to do 

is sit down with the leader of their party, regroup, determine 

where they want to go. Because what they’re talking in this 

House makes no sense to members on this side of the House, I 

would suggest, to the media, nor to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower’s Proposed Project in Guyana 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 

the minister responsible for SaskPower. Mr. Minister, what are 

you thinking about? How can you let that old air bag, Jack 

Messer, expose Saskatchewan taxpayers to this kind of risk? 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

It’s going to cost $210 million to fix up that mess that you call a 

power company down in Guyana, and you want to buy half of 

that. That’s like someone that’s still wanting to buy Bre-X 

shares. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Guyana power company requires $210 million 

worth of repairs. If this deal goes through, you’re on the hook 

for a hundred million plus. Will you get out of this deal before 

it’s too late? Why don’t you just pull the plug on this whole 

deal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I hope you’ll bear 

with me; I’m going to take a little time to explain this. 

 

The members read a newspaper article; they get very excited. 

They talk about a $210 million repair cost to this power 

corporation. Wrong. What that is is a proposal by a consulting 

group that looked at an expansion that isn’t even being looked 

at by SaskPower Commercial. 

 

But I want to say, members of the Conservative Party and the 

Liberal opposition read a newspaper article and they can barely 

contain themselves, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell you why. 

 

They’ve been in this House for — what? — 42 days. How 

many days have we been sitting? They can’t find an issue. They 

can’t complain against the budget because the people of 

Saskatchewan are very comfortable what’s happened in this 

session. A tax decrease on the provincial sales tax of 2 points, 

$180 million — it’s little wonder they’ve got no issues and have 

to rely on Guyanese newspaper articles by some journalist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you keep 

telling us we shouldn’t believe the media reports. The problem 

is we get no information other than media reports. We ask the 

minister to release the letter of intent. He refuses, but then we 

read about it in the newspaper the next day. 

 

We ask the minister how much it’ll cost to rebuild this 

company. He refuses to answer, but we find it’ll cost $210 

million. 

 

Mr. Minister, what’s the point of all this secrecy? You could 

end all the speculation. You could end all the newspaper reports 

about this if you just simply release all the documentation 

surrounding this deal. Why don’t you do that for us this 

afternoon, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

going to help that member a little further. What is reported in 

that particular newspaper article is not the letter of intent. I am 

telling the members on that side of the House what is in the 

letter of intent is a confidentiality clause that binds both sides. 

 

And I am saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am not going to 

stand in this legislature and breach an agreement that we made  

with people who may become potential partners of ours. I’m not 

about to do that. 

 

And I say, if those members understood anything about 

negotiations, they would understand why there are 

confidentiality clauses in letters of intent and documents of the 

like. It’s to protect the interests of both people who are sitting 

down and attempting to negotiate a reasonable deal. 

 

Now they may not understand that, Mr. Speaker, but members 

on this side of the House do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if you 

pump millions of dollars into the repairs at the Guyana 

electrical company, how are you ever planning on recovering 

this money? This is one of the poorest countries of the world. 

Jack Messer just can’t wheel in and jack up rates like he does 

here in Saskatchewan. The Guyana government has already 

frozen power rates for a year and made future increases subject 

to the approval of a public utilities review commission, which 

incidentally is something we should have here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask you a straightforward question 

and I think the people of Saskatchewan would like a 

straightforward answer. This shouldn’t be the subject of a secret 

deal, Mr. Minister. Why don’t you release all documentation 

surrounding this deal and provide for the people of 

Saskatchewan an estimate on how much it’s going to cost to 

upgrade the Guyana electrical company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that a capital purchase price will be based on 

how much we can return with respect to power rates, with 

respect to electrical consumption, what it’ll cost with respect to 

repairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all of the things that are being analysed 

by SaskPower Commercial at this time. That analysis is not 

complete. Once the analysis and the negotiations are complete, 

it’ll be brought to the board of directors of the corporation. It’s 

a normal course of doing business. 

 

I want to say to members opposite, do they stand up in this 

legislature and scrutinize every business deal that’s done in this 

province, or do they just scrutinize the ones that they pick off of 

a Guyanese newspaper? 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this deal will not be completed 

unless we are sure that there is a security of our investment, that 

the amount that we have invested is appropriate in relationship 

to the worth of the assets. And until it comes to the appropriate 

people, that decision will not be made. Once that decision is 

made, we’ll share it with the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



1540  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Pornography on the Internet 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the only minister responsible for the government 

today, the minister answering the questions for SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Minister, one month ago the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

caucus identified a number of illegal pornographic use-net news 

groups available on the Internet through SaskTel’s Sympatico. 

We provided you with a list of some of the more offensive news 

groups and you made a commitment to block them. SaskTel has 

now blocked some — I repeat, some — of these use-net groups, 

but this morning we discovered that alt-sex pedophilia is still 

available through Sympatico. 

 

Why is Sympatico continuing to allow the distribution of this 

illegal material? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, the member . . . the 

minister indicated that she would respond to the member. She’s 

at a meeting this morning that keeps her out of the House. And I 

will take notice on her behalf and she will be responding to the 

member directly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, I’m glad that you’re going to take notice, but the 

minister said last month she was going to do something about it. 

 

And this is quite the age that we live in. IBM can program a 

computer to analyse 200 million chess moves a second and 

defeat the world chess champion, but SaskTel can’t figure out a 

way to block child pornography. 

 

Mr. Minister, since we raised these issues last month, SaskTel 

has blocked a number of these use-net groups we identified, but 

it still hasn’t blocked at least two dealing with pedophilia. It’s 

kind of ironic that a Saskatoon man has just been charged with 

illegally distributing child pornography through the Internet, yet 

this material continues to be readily accessible through SaskTel 

Sympatico. 

 

Mr. Minister, why isn’t this material being blocked? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice on 

behalf of the minister, as I indicated in my previous answer. 

 

Saltcoats Reassessment 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, my question is for the minister in charge of 

Municipal Government or her designate. I brought to her 

attention last week the disastrous results that resulted from 

SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 

lack of common sense approach in reassessing the town of 

Saltcoats. This government has had time to reconsider its 

pass-the-buck attitude. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is really in charge of this province’s 

reassessment? Will this government show some leadership and 

assist these people who are at the mercy of SAMA’s 

I-don’t-care attitude? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, that member, having 

spent some time and having some experience in municipal 

government, will understand that SAMA is the agency 

responsible, for goodness sakes. He will also know that it’s 

being done on behalf of the municipal governments. He will 

also know that SAMA has . . . or that SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) has representation on the 

board, that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) has representation on the board, and the 

government and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) have representation on the board. 

 

He also understands that there is an appeal process whereby if 

folks are not comfortable with their assessment, they can do an 

appeal process after having SAMA review it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, it’s not news to me that 

SAMA is in charge of the reassessment. What I’m asking: who 

on earth is in charge of SAMA? If not you, who? Someone has 

to be the overseer. You can disband SAMA if you . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I would ask the 

House to allow the member to put his question and allow the 

minister to answer. The whole House is getting a little too loud; 

so I would ask you to calm down. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

minister indicated in this House that these people have the right 

to appeal, as you have said, and more than 50 people have. Due 

to this high number, the Appeal Commission has reserved 

decision to a later date. 

 

If these appeals are passed on to the next level, it would cost 

each appellant $50 for every $100,000 that their properties are 

assessed at, just to take their cases any further. This could cost 

Saltcoats residents thousands of dollars in total just to have their 

say and to right a wrong SAMA has partially admitted to. 

 

Just once will this government do something right for the 

people of rural Saskatchewan and help right this injustice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member can 

stand up and grandstand all he wants, but he knows who’s in 

charge. He also knows that in 1985, 87 per cent . . . or 85 per 

cent of the people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  1995. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Or 1995 — voted to endorse the 

SAMA arrangement. He also knows that SARM has members  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

on that. He also knows that SUMA has. And he also knows that 

SSTA has, and that the provincial government has 

representation on it. It’s the board of directors that runs the 

operation. 

 

Certainly there’s a minister responsible for Municipal 

Government and you understand that. But you also understand 

that municipal reassessment has not taken place in this province 

for 30 years and that municipal governments were facing court 

challenges that in all likelihood they wouldn’t win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the member opposite is not as 

naïve as he pretends to be. He knows the support that the 

municipal governments gave for SAMA. He also knows its 

make-up, he knows the appeal process, and he is very well 

understanding of the whole situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Permanent Voters List 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, every provincial election 

enumeration costs this province $900,000. Now of course this 

federal election the federal government has instituted a 

permanent voters list that will do away with enumeration in 

every single election. 

 

My question is, why don’t we link up to the permanent voters 

list of the federal government so that there will be a permanent 

voters list for provincial and municipal elections as well, and 

save us a million dollars per election? 

 

And while the government is answering that question, they may 

also explain . . . a month ago they said they were considering 

linking municipal and health elections on the same day instead 

of a few days apart. Do we yet have an answer on that, or are 

we going to go to the expense of two election days this fall 

instead of one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I know they wanted to hear again from 

the Minister of Energy and Mines, but I felt I just had to say 

something today. So I want to say something today about the 

question that the hon. member asked. 

 

Saskatchewan has supported the initiative of the federal 

government to establish a permanent voters list. When we 

amended The Election Act in the last session, we made 

provision for those kind of arrangements to take place. 

 

Before the Bill was passed in parliament, the Hon. Herb Gray 

telephoned Saskatchewan and talked to me about this, about our 

support for it. I confirmed our support. We think that there is a 

great deal of gold to be mined in this particular spot, and we 

will be cooperative, and we will try to come online with a 

provincial voters list, based on the federal voters list, for the 

next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 70  The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70, 

The Archives Amendment Act, 1997, be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 71, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 72, The 

Children’s Law Act, 1997 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 74, The 

Family Maintenance Act, 1997, be now introduced and read for 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 75, The 

Matrimonial Property Act, 1997, be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the  

  



1542  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

give second reading to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 1997. This Bill is being presented in both English and 

French. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is 

replacing. The purpose of the Bill is to provide the government 

with the means to regulate the sale and consumption of alcohol 

within the province and to regulate horse-racing and gaming. 

 

The Act that is being replaced by this Bill was first considered 

by this Assembly in 1988. Since that time the Act has been 

amended on numerous occasions. As a result, the drafters made 

a number of technical drafting changes to facilitate the 

translation into French. In addition, the provisions of the Act 

were consolidated and renumbered. 

 

This Bill contains one change to the existing Act based on an 

opinion from my department’s constitutional law unit. It was 

determined that the provision requiring applicants for permits to 

be Canadian citizens was contrary to the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. As a result, that requirement was dropped 

in the Bill. Other . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Order. I have been advised 

that this Bill is a financial Bill dealing with the government 

finances, and the Crown recommendation has not been received 

for this Bill. Therefore we cannot allow second reading to 

proceed. 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

give second reading to The Children’s Law Act, 1997. This Bill 

is being presented in both English and French. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to give a brief background to this Bill and to the 

other Bills being considered today in English and French. 

 

Following the current decision of the Supreme Court in 1988, 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Canada entered into a series of agreements to recognize and 

promote the language rights of Saskatchewan francophones. 

One of those agreements provided for the translations and 

presentation to this Assembly of legislation that is of 

importance to the francophone communities. 

 

Under the terms of the 1988 agreement, the Government of 

Canada is paying 75 per cent of the costs associated with  

translation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government began a process of consulting 

with Saskatchewan francophones to develop a list of Acts that 

were of the greatest importance and usefulness to them. They 

provided us with a list of 35 Acts which they identified as Acts 

they would like to have translated. In 1995 eight Acts from that 

list were introduced and approved by the Assembly, and in 

1996 a further 10 Acts were approved. 

 

This session we are introducing six more Bills from that list. 

They are: The Small Claims Act, 1997, which has already been 

approved by this Assembly; The Children’s Law Act, 1997; 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997; The 

Family Maintenance Act, 1997; The Matrimonial Property Act, 

1997; and The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

In addition to the Acts identified by the francophone 

community, this Assembly has enacted other legislation in 

English and French, including five Acts in 1988, one in 1993, 

and a further two Acts earlier in this session — The Court 

Jurisdiction and Proceeding Transfer Act, and The Enforcement 

of Canadian Judgments Act. 

 

After the five Bills before the Assembly this afternoon are 

approved, Saskatchewan will have enacted a total of 32 

bilingual Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially identical to the Act that it is 

replacing. The Bill establishes rules respecting the custody and 

access of children, and the guardianship of their property. It 

also provides rules respecting child status and parentage. 

Enacting this Bill will allow Saskatchewan francophones to 

read the law in their own language and to feel more comfortable 

when dealing with domestic legal issues. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Children’s Law 

Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

give second reading to The Family Maintenance Act, 1997. 

This Bill is being presented in both English and French. This 

Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is replacing. The Bill 

establishes the legal responsibility to provide support to one’s 

children and one’s spouse. The claimants who are entitled to 

support are given the right to apply to the court for a 

maintenance order. 

 

This Bill incorporates the amendments found in Bill 28 of this 

session that were earlier approved by this Assembly. To 

facilitate the translation into French, the provisions of the Act 

were consolidated and renumbered, however, the Bill does not  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

change the existing law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Family 

Maintenance Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise again 

today to give second reading to The Matrimonial Property Act, 

1997. This Bill is being presented in both English and French. 

This Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is replacing. 

 

The purpose of the Bill is to recognize the joint and mutual 

responsibilities of spouses and the joint contributions that 

spouses make in acquiring matrimonial property. In the case of 

a marital dispute, the Bill allows for applications to court to 

resolve questions of distributing matrimonial property, and it 

also recognizes the right of spouses to enter into inter-spousal 

contracts. 

 

The Act that is being replaced by this Bill was first considered 

by this Assembly in 1979. During the years since 1979 legal 

drafting standards have changed. As a result, a number of 

drafting changes were made to the English version to facilitate 

the translation into French. 

 

The changes made include the following: use of gender-neutral 

terms — for example, use of his or her rather than his; use of 

shorter sentences; and use of the active voice. 

 

In addition the provisions of the Act were consolidated and 

renumbered. However, the Bill does not change the existing 

law. The result is, I believe, a Bill that is easier to read. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Matrimonial 

Property Act, 1997. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 36 — The Health 

Districts Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

The Health Districts Amendment Act attempts to clear up some 

problems surrounding remuneration for members of district 

health boards. This is only one area in my constituency, with 

the boards that I am associated with, that is of a drastic need of  

clarification. There are many other problems that need clearing 

up in the Central Plains Health District. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the budget speech of March 20, 1997, I have 

had the opportunity to sit in this Assembly and listen to this 

government generally and to the Minister of Health specifically 

speak about the year of stability that is upon us in health reform. 

I have understood the minister and the government to say that 

this year we will see an end to the destruction of health services 

that this government consciously brought upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. This year is supposed to be a period of stability 

and building; no more job loss and no more money . . . and 

more money, rather. 

 

I have also listened to my constituents who reside in the Central 

Plains Health District. What they are facing is continued loss of 

services, loss of jobs, and not enough funding for necessary 

services — completely opposite of what I am told by the Hon. 

Minister of Health. 

 

So I ask myself: just what is the truth? And my purpose today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to try to get to the truth about health reform 

generally and the Central Plains Health District specifically, 

including issues surrounding the minister’s responsibility to 

ensure remuneration ceilings are complied with through an 

order in council, which was apparently not done in 1995-96 in 

the Central Plains Health District, according to the auditor’s 

report. And because of some of these problems, I wrote a letter 

to the Minister of Health on November 14, 1996 trying to alert 

him to the escalating problems within the Central Plains Health 

District. 

 

And I told him that there was a great deal of frustration and 

anger on the part of community people, health care providers, 

community leaders, facility owners, some district board 

members, and citizens regarding the operations and 

management of that health district. 

 

I had mentioned to him that I had heard numerous complaints 

regarding the lack of opportunity for meaningful discussions at 

the district board level. And that is because the Carver model 

excludes timely input from community members. So in essence, 

people feel excluded. 

 

People in that district also spoke to me of misinformation that 

they have been given, inability to access information, 

intimidation tactics, muzzling of board members, and unfair 

tactics in decision making. 

 

I have personally tried to assist these people in getting some 

answers to their questions by submitting them to the CEO (chief 

executive officer) of the district. My letter went to him 

September 19, and to date I have not received an answer. 

 

Recently I witnessed a motion passed to close St. Michael’s 

Hospital in Cudworth. This was done in spite of the fact that 

community leaders in Cudworth worked with the process in a 

very open and intelligent manner to put together a proposal for 

an integrated facility in their community. This proposal, if 

implemented, would have saved the district money and 

provided better access. These people in Cudworth had the best  

  



1544  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

interests of the entire district at heart. 

 

It was evident to me that many board members did not have 

enough information to make an informed decision. In fact some 

board members voiced this loudly, but to no avail. The motion 

was passed anyway, and citizens of Cudworth were not allowed 

to speak until after the motion was passed. Their treatment, 

along with the additional barrage of complaints, suspicion . . .  

 

There is evidence that the decision to close St. Michael’s 

Hospital was contrived, predetermined, and certainly not in the 

best interests of the people of Central Plains Health District or 

the province of Saskatchewan. You can be sure that the 

remaining communities with health facilities in this district lack 

trust and faith in this undemocratic process. 

 

People in the constituency will not be suppressed. I mentioned 

this to the minister and I mentioned that he should expect to 

hear more on these matters as the mayors, health advocacy 

groups, and many others are uniting their efforts to take action 

to ensure that their health facilities will not become victims of 

the slash and burn mentality that has been inflicted on other 

communities and agencies throughout the health district. 

 

And I appeal to the minister to set aside the politics of health 

reform and to respond to the serious and immediate needs of the 

residents of this health district. I ask him to please not approve 

of the decision of the health board without speaking directly to 

the people involved at the community level. I mentioned also 

that these matters are serious and worthy of full investigation by 

himself as Health minister of the province. 

 

This letter on my part, Mr. Speaker, was a sincere request, an 

attempt to solve a serious and growing problem — one could 

say cancerous — that has resulted from health reform. 

 

It is my duty and my responsibility as an elected representative 

of my constituents who live in the Central Plains Health 

District, to bring to the attention of the Minister of Health and 

this Assembly, the citizens’ honest concerns and experiences. 

 

But why is it my responsibility to inform the minister? It seems 

to me that democratic institutions require a series of checks and 

balances — internal controls — to see that there is public 

accountability for decisions made and that proper actions are 

taken by those in power. We are here to serve the people. Our 

accountability is to the people and so the people must have a 

voice. Government can delegate a lot of tasks but it cannot 

delegate its ultimate responsibility and accountability to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why should the Minister of Health take my letter of November 

14 seriously? Well it seems to me that the information flowing 

into the minister’s offices come from two sources. One is from 

the board and administration of the Central Plains Health 

District through the Department of Health to the minister. The 

other is from the people through the political process — both 

the informal partisan NDP information system and the public 

political system where members of the Legislative Assembly 

represent their constituents and bring forward their questions 

and concerns. 

It seems to me that any minister, if she takes her duties and 

responsibilities as a minister seriously, must look at both flows 

of information, compare them, and ensure that they are saying 

the same thing. If this is not the case, the minister has a duty to 

identify the problem and do her best to rectify it. If she cannot 

solve the problem, then she should cease to be minister and 

someone who can do the job should be put in place. If no such 

minister can be found, then the government should be changed. 

 

In the Health minister’s case it appears that there is a grave 

discrepancy between the information he is receiving about the 

Central Plains Health District through his bureaucracy and the 

information he is receiving from the citizens of that health 

district. So that is why the minister ought to have taken 

seriously, and ought to have acted upon, my letter of November 

14, 1996. For whatever reason, the minister chose not to act, 

other than to write me a response to my letter basically stating 

that he trusted the health district is responsible. 

 

So the month passed, Mr. Speaker, and the minister carried out 

his responsibility to this Assembly and to the citizens of Central 

Plains Health District by choosing to do significantly nothing to 

help. Please note that I am not being critical of the minister. I 

fully respect his right to choose to do nothing of significance — 

a decision for which I am sure both he and the government will 

agree is part of the decision-making process for which he is 

fully and ultimately responsible. 

 

In the months following November 1996, Central Plains Health 

District Board and administration carried on undaunted. I 

expect that they had full knowledge that the Minister of Health 

had acted on his ministerial responsibilities by choosing to do 

nothing of significance. This of course, ensured the level of 

public accountability that the health district has grown to 

expect. For as we all know, consistent and repeated experiences 

over a period of time soon do become expectations. Needless to 

say, my constituents who are citizens of the Central Plains 

Health District continue to enjoy the same respect, 

consideration, and treatment as identified in my November 

letter. 

 

With the passing months and continuing experiences, 

information kept filtering out of the health district though. No 

matter how competent a bureaucracy is, a lid cannot be kept on 

everything. So in order to fulfil my responsibility to the 

Legislative Assembly and to my constituents, I wrote the 

Minister of Health another letter dated February 20, 1997. And 

I would like to read some excerpts from that letter. 

 

I asked the Minister of Health to intervene and address the 

serious administration and operational deficiencies within the 

Central Plains Health District. I mentioned to him that I had 

been advised by various community groups and individuals that 

they have either spoken to him or written to him outlining their 

concerns surrounding the process taken by the administration to 

arrive at decisions affecting the delivery of health services. The 

concern, I stated, “is that these decisions are not in line with the 

principles outlined by Saskatchewan Health.” 

 

(1445) 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

The announced closure of St. Michael’s Hospital in Cudworth 

and now the impending financial, personnel, and service cuts at 

St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Humboldt are seriously questioned. 

People find these measures are totally unacceptable considering 

the value and necessary extent of services provided through 

these highly respected institutions. I said to the minister, “Given 

the knowledge that these facilities have in the past operated in a 

fiscally responsible manner, I question the motivation behind 

the decisions.” 

 

And so again I brought matters to the minister’s attention, 

pointing out also that there was some very serious discrepancy 

surrounding the management of the Central Plains Board. The 

letters that came to me were alarming, and some of those letters 

I would like to mention in a moment, surrounded the auditor’s 

report. Because of the serious implications in those reports, I 

was asking the minister that as a responsible minister for 

Health, he take the necessary action to ensure that the Health 

District of Central Plains was responsibly managed. 

 

The following things are what I wanted to bring to the attention 

of the Assembly today regarding the auditor’s report of the 

Central Plains Health District. Some of the statements were 

alarming, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the statements 

surrounded the internal financial reports. It was stated that: 

 

In our opinion, the financial reports which were being 

received by the board did not contain sufficient detail to 

allow the board to effectively monitor the activities of the 

health district. 

 

More alarming was this statement that: 

 

The financial reporting package given to the board was in 

summary form and did not contain a balance sheet. 

 

The board (said the auditor) has not formally defined and 

documented its internal financial reporting needs. 

 

In statements under accounting records, the statement: 

 

We found little evidence of supervisory review of the work 

being performed by the clerical staff with the accounting 

department. Clerical work was not being double-checked, 

and the finance policy manual must be expanded to include 

procedural controls. 

 

And then the auditor did point to those controls. 

 

The review of the auditors also mentioned that: 

 

Our review indicated that the following control procedures 

were not being performed. Accounts receivable sub-ledgers 

were not being agreed to the general ledger control accounts. 

The accounts payable sub-ledger was not being reconciled to 

the general ledger. 

 

There was no second review of the long-term charges to 

ensure that monthly charges were correct, or that all residents 

had been billed correctly. There was no evidence that the 

payroll registers were being reviewed by management. There  

was no evidence that journal entries were being reviewed by 

management. Adjustments to client accounts receivable 

sub-ledgers were not being reviewed by an individual 

independent of the billing process. 

 

Now in regards to the capital assets, the auditors recommended 

that fixed assets sub-ledgers be established by the health 

district. Employee job descriptions — there were problems 

surrounding that. Expenditure approvals — and this is what 

brings me back to this Bill — and also service agreements with 

affiliates, there was a statement here that the board 

remuneration and expense reimbursement rates have not been 

approved by an order in council. 

 

Now that did alarm me a bit because I recognize that an order in 

council is around the cabinet table, which I believe the Minister 

of Health should have been recognizing that the Central Plains 

remuneration had not come across the table of the cabinet for 

approval. If in fact the management of Central Plains was not 

seeing to these things, it should have been evident to the 

minister just through the fact of omission —that there was 

nothing coming across the cabinet table, that there had been a 

serious omission here. 

 

There are a number of other statements in the auditor’s report 

that do point out some grave, grave, and serious problems. 

 

On May 7 I did finally receive a response to my February 20 

letter from the Minister of Health. And I’d like to bring to the 

attention of this Assembly that the minister’s response was 

there but it was very far from satisfactory. And so I guess I will 

have to accept that for now. 

 

I would like to bring also to the attention of this Assembly some 

of the following articles that appeared in the Humboldt Journal. 

And the first one was on February 13 raising concerns over the 

future of services at St. Elizabeth Hospital. In this news article 

it states that: 

 

Although no final decisions have been made, there are 

worries about the future of major services at St. Elizabeth’s 

Hospital in Humboldt. 

 

(The administrator of the hospital) . . . says (that) all areas 

are under review and nothing is sacred when it comes to 

(them) meeting the budgetary requirement of the hospital. 

 

“Everything is on the table . . . (the administrator 

mentioned) including areas such as obstetrics, anaesthesia, 

and surgery. 

 

And it is the possibility of losing surgical services that has 

Humboldt’s mayor questioning the process at hand. He said: 

 

“It is my understanding that people in the health care field, 

including the Minister of Health, contend that St. 

Elizabeth’s (does have) . . . the capacity to provide more 

surgery rather than less. 

 

(The mayor) . . . was referring to a conversation he had 

with . . . (the) Minister of Health, at the annual  

  



1546  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities convention last month. 

 

(The mayor also says that he finds) . . . it incomprehensible 

that people from Humboldt and area will have to travel to 

Saskatoon, Melfort, Prince Albert or Regina to have . . . 

(those kind of procedures performed). 

 

So it does point, in this newspaper article, to the fact that the 

minister is, on one hand, saying that we should be having all the 

services in Humboldt; on the other hand, there are such grave 

problems surrounding the management that it appears we may 

not. 

 

I have also an article from the Wadena paper that I would like 

to quote from: 

 

Communication “breakdown” a concern (in Central Plains) 

 

The provincial government has acknowledged that issues 

of health reform are of great concern within Central Plains 

Health District. 

 

(And the mayor of Wadena) . . . has promoted local 

concern at a district level since last September, as (has the 

mayor) . . . of Cudworth and (the mayor) . . . of Humboldt. 

The Mayors have also formed a coalition with 

representatives of local government throughout the district 

to address (some of) the cuts. Each of these three 

communities are targeted for changes as budget cuts to 

acute-care funding are implemented. 

 

While the communities have expressed support for the 

reform of health care, serious questions have arisen 

regarding decisions made by the Central Plains Health 

Board. 

 

After several requests, three mayors attended a meeting 

with Sask. Health representatives Kelly Richter (Assistant 

Director with Integrated Health Services . . . ) and Steve 

Petz (Assistant Department manager) on Thursday, Feb. 6. 

(The mayor of Wadena) . . . was cautiously optimistic 

about the success of the meeting. 

 

(He says) “It went very well.” . . . “Each of us expressed 

our views and Richter and Petz made notes and promised 

to get back to us with helpful (information and) solutions.” 

 

“Everyone had agreed that a breakdown in communication 

with the . . . (Central Plains Health Board) has occurred 

and that many problems relate to that breakdown,” . . . 

 

Further on in the news article, dated February 12, there are 

statements like: 

 

Under reform, all board decisions are to be made in 

partnership with affected communities. To date, it is 

believed that the current board has not given satisfactory 

explanations for why and how decisions are being made 

within the district. 

 

The mayor also stated: 

 

. . . that the general consensus is that the government has 

implemented many cuts and stabilization should start to 

occur (very) soon. He noted that Richter and Petz made a 

real effort to get the facts and figures straight and 

expressed real interest in the concerns forwarded by each 

mayor. 

 

Now in spite of the fact that all of that has happened, we still do 

not see any solutions either through management controls or to 

the funding cuts directed at the district. 

 

Now according to the article from the mayors of those 

communities located in Central Plains Health District, the 

Minister of Health has had discussions with them along with his 

department’s officials regarding the operations of the Central 

Plains Health District, and I commend the minister for being 

approachable. And I’m confident that the minister has chosen to 

become more informed about that district from sources outside 

of the Central Plains District. I am also confident that the 

minister knows full well the seriousness of the situation and the 

dissatisfaction of the citizens of that health district. 

 

Mr. Chairman, a few weeks ago I raised I raised a question in 

this Assembly directed to the Minister of Health with respect to 

the closure of St. Michael’s Hospital in Cudworth. And rather 

than dealing with my question, which was in fact a question of 

accountability and proper decision making, the minister chose 

to answer on the basis of his not taking responsibility as the 

Minister of Health, for the functioning of the Central Plains 

Health District Board and administration — a responsibility that 

is clearly identified through The Health Districts Act and 

regulations, as well as Department of Health policy and 

procedures. 

 

The minister also stated that I was taking sides in this matter. 

And I assure the minister that if a proper health plan was in 

place I would not even have to question what is happening in 

the Central Plains Health District. 

 

Well months have passed, Mr. Speaker, since my letter of 

November 14. I have not received a satisfactory reply to that 

letter or to the one of February 20. The minister has had 

representations and communications from concerned 

community leaders and citizens of Central Plains Health 

District. Despite clear and public indications of a need for the 

minister to act in carrying out his responsibilities to the people, 

he is apparently choosing to do nothing. 

 

It appears to me that the Minister of Health seems to see the 

concerns of the people as being nothing more than a lack of 

respect for local decision making by a locally elected health 

board. I am concerned that the minister has taken an overly 

simplistic view of a very serious problem. 

 

The Liberal vision of a reformed health system sees local 

decision making by locally accountable health boards at a 

community level with a view to true community accountability. 

And the Liberal vision also sees a government that cares 

enough to be involved and shows positive leadership when true  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

problems are encountered — a government that realizes that it 

is ultimately responsible for the public trust given to it by the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Two of the key ideas in a Liberal vision are balance and 

accountability. What we seem to be experiencing through this 

government’s vision is instability and finger pointing. 

 

I would also like to bring to the attention of this Assembly an 

article from the Humboldt Journal dated April 14 where the 

chairperson of the district makes a statement that he is sure that 

we are in a position to begin to formulate a plan and answer 

some of the questions which people have been asking the board 

members for months. And he states: 

 

“Altogether, the Saskatchewan Health funding for the 

Central Plains Health District will increase by $522,000 in 

1997-98, a percentage increase of 3 % over 1996-97 

baseline funding levels.” 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member from 

Humboldt has the floor and it is on the debate of the second 

reading. I’m sure that other members will have an opportunity 

to enter the debate, if they so wish, rather than hollering across 

the floor. 

 

So I would wait for hon. members . . . for the member from 

Humboldt to be finished and then they can enter the debate 

themselves. But until then I would ask the hon. members to 

please to come to order and to listen to the debate. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 

the chairperson of the Central Plains Health District also states 

that he is pleased to see that they will be receiving a funding 

increase. 

 

“. . . however, we must remember that in 1996-97 we also 

received a supplementary allocation of $662,000 so that, in 

balance, the Central Plains Health District will actually 

receive less funding from Saskatchewan Health in 1997-98 

than we received last year.” 

 

So again we look at this. With less funding, how is it possible to 

be able to retain the services at hand right now as the Minister 

of Health said should be retained? 

 

Once again we seem to have the experience that what is being 

said by the Hon. Minister of Health and this government is 

opposite to what is actually taking place in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Responsible communications and problem 

solving is essential, especially when working with something as 

important as our public health service system. Delays in dealing 

with important service and relational issues only serve to 

compound the problems. 

 

And so I would have to ask the Hon. Minister of Health: how 

bad are you prepared to let the situation in the Central Plains 

Health District become before you try to seek a solution, before 

you personally investigate this situation? 

 

Your answer may be as simple as when the destruction is  

complete. It may be as complex as this government didn’t 

consider the need for a problem resolution process despite the 

serious nature of health reform. Whatever the reason, you as 

Minister of Health have a duty to let the people know. 

 

As a part of this question, I would also like to know how the 

Minister of Health proposes to see that the problems are solved 

while respecting and encouraging the establishment of positive 

relationships between the Central Plains Health District Board 

and administration and the communities and affiliates who are 

key participants in that health district. 

 

Or is it perhaps your intention, Mr. Minister, to allow the 

problems in Central Plains Health District to escalate to the 

point that the government takes control of the affiliates? What 

positive solutions do you have? 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 2 — The Rural 

Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Many of 

the amendments proposed within Bill No. 2 will enable local 

governments to apply changes to the reassessment system. As 

we have said before, this legislation is a band-aid for the 

government’s mistakes relating to the reassessment process and 

to the hurried way that they have brought this in, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I really feel that we should have waited at least one year so we 

could test-run all the rules and regulations that have been 

brought in, ironed out the mistakes, and we could have done 

away with much of the confusion that has been caused by the 

government. The explanatory notes even admit that the minister 

and her officials did not anticipate the dramatic effect of 

reassessment. The government should have thought this through 

more carefully from the beginning. 

 

But to be honest, the mishandling of the reassessment process 

really does not surprise me because the NDP government has 

shown nothing but contempt for local governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some of the meetings I’ve 

had and the frustrations that local municipalities, whether it’s 

towns or RMs (rural municipality), have to go along with Bill 

No. 2 and the reassessment and some of the frustrations that are 

adding to their problem. I think many of these governments out 

there are feeling abandoned right now; that nobody really cares, 

nobody is helping them get through this tough time. They’re 

being left on their own. 

 

I think the cuts and the policies actually encourage people to 

leave small towns in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And Bill No. 2 and the frustrations that are brought on by it are 

only adding to this problem. 

  



1548  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to talk about the revenue-sharing cuts 

that have been passed down onto local governments, 

continually actually since 1991. 

 

This year we have seen another $29 million cut — $17 million 

to urban, $12 million to rural. And I honestly think if the 

numbers were all in it would actually be far more than $29 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every type of grant for municipalities out there 

have been cut, but some worse than others. I’d like to give you 

some examples, Mr. Speaker, that I had got from meeting with 

a number of these RMs. 

 

(1500) 

 

The RM of Shellbrook had its conditional grant cut from 

$160,000 to $63,000, a 61 per cent reduction. RM of Rosthern 

has been cut from $110,000 to $40,000, a cut of 65 per cent. 

RM of Langenburg has been cut from $115,000 to $30,000, a 

reduction of another 74 per cent on top of what they’ve already 

had in the last six years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now you tie this in to what Bill No. 2 has done with 

reassessment, and I think you must agree with me the 

frustration that these people have out there. 

 

Some of the examples of unconditional grants: RM of Meota 

had unconditional grants drop from 53,000 to 18,000. RM of 

Meadow Lake suffered a cut from 65,000 all the way down to 

$6,000, a 91 per cent cut, Mr. Speaker. RM of Golden West 

went from 37,000 to 2,000, a 95 per cent . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want 

to thank the member for Saltcoats for allowing me leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

As you will notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve been joined in 

the gallery today by a large group of people who are here with 

the Canada-wide Science Fair. This is a group that in part was 

introduced earlier by my colleague, the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. And I’d like to welcome this new group of 

people here today who are visiting and touring through the 

building. 

 

I’m looking forward tonight to joining them at the banquet and 

having an opportunity to meet with them and enjoy some of 

Saskatchewan’s hospitality. 

 

As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these folks are joining us 

from across the country, and it is a distinct pleasure to have  

them here in Saskatchewan today. So if you’d join with me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

maybe mention to the member from Regina South I would also 

like to welcome the guests here today. But being that he broke 

my concentration, I’m afraid I’ll have to start all over and read 

all these numbers out again. I’m sure the members opposite 

wouldn’t mind. But I will carry on. 

 

RM of Meadow Lake, Mr. Deputy Speaker, suffered a cut from 

65,000 to $6,000, which I had said was a 91 per cent cut. And I 

think that was worth mentioning twice. RM of Golden West 

went from 37,000 to 2,000, a 95 per cent cut. 

 

The main farm access program, which was cancelled, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is going to be a program cancellation that will 

hurt rural Saskatchewan for many years to come. 

 

And a number of the projects that were started last year by 

RMs, thinking that the government was going to assist them to 

the tune of 50 per cent and spent thousands of dollars in 

engineering fees and prelim work, are now finding out that 

they’re on their own to pick up that tab. And in many cases, it’s 

wasted money because they can’t afford to build these roads. 

 

And all we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is when we go home on 

weekends, the ones of us from rural Saskatchewan, as yourself, 

is drive on some of these rural roads and see how the 

infrastructure is breaking down now as the frost comes out. And 

the last thing we need out there is cuts to road programs. We 

need a fresh injection of money; we need the cuts to stop; we 

need the bleeding to stop; and we need somebody to really start 

to care about rural Saskatchewan and our road network. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to talk about the futures 

program which the minister so eloquently also cut. She 

cancelled this program, and the reason for cancelling — the 

only reason she could give — was because it was an accounting 

problem for the government. Well I would suggest why it was 

an accounting problem for the government goes back to the 

previous minister, Carol Carson, who in her wisdom decided to 

transfer funds to the future program into the debt. So it started 

to show as a debt, although it really wasn’t for that year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the futures program was a very good 

program. It cost the Government of Saskatchewan absolutely 

zero. The RMs actually borrowed money to fund the 

government’s share until it was time for them to pay for their 

allotment for that year. 

 

What it did was enable RMs to go out and build a stretch of  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

road for 6 miles, 10 miles, whatever their allotment would work 

out; they would fund the project, and the government would pay 

in the following years as the allotment came due. 

 

Now what we’re going to see is we’re going to see RMs 

building 1 mile of road or 1 kilometre of road a year, ripping up 

a 6-mile stretch for six years in a row, frustrating the ratepayers 

that are in that area and have to drive on these roads. And what 

are we accomplishing? An accounting improvement, according 

to the minister. 

 

If it was dollars and cents, we could even see her reasoning why 

she had done this. But when it comes down to accounting, and 

it’s not a comfortable thing for the accountants — I don’t know, 

I have a real problem with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It makes 

no sense whatsoever. And I’m sure someone — someone is 

going to pay for this mistake down the road. 

 

We should be looking at the main farm access program, we 

should be looking at the futures program, we should be taking a 

good look at it and reinstating these programs. Because our 

rural RMs out there cannot afford to pick up this tab for 

themselves, and the infrastructure is breaking down already, is 

going to get worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the RMs I met with, and actually the 

towns in that matter too, say that it worked out to about four out 

of every five of them are going to have to raise their mill rate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see why with Bill No. 2 and 

reassessment and the problems it’s caused, and the lack of 

common sense that was used to bring it in, how these people 

have so many things on their plate out there that I might even 

mention in the case of Saltcoats this week, where the mayor had 

quit this week because of the frustrations, and was finally 

convinced to come back. 

 

We are losing good people out there. Alderman, councillors, 

mayors of towns, reeves of RMs are getting to the point where 

they can’t take this frustration any more, and this government 

has left them out there to do it on their own. It just can’t 

happen. It just keeps going on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a big part of the problem with reassessment has 

been the Minister of Education’s downloading from where the 

government funded 60 per cent, RMs funded 40 per cent, and 

we have made it totally flip-flop that has led to the problem that 

a lot of these people are quitting for. Now the government funds 

40 per cent, the taxpayer right on the front line is expected to 

pick up 60 per cent that again, Mr. Speaker, it just cannot keep 

on going like this. 

 

If we want to start solving these problems out there, we should 

be reversing that trend. And a number of people in rural 

Saskatchewan want the government to fund 100 per cent of 

education. Well if we even got back to the point where the 

government was funding 60 per cent, most of us would be a lot 

happier than we are today. 

 

On top of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to solve a problem with the 

rural . . . rural farm landowner was going to pay a higher  

proportionate part of education tax because the rural land 

assessment had gone up higher. The Minister of Education and 

the Minister of Municipal Government came along and said, 

well we’ll help this problem. We’ll bring in the .84 factor, and 

we’ll take a little of this away — not all of it mind you, you’re 

still going to pay more than you were, but we’re going to dump 

some of this back on the urbanites. 

 

Well now what do we have? We have the urbanites mad at the 

rural people, the rural people mad at the urbanites, the school 

boards caught in the middle, and all these same people are 

representing people just like we are, except they are taking the 

brunt of all the frustrations that really should be pointed at this 

government across because that’s where it starts and finishes. 

 

We must also remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is the 

government that also cut $328 million from net education 

funding since 1991. I don’t think they really care about 

education, health, municipal governments or anything when it 

pertains to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And what I am saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when you bring 

a Bill in like the one on reassessment at the same time you do 

all this downloading, people out there cannot handle all these 

things in one year. Someone has to take a look at this, realize 

this, and realize that without rural Saskatchewan this province 

does not survive. 

 

I have heard the comment come from across; in fact I’ve heard 

the Premier say that unless rural Saskatchewan survives, this 

province doesn’t survive. Then why in God’s name is that 

government trying to kill rural Saskatchewan? Local 

governments have no choice but to raise mill rates. The local 

taxpayer is picking up the tab. Even though the books are 

balanced in here, they aren’t going to be balanced for long out 

in rural Saskatchewan whether you live in a town or in an RM. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to light also the part that the people 

of my home town of Saltcoats have been trying to put up with 

the frustration, and it comes directly with reassessment and Bill 

No. 2. 

 

SAMA in it’s wisdom has come out there and thought, well 

we’ll compare the town of Saltcoats, a little town of 540 with a 

small lake beside it, and I honestly think that SAMA must have 

figured this was the Mediterranean or the Red Sea or something 

and the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Well it’s a pretty little town. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Yes, and you could park your yacht in from 

in front of your house. Because no common sense was used 

here at all. 

 

Now the problem gets bigger, Mr. Speaker, when no one want 

to accept responsibility for SAMA. And I realize, yes, SARM 

has three members on the board of directors, SUMA has three 

members, and the government has three members. 

 

But the minister must realize that SAMA was set up by the 

government of the day when they were set up, and I would  

  



1550  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

suggest if SAMA had to be disbanded, it could be disbanded by 

the government of the day. And if it can be disbanded by this 

government, then it can be controlled by this government and 

leadership can come from that side of the House — leadership 

has to come from that side of the House. Someone over there 

should help these people when they’re in the position that they 

are in. 

 

And the problem being, Mr. Speaker, that along with this higher 

assessment that this town has had, and far higher, in fact double 

compared to some communities of the same size, once again 

comes along the education tax. And the problem I have with 

that, Mr. Speaker, and the residents of the town of Saltcoats, is 

that once we are stuck with that higher assessment, we will 

never get rid of it. 

 

For an example, Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell you that in the 

next 10 years comparing the town of Saltcoats to eight miles 

down the road to the town of Bredenbury which is a minusculey 

bit smaller than the town of Saltcoats, between policing and the 

additional education tax, the town of Saltcoats will pay $1 

million more in tax than they were before, compared to their 

neighbouring town. That should tell you right there there’s been 

a problem with reassessment. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now the SAMA officials admit yes, we have made a little bit of 

a mistake here, but they have that attitude that really who are 

you to question us. Unless two and two doesn’t add up to four 

you have no right to appeal. 

 

Well I question that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When the numbers 

prove that there has been an injustice done here, out of a little 

town there’s been 50-some appeals, this should tell the minister, 

and SAMA for that matter, that something is wrong with their 

numbers and they should go back out and totally, totally, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, reassess this town and do it with some 

common sense in mind. I think everyone would be much 

happier out there, and I would be willing to bet that this 

government would receive a lot less heat over this, because this 

one is not going away. 

 

I honestly believe that some of these things that the government 

does is that same old adage, that we want to divide and conquer. 

If we have the RMs fighting with the urbanites, we have the 

urbanites fighting with the RMs, we have school boards looking 

over to see what little piece of pie they can get, people forget 

where the problem started, and it started across with this NDP 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, everything this government does, whether 

it was health care with the wellness plan, where we got people 

mad at the health boards and we dumped the blame on the 

health boards, when really where did wellness come from — 

the previous health minister and the government across. 

 

Then we had things come out to do with education and the 

higher education taxes. And we try and divert the attention from 

the government and pass it on to the school boards. Well the 

school boards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only thing they can  

do is pass it on to the local ratepayer because of all the funding 

cuts this government has put on them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, out in Saskatchewan we are very proud 

over the years to have a strong community spirit, but in the last 

number of years this has really worked at our strength in 

holding up that community spirit. I know we will prevail in 

spite of this government, but it would sure be nice for once to 

work with this government and survive out in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have . . . I’d like to 

just touch on amalgamation, and I don’t believe this problem 

has gone away. And part of the frustration with Bill No. 2 I 

think also ties in with amalgamation. 

 

And the one thing I would like to just quote from, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is a study that was done on older adults in 

Saskatchewan. And actually this comes back from October 26 

of ’93 and it comes from a Jim Fodey, chief of staff for the 

NDP. 

 

This is a study done on checking out the elderly — where they 

live and the problems going to be created from the elderly. And 

I believe this study was well worthwhile doing. What I have a 

problem was, is what this government took from this study and, 

oh-oh, what are we going to have to pay for it out in rural 

Saskatchewan on account of it. 

 

I’d like to quote, Mr. Speaker, part of this study. And it says:  

 

The rural Towns and Villages of southern Saskatchewan 

provide a mirror as to what the province as a whole may 

look like in 40 years if present trends continue. With very 

large older adult populations, these municipalities are faced 

with eroding tax bases and considerable stresses in the 

provision of health care and other elderly-oriented services 

and facilities, especially since many young 

economically-active individuals leave these communities 

due to the lack of job opportunities. 

 

Towns and Villages, like Rural Municipalities, are 

experiencing significant population decline along with 

their aging trend. 

 

And I think we find that more true every day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I’m sure you do in your area, where our farmers’ 

average age is increasing gradually. 

 

It may eventually prove desirable to politically amalgamate 

the Towns and Villages with their adjacent Rural 

Municipalities. (And here’s where it gets interesting, Mr. 

Speaker.) This would create larger units to more 

effectively support the infrastructure of local government, 

while “normalizing” the population pyramid by combining 

youthful and elderly populations. 

 

I always wondered where this government was getting the 

foresight to think that amalgamation was a wonderful thing.  

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

And I guess this tells it all. Because some study said, well what 

we will do is amalgamate the towns and villages and RMs, and 

then people can’t say, well all we have left in rural 

Saskatchewan is old people, because this new project will 

amalgamate them with the young people. Let’s bring the 

average age down by 30 years. 

 

I have never read anything so ridiculous in my life, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Minister of Municipal Government is fell for 

this one. In fact the whole government must do, because she’s 

still the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from another part of this 

study. And it goes on to say: 

 

A large number of older adults remain in the more isolated 

rural areas of southern Saskatchewan, despite the tendency 

to relocate to larger settlements. For these individuals, 

problems of accessibility to services and facilities will 

remain a serious problem. (And I agree.) Should all or 

some of these needs be addressed under the present 

distribution patterns, or should older adults (and this is the 

interesting part) . . . should older adults be encouraged to 

relocate to centralized locations, where a “critical mass” of 

individuals exists to allow optimum delivery of services? 

 

Well doesn’t this one hit home, Mr. Speaker. Close the rural 

hospitals, move the old people into the cities, and we can give 

them the best care that we have. But don’t leave them out in our 

rural communities where they actually were born, raised, raised 

us, our families. No, we can’t afford to keep them there any 

more. Let’s move them into the cities. 

 

And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what the opposition from all 

sides here has been saying is that you’re killing rural 

Saskatchewan by closing our rural hospitals; you’re killing rural 

Saskatchewan by closing our schools; you’re hurting rural 

Saskatchewan by the funding cuts you are dumping on us. 

 

And when we go back as far as 1993 and this study that was 

done by this government, it starts to make the picture look real. 

Where did all these ideas come from? A study a way back then 

that tries to figure out how can we get away from providing 

services to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And now 

I think I can see what’s happening. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a number of other questions on Bill 

No. 22, but at this time I would pass it on to Committee of the 

Whole and get my questions answered there. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Ms. Teichrob that Bill No. 3 — The Urban 

Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I certainly hope that the members opposite have been 

paying attention to all the concerns that we’ve raised 

concerning these municipal Bills in the past few months, 

because we are relaying the real stories of the people forced to 

deal with this government’s municipal policies every day. 

 

Bill No. 3, The Urban Municipality Amendment Act is 

necessary in order for communities to implement the 

reassessment program changes. Some communities say they 

will now use the new power to decide if they want to increase 

the reassessment phase-in period from three years to six. 

 

As my colleagues have pointed, the problem with the six-year 

phase-in period is that the minister is admitting that she did not 

properly plan for the reassessment process in the first place. The 

explanatory notes that were issued along with Bill No. 3 state, 

and I quote: 

 

Among re-examination of the impacts that reassessment 

will have on some specific economic sectors, it has been 

recently determined that some of the shifts are more 

dramatic than originally anticipated. 

 

I have spoken to many communities within my own 

constituency that are extremely upset with the way this 

government has handled — or rather, mishandled — the 

reassessment process. What we are seeing right across 

Saskatchewan is numerous examples of communities already 

devastated by revenue-sharing cuts. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With apologies to the member from 

Melville, to ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I again 

want to apologize to the member from Melville. I was going to 

allow him to go on a little longer but unfortunately the last 

Liberal speaker drove off the student group so early, I thought 

I’d better get in a little quicker on this one. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is again my pleasure today to introduce 

to you a group of very bright young people who are joining us 

in the gallery from across Canada. These people are here in 

town for the Canada-wide Science Fair which is being held at 

the University of Regina, and I will not take . . . A nice, big 

wave. That’s very pleasant. 

 

I hope that they enjoy their time here in Saskatchewan and the 

debate in the Assembly this afternoon, although my 

expectations aren’t that big on the debate part. I simply ask 

members to join in with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



1552  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just because of 

those comments, I’ll start all over again. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many communities throughout rural 

Saskatchewan are finding that their funding cut-backs are much 

more than the 25 per cent forecast by the minister initially. In 

fact there are several communities that are facing cuts of more 

than 40 per cent. We are seeing many articles in local 

newspapers in which mayors, councillors, and other 

administrators are trying, they’re trying their best to explain to 

residents that they have nowhere else left to make cuts. The 

funding withdrawals they have been forced to cope with since 

this NDP government came to power are now insurmountable. 

Many of these people say they have no other choice but to raise 

their mill rates. 

 

So for the NDP members opposite, who can’t seem to 

understand what devastating effect this is having on 

Saskatchewan communities, I’ll gladly spell it out for them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Thousands of Saskatchewan people are being 

forced to pay higher property taxes this year not only because of 

reassessment, but because of the revenue-sharing cuts levied by 

this provincial government. That is nothing more than 

back-door taxation. This is the same back-door taxation that 

NDP candidates supposedly took the Tory government to task 

for in the late ’80s and the early ’90s. 

 

An NDP caucus document from 1991 called Tax Fairness for 

the 1990s says on page 4, and I quote: 

 

People are concerned that provincial government 

underfunding of local government caused an increase in 

the local property tax burden, which is unfair and 

regressive. 

 

Later, on page 8 of this same document, the NDP caucus writes: 

 

Saskatchewan people are becoming increasingly concerned 

by the PC provincial government’s pattern of shifting the 

tax burden onto local property taxpayers, a tax shift that 

amounts to a back-door tax increase. As a result of this 

policy of underfunding local governments, the direct 

provincial share of the total school board costs has dropped 

significantly from 54 per cent in 1981 to 49 per cent in 

1989. 

 

This from an NDP caucus document, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Oh, 

how soon they forget. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really too bad Bill No. 3 was not 

more than an admission that this government has bungled the 

reassessment program. The Minister of Municipal Government 

and all the government members opposite should at least try to 

live up to their own promises. But the fact of the matter is  

Saskatchewan property owners are now picking up as much as 

60 per cent of the education costs. 

 

I realize that the members opposite don’t like to hear that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They keep chirping about the fact that they 

really don’t care about what’s happening to people in rural 

Saskatchewan. And that’s evident. That means that the 

government’s share of education funding for the K to 12 system 

has dipped to 40 per cent or less. 

 

The numbers show this NDP government is not only disabling 

local governments by way of vicious funding cuts, but since 

1991 this NDP government has also slashed, has also slashed 

$328 million in net funding from Saskatchewan’s K to 12 

system. That’s shameful. Is it any wonder, is it any wonder 

Saskatchewan people are growing more and more frustrated 

with this NDP government? Time and time again they are 

forced to reach into their wallets to pay for government 

mistakes and mismanagement. 

 

(1530) 

 

While Bill No. 3 may give local governments more authority 

and options when dealing with reassessment, the minister and 

her officials should have more carefully considered the 

consequences of reassessment before the program had started. 

Why not delay it for another period of time? Try it out and see 

where all the difficulties and the problems that would be 

encountered — have a test run. No, they wouldn’t consider 

doing that. I’m getting many phone calls from town 

administrators who are absolutely fed up with the problems of 

SAMA and the reassessment debacle. 

 

Swift Current had to issue several notices of reassessment 

because every time they issued one notice to property owners, 

the government was forced to tinker with the program again. As 

a result the city of Swift Current was forced to absorb the extra 

costs and residents were forced to sort out the confusion. And I 

don’t hear anything from the member representing Swift 

Current saying anything about that. 

 

Last week and again today my hon. colleague from Saltcoats 

brought up the case of the reassessment fiasco in Saltcoats. 

Property owners there are outraged — and you can’t blame 

them — that their community has been assessed as one of the 

most costly categories because Saltcoats is considered to be 

either a bedroom community of Yorkton or a resort community 

because of a nearby small lake. 

 

So while property owners in Saltcoats are facing property taxes 

as high as $30,000 — $30,000 on some lots — just down the 

road in Bredenbury, and my hon. colleague referred to it, the 

same type of lots, the same type of lots are assessed at an 

average of $300. There have been at least 50 appeals filed so far 

and several letters written to SAMA officials demanding that 

this mess be sorted out. 

 

Yet when we brought up this issue in the House last week, the 

minister was unwilling to even address the problem. The people 

of rural and small town Saskatchewan are feeling totally 

abandoned by this government. 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

If the Minister of Municipal Government will not accept 

responsibility for her own portfolio, where are these people to 

turn? This lack of planning, lack of accountability, and lack of 

leadership, and a refusal to accept input on the reassessment 

process, are all symptoms of the arrogance of this NDP 

government. 

 

This legislation may help facilitate the reassessment process, 

but the reassessment process is creating huge divisions between 

local governments right across Saskatchewan. 

 

This government must not place the funding for our children’s 

education at the heart of the reassessment mess. But that is 

exactly what’s happening. Local school boards are placed in the 

middle of this controversy because this government refuses to 

accept the responsibility for adequate funding for local 

governments and education. 

 

While the minister wrongly claims that everything, and I quote 

what she said, “is fine in municipal land,” smaller communities 

are trying to deal with drastic cuts to the revenue-sharing pool. 

SUMA states that even after the removal of health levies, the 

cut could still be at least 36 per cent for some communities. 

 

Dozens of towns and villages across Saskatchewan are finding 

themselves in the cross-hairs of this government. Massive 

revenue-sharing cuts, coupled with the underfunding of the 

education system, amounts to nothing more than a direct attack 

on Saskatchewan communities. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to be able to enter this debate on behalf of municipal 

government in this province. 

 

I must say that I think my colleague, the hon. member from 

Saltcoats, has done an excellent job in pointing out the havoc 

and devastation caused by this government on some of our 

smaller communities and on rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think it is important, I think it is important to remember in 

this debate that it is also our larger communities, including the 

two largest cities, that are affected by this government’s passing 

the buck, this government’s abrogation of its responsibilities, 

this government’s not caring about local government. 

 

And I have been saddened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the fact that 

we have all these members from Saskatoon and Regina who 

don’t seem to think these issues are important or significant, 

who do not seem to see the need to stand up and defend 

municipal government, even in our larger cities. 

 

And of course we know what the NDP attitude is in terms of 

our small communities in rural Saskatchewan. I mean we’ve 

long realized that close and attack is the only NDP rural policy. 

But I think we’re surprised now to find that in the case of 

Saskatoon and Regina even, those cities will have to look 

elsewhere for someone to defend their interests; they’re not 

going to find them in the MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) I see opposite, who are grinning to themselves as I  

talk about the problems with municipal government in our 

larger centres as well. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the problem of 

reassessment. Now everybody agrees that reassessment needed 

to be done. Of course the last time they had reassessment in this 

province was under the Liberal government in the ’60s; the last 

government that seemed to be interested in getting things done; 

the last government in this province that seemed to be interested 

in getting our roads paved. They’re also the last ones who had 

reassessment. So it took over 30 years to have reassessment 

done. 

 

Because reassessment had been left for over 30 years, it was 

bound to be disruptive. I think we all acknowledged that; we all 

accepted that. But certain things could have been done in order 

to manage the dislocation. 

 

What were these things, Mr. Speaker? Well first of all, if it had 

been done in an atmosphere of stable funding. Well what 

happened? Reassessment came in the same year as the minister 

of Municipal Affairs took the meat cleaver out after 

revenue-sharing grants to our municipalities. 

 

The minister of the machete brigade went to the 

revenue-sharing grants, and municipal grants for urban 

municipalities were cut an average of 42 per cent. In the case of 

my own community of North Battleford, it was 47 per cent. So 

there is half in one year; the same year as reassessment. So 

either one would have been a serious problem, but you throw 

both into together and you have catastrophe. 

 

What are some of the other things that could have been done to 

ease the pain of reassessment? Well if the assessment figures, 

the reassessment figures, had been in the hands of the urban 

councils on a timely basis, preferably six months or a year 

ahead of time. Well what happened? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see what happened was that the 

reassessment figures were not put into the hands of the councils 

until well into this taxation year. So consequently the town and 

city councils found that they were not able to formulate tax 

policy, to send out assessment notices, to set the mill rate, 

because they were still getting new figures on assessment from 

the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. 

 

And worse yet, they seem to get new figures from SAMA every 

few weeks which . . . you know, another letter from SAMA 

saying, throw out the old figures; here is the new figures. And 

this went on and on, and so, you know, every time the town 

council or city council would say, well are these last ones? — 

well we don’t know . . . (inaudible) . . . And of course they 

weren’t the last ones. 

 

So what happened was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saltcoats this 

morning, we heard on the radio the Rev. Walter Farquharson, 

former NDP candidate, saying the problems he has — retired 

minister, not a wealthy millionaire. Of course you know over 

there, they’re always saying tax the rich. Tax the rich. Well now 

the truth comes through, who they’re really after. Here’s this 

retired minister in Saltcoats, lifelong supporter of their  

  



1554  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

party, and he’s practically being driven out of his house by this 

tax-the-rich philosophy over there. 

 

And then we see, then we see in Swift Current, in Swift Current 

. . . in Swift Current we had the city council receive four 

different assessment figures from SAMA. Finally, after the 

fourth one, they voted unanimously to request the resignations 

of the heads of SAMA. 

 

And in North Battleford last week, my friend, Councillor Glenn 

Wouters, again sometimes associated with friends opposite, he 

said that SAMA is causing nothing but trouble. SAMA’s 

causing nothing but trouble in the city councils trying to 

manage tax shifts. And yet this government refuses to take 

responsibility. 

 

I see the Hon. Minister of Education doesn’t seem to believe 

this. Please read the lead article in the North Battleford 

News-Optimist and the details are all there if you think in any 

way I have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I have taken it any 

way. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, yes I’m trying to put a human face 

on the fact that this government has not taken responsibility for 

the reassessment. This government has had reassessment come 

in in the same year as 42 per cent cuts to municipalities and this 

is creating chaos in all municipalities in this province. 

 

Well we have also the tax tools, the tax policies that were going 

to be available to our municipalities. They should have been 

available a year ago. Instead we’re debating them here in this 

Assembly today. We’re talking about six-year phase-in period. 

Well how can there be a six-year phase-in period when (a) it’s 

coming in this year and (b) there’s going to a rolling phase-in in 

only three years time. I understand that the six-year phase-in 

that we’re talking about may be used by as few as one 

municipality in the whole province. 

 

Well I see the Minister of Education doesn’t want me to 

personalize but it’s already been mentioned that Meota received 

cuts of 53,000 to 18,000 in one year. Now one of the 

councillors there of course, is my opponent in the by-election, 

Glenn Tait, who said that if he was here he could bring pressure 

to bear on the government to give a better deal for us in the 

North Battleford constituency. Well he hasn’t done a very good 

job of it in the case of his own council. Whether he could do a 

better job in here I don’t know. 

 

But the one thing we do know is that in spite of his enormous 

influence with this government, his council has been cut from 

$53,000 down to $18,000. So that doesn’t sound like a lot of 

influence to me, and I just hope he can have more positive 

influence if he does succeed and he is MLA for North 

Battleford. 

 

Well my colleague from Saltcoats has already pointed out that 

this government, through its municipal funding policy, has 

pitted Saskatchewan people against Saskatchewan people. We 

have rural against urban; we have condominium home-owners 

against other residence owners; we have schools districts 

against municipalities. And that is a direct result of the fact that  

the property tax is now bearing about 60 per cent of education 

costs. When this government took office it was only 40 per 

cent. So there’s a 20 per cent increase that’s being borne by the 

property taxpayer, and that is causing great stress to property 

owners, but it’s also causing stress between our school districts 

and our municipalities. 

 

In terms of our small communities, we find that the problems of 

rail line abandonment is another thing that is going to seriously 

affect their tax base. And we’re very worried about the tax base 

of our smaller communities. 

 

Well I was speaking with the council of the RM of Val Marie 

recently. They tell me that they’ve had several bridges affected 

by washouts from the flooding of the Frenchman River this 

spring. Of the several bridges affected, only one qualifies for 

any provincial help. 

 

So the problems we see run right through the entire piece, 

whether you’re talking about rural municipalities, our small 

villages, towns, our cities, right up to Regina and Saskatoon. It 

doesn’t matter who you are looking at, the same issues are here; 

and respect for local government, respect for property owners 

and ratepayers is simply absent in this government. 

 

And while we have a strong contingent here speaking on behalf 

of farmers and property owners in our rural municipalities, I’m 

very disappointed that we haven’t heard more from our MLAs 

from Regina and Saskatoon and Prince Albert and Moose Jaw 

on the pressures that reassessment is causing to our cities and 

our towns. And I would encourage members opposite to talk 

about some of the letters and the phone calls they must be 

getting — I know we’re getting them — on the pressures of 

reassessment. They must be getting them as well. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of 

things all coming together to municipalities this year — the 

reassessment, the 42 per cent cut to revenue sharing, to grants, 

and the inability of SAMA to present timely assessment 

information and assessment values to the municipalities so they 

can get busy and try and manage the shifts. 

 

Any one of these on its own, any one of these in and by itself, 

would have caused enormous problems for municipalities. But 

you throw them all in together and you get chaos. 

 

The problems that we were going to face this year would still 

have been there, but they could have been managed much, 

much better and with far less dislocation if we had a provincial 

government that cared, if we had a provincial government that 

could properly manage the challenges facing this province, and 

especially local government in this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1545) 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

Bill No. 34 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 34 — The Young 

Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

just a few comments on this Bill, The Young Offenders’ 

Services Amendment Act. 

 

When the minister was speaking the other day, he made a 

comment or commented about the fact that it was evident that 

the formal, court-centred system of dealing with young people 

who break the law has, for at least some individuals, met with 

very limited success in both terms of accountability to victims 

and in terms of reducing the likelihood that the youth will 

re-offend. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly can agree with the 

minister on that. It’s an issue that our caucus and our party has 

talked about for a number of years; an issue that I’ve actually 

had the privilege of talking about with the former Minister of 

Justice in this Assembly, and the current minister, and now the 

member responsible for Social Services. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, across this country people are quite 

concerned about the Young Offenders Act, and there are a 

number of issues that, even in this current federal election 

campaign, that different parties are taking stands on as to how 

you address the Act; how you change it to make it an Act where 

people are more accountable for their actions. 

 

However, the Young Offenders Act is certainly an area that is 

the jurisdiction of the federal government and not this province. 

But certainly input from the province . . . I’m sure the federal 

government and members of the justice committee in Ottawa 

would certainly appreciate when you would discuss that issue. 

 

But when it comes to young offenders in this province, there are 

areas where we can take some responsibility. And this specific 

Act is addressing issues and concerns that relate to the actions 

of young people and how you deal with them and whether you 

. . . If you just go through the formal court system and you find 

a person guilty of break and enter or car theft — as we’ve seen 

certainly in the city of Regina it’s been quite prevalent over the 

last year — and incarcerate these individuals, Mr. Speaker, I 

think, and as the minister indicated, there is certainly more and 

more evidence showing that just to incarcerate . . . first of all, 

get a conviction and then incarcerate a person for a time period 

in a jail system does not help that person become accountable 

and recognize the responsibility they have for their actions. 

 

I think what the minister is suggesting — what this Bill is 

intending to do is bringing victims together with the offenders 

— is something that may in the long run keep more young 

people out of jail and maybe help them and assist them in 

building their character and creating value in their lives — 

making them, giving them, helping them to become more 

productive people in our society. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the comment the minister spoke about 

when he talked about restorative justice is something that is 

certainly positive. And I appreciate that and I think it’s certainly 

something that we need to work towards. 

 

And I think that there was one example the minister had 

mentioned, as well, where he had been involved in . . . a means 

of a young offender being brought face to face with a victim. 

And afterwards, speaking to the individual and his comments 

. . . or the person’s comments were, it’s much, much easier to 

go to a court where they can remain silent, represented by 

professional legal counsel and sheltered always from any 

contact with the individual, the victim, that they have hurt. 

 

So there’s a strong indication, Mr. Speaker, and I think you find 

that in families as well, if a parent says there will be some 

penalties if you disobey the rules of the house and you stretch 

the parent to the limit and the parent applies the law, a young 

person generally, finally realizes after a parent has finally 

shown them what the consequences are that it would have been 

easier if they would have obeyed the parents’ command rather 

than disobeying. 

 

And I think this is a good example as well. When you bring a 

young person before a victim, that individual is all of a sudden 

made more aware of the consequences of their actions — when 

they have to deal with the victim who’s maybe had a car ripped 

off. The person may have just bought that vehicle, it’s cost them 

a significant amount of money, and all of a sudden this vehicle 

is in for a major repair. And to that victim rather than having a 

very . . . a good quality vehicle, now they’ve got a vehicle that’s 

maybe had 8 or $10,000 worth of damage to it, and it’s a 

repaired vehicle. 

 

And I don’t know of anyone who really wants to drive around a 

vehicle that’s been in a major accident. And they feel 

victimized. 

 

Or you’ve had things stolen out of your house. You’ve worked 

hard to begin to provide for yourself and to . . . maybe that 

stereo system or that TV that you worked for a number of 

months to put aside money so you put it in the house. Those are 

things, Mr. Speaker, that if you just go to a court system, 

individuals do not realize that the hurt they create on the 

victims. 

 

And so by bringing them together I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this Bill I think will go a long ways. And it 

certainly addresses some of the concerns that our caucus has, 

that I’ve had. And I look forward to working with the minister 

and in working through this program, and not only working on 

what we have here in the legislation that we have here today, 

but also building on it so that we can create a better society in 

which we can live and which people can feel comfortable and a 

lot safer to live in. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

  



1556  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Bill No. 59 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No 59 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la 

Loi sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just a few 

comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before my colleague, the 

member from Rosthern, wants to add some comments to this 

Bill as well. I understand that the Bill certainly does deal with 

some clarifications. And I understand as well when translation 

of the legislation into French was undertaken, there were a 

number of omissions and errors that arose and this Bill is 

clarifying that. But beyond that there are a few issues in the Bill 

that I think need a further debate and I won’t take a lot of time 

to debate that. 

 

The question of amendments related to school year day issues I 

think is something that a lot of boards will certainly be pleased 

to see as they begin to look at alternative ways of providing 

education. And certainly I know one of the concerns in the 

school division that my family . . . that I grew up in and that my 

family are attending today is the major concern about the start 

up of the school year and the fact when they moved to the 

semester system, the finals for the first semester were coming 

into the January period. You’d have that Christmas break and a 

lot of students found that difficult. 

 

And I think boards and teachers are looking at the fact — and I 

think students are mostly in agreement with this as well — that 

to move the start-up date into August and conclude your first 

semester before the Christmas break is something that I think 

everyone really feels strongly about. And they feel that it’s 

important that that be allowed. So that’s an issue I think that a 

lot of people are going to be looking at and following it very 

closely. 

 

Another issue is the clarification of the length of school days. 

And as you may or may not be aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there was a fair bit of debate last year when the school division, 

the Scenic Valley School Division, decided to take the minister 

at her word and became a little innovative with an idea as to 

how they could implement the budget cuts that were pressed 

upon them in a manner that would mean the least number of 

teaching positions that they would have to cut and yet still 

provide quality education. 

 

And they brought forward the experimental four-day school 

week, adding a lot of the other services that weren’t directly 

related to the curricular activities onto the Friday. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, from what I find in talking to the administrator 

and parents in the area, there seems to be quite a consensus that 

the four-day school week is working well. 

 

The concern that I have here is that this provision may 

discourage other school divisions from looking at this as an 

alternative — at the four-day school week. 

 

But in general, the Bill before us I think brings forward a 

number of positive ideas. We just wanted to make sure that the  

issues that we may have concerns or have some concerns with, 

we took the time to certainly bring them to the attention of the 

individuals involved. whether they be teachers or school boards 

or unit divisions, make sure that . . . get their feeling on the 

matters before we certainly allow the Bill to proceed. 

 

And I know other members have spoken on this Bill, and I 

realize our critic for Education would like to add some 

comments. So therefore I’ll take my place and allow other 

members into the debate on Bill 59. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As my 

colleague just mentioned, there’s a lot in this Bill that I think we 

are totally in favour of. It does have a few problems and a few 

concerns and I think we need to address those. 

 

I think also in the last day or two or three we’ve received . . . 

I’ve received substantial information from both sides of the 

issue on this Bill and I think as that information continues to 

come in, we need to continue to look at this and make sure that 

we’re going down the road correctly. 

 

We often talk of local autonomy and how local municipalities 

and health districts and local school boards should be allowed 

to make decisions, what’s best in their own communities. And I 

think by and large, we totally agree with those sorts of things. 

 

Our local municipalities, be they RMs or towns, know exactly 

what’s best in their areas. They know what services are needed. 

They know how best to provide those and provide those 

efficiently. 

 

I think the same thing goes with the health boards where we . . . 

looking at having more and more people elected, because those 

are the people that have the heart and the mind of the 

constituents out there. 

 

And local boards, division boards, district boards are in the 

same area. They know what’s best for their communities. They 

know what’s best for their kids. Because in each community the 

situation is somewhat different, based on the size of the area, 

the kinds of students they have, their backgrounds, and all those 

sorts of things. This makes sense. 

 

And if this government would allow the local autonomy it has 

promised on so many occasions, I think a lot of these problems 

would be gone and things would be working along fairly well. 

 

I’ve made a few points about parts of this Act that I believe are 

necessary and I think one for the varying of the school day. And 

I realize that there’s still some allowance for the exact times of 

closures and all those sorts of things, but we still need to look at 

the other aspect. 

 

I think my colleague mentioned the concept of Scenic Valley. I 

was there last year when that . . . when those plans were being 

put into place. And it was absolutely impressive the way every 

single component of that community from bus drivers, 

caretakers, teachers, students, parents, everyone came on side 

and said we’re prepared to try this. 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

(1600) 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve tried it for one year. 

They’ve done some research; they’re coming back at very close 

to 100 per cent approval — 90 per cent, which is amazing; that 

when you have those different kinds of groups, as I mentioned, 

that were in there, everything from the people who work in the 

schools — the caretakers, the buses, and the teachers — down 

to the parents and the kids all think it’s just a great system. 

 

That was a major innovation. We know by the concerns and the 

interest that the minister showed in that particular thing that this 

was really quite unique and quite different. It seems to be 

working out very well. 

 

That’s the kind of innovation that came from the grass roots, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It didn’t come from higher up, it didn’t 

come from the Minister of Education, it didn’t come from this 

House — it came right from the bottom. I think we need to 

allow that. 

 

Who would have thought that idea would have come up? Who 

would have thought it would have even been able to put into 

place? And who would have thought it would have been as 

successful as it now is? 

 

There may be dozens of more ideas out there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that are just as innovative, just as unique, and maybe 

just as successful. We need to be able to allow to try those 

because we have, by no means, invented the perfect system up 

to this point. 

 

I also want to comment on this concept of placement of 

students. Placement refers to many different sorts of things 

including the geographic student within the school system. And 

I think those are things that we need to leave back up to the 

local system. They know what kinds of problems they have out 

there, the concerns that are out there, how those can be met 

most efficiently and for the benefit of the kids. 

 

As a former teacher and principal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

will inevitably lead to an unnecessary conflict between parents, 

guardians, and boards of education because it opens up more 

opportunity for more litigation, for additional costs. And these 

things can just go through different appeals and those sorts of 

things. 

 

It goes without saying that school boards have been cut by this 

government by over $20 million in less than five years. And 

that’s an amazing cut on a per year basis. And every one of 

those cuts has to be worked through by the local schools. If we 

come on from this angle and present situations that may 

engender further costs, I think we may be just causing more 

problems and not providing any solutions. School divisions in 

my area still aren’t sure how they’re going to deal with these 

millions in cuts — and it is millions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moving on. Section 19 regarding the local 

collective agreements of teachers is a concern as well. And I 

think we want to underline one fact — contracts should not be 

torn up. We’re not in favour of taking those contracts, tearing  

them up, and say get back to the table and come up with 

something. Because regardless what the situation is, that will 

put one group at an uneven and an unfair situation. And 

whatever that group is will be different from school division to 

school division. 

 

The present legislation provides that where a new school 

division is established and two or more existing school 

divisions are established that the local agreements continue 

until a new agreement is negotiated. This means that 

administration is required to treat individual teachers 

differently, making assignment of teachers to different schools 

within a school division difficult. 

 

And there are dozens, if not hundreds, of situations that come to 

mind where you can create some very awkward situations. 

Where certain school divisions have created certain contracts 

with their teachers, other school divisions — for whatever their 

different circumstances were — have different ones. Now in 

certain circumstances these teachers will be teaching side by 

side — one of them may do noon-hour supervision, one of them 

may not; one of them may have days of leave, and others may 

not. It creates a very divisive thing within the school. 

 

Now as I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not want to 

see those contracts torn up. But where this legislation is 

somewhat weak, and we think substantially weak, there is 

nothing in place there to sort of ensure that this process of 

having two contracts in place in one division doesn’t go on for 

ever and ever. 

 

And we think there should have been some mechanism in place 

to take care of that situation; that after a certain process has 

gone through — and I won’t say necessarily a period of time — 

but after a certain process has gone through, teachers can work 

side by side in the same school under the same contracts. That 

will create a whole lot more unity than having a divisive 

situation such as this creates. 

 

And I think, for the benefit of the staff and the cohesiveness of 

the staff, that was left out of this contract and should have been 

in there somewheres. 

 

My understanding is that the SSTA has provided the 

Department of Education alternative ways of handling this 

problem, both practical and fair. I’m not sure how practical and 

fair they are, but they need to be looked at. I’m sure, checking 

with teachers, they could have come up with some contracts. 

 

The minister I think often holds up Sask Valley school 

amalgamation as one of the positive ones; it was one of the first 

ones. I think they worked through great processes involving all 

of the stakeholders in education in their contracts and in the 

amalgamation. And I believe they have in place something to 

take care of this situation. Their contracts will not go on for 

ever and ever, creating divisive situations. They will take care 

of that. They dealt with a way to do that. There was a process in 

place. This has no process in place. This just says they can go 

on till whenever. And that one has something definitely in 

place. Something should have been here as well. 

 

  



1558  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Section 20 is also of some concern. I don’t believe it is 

necessary for the Minister of Education to approve regular 

day-to-day boundary changes where only one school or 

attendance area is transferred. In effect, where the minister 

orders a boundary change, the minister will also be ordering the 

receiving school division to administer two local agreements 

with attendant problems — and we’ve already given a few 

examples of those — and negotiate new collective agreements. 

And some of those things just create more problems than they 

solve. 

 

As I mentioned at the start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m receiving 

a fair bit of information from both sides in this particular issue 

and I’m sure that will still continue. And because of that 

information still coming in, I move to adjourn debate on this. 

Thank you. 

 

Motion negatived on division. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The debate will continue. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 60 — The 

Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Actually all the 

weekend I’ve been looking forward to standing up on this 

debate. 

 

I’d like to take a moment to acknowledge the presence of the 

president of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) and 

the general secretary, Mr. Herron, and other representatives 

here who, from the teachers I’ve talked to, have initiated quite 

an aggressive campaign. And in fact there’s a number of calls I 

still haven’t been able to catch up to teachers on. 

 

I thought I should just enter into the debate of it a little bit, 

because the impression I got from some of the teachers I talked 

to was that unless the teachers called me, this legislation would 

not get passed through this Assembly before the Assembly 

adjourned. And I was quite disturbed by that. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a process that’s followed. 

This piece of legislation, Bill No. 60 and 59 were only 

introduced for the first time on May 2, were read for the second 

time on May 5. There are 58 Bills ahead of these two Bills and 

some of them have been here for two months. And there’s a 

process that’s followed. And I was a little dismayed. 

 

And some of the teachers I talked had a good understanding of 

how the Assembly operates and the fact that when a Bill comes 

before the Assembly and when the opposition hears how, after a 

Bill is introduced and read for the second time, that there is a 

process of consultation. And so I thank the STF for informing 

their members. We’re looking forward to getting back to the  

membership and informing them that while we were adjourning 

the Bill, it didn’t necessarily mean that we were totally opposed 

to the Bill. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of . . . there are 

a number of portions in this Bill that certainly are positive and 

cover a number of concerns that teachers have brought to this 

floor and brought to our caucus. In fact my colleague will 

probably be mentioning about his discussion with the STF, and 

our caucus has met with the STF representatives on a number of 

occasions. In fact I enjoyed visiting with members of the STF in 

Saskatoon after driving through quite a snowstorm back about a 

month ago and just rubbing shoulders with them. 

 

And needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not trying to say 

that I agree with everything the STF does because they certainly 

don’t agree with every stand I take as well. And that’s fine. 

That’s fair. That’s how democracy works. 

 

But on this specific Bill, Bill No. 60, there were a number, and 

are a number of areas that we have acknowledged that are 

certainly positive and bring some positive direction into the 

teaching profession. And I think the Minister of Education has 

heard those and is bringing forward this Bill to address some of 

those issues. It cleans up many inconsistencies and obsolete 

references in the original Bill, and as a result I believe it does 

move forward by including provisions for mediation to ensure 

effective and harmonious bargaining on teacher contracts. 

 

There are, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some concerns which 

have been brought to us and yes, the Saskatchewan School 

Trustees Association raised concerns regarding section 17, 

sections 19 and 20, successor rights, and section 45(1) which 

gives — and this is an area that we have had a definite concern 

— gives us some concern in regards to what the section means 

when it says power to discipline teachers. 

 

And that is a question that we have raised and want to raise and 

look forward to raising with the minister as we go along and 

move along through the stages of debate on Bill No. 60. It 

seems that these provisions do appear somewhat broad and I 

think need to be clarified. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing that one of the STF members 

talked or mentioned . . . that I was talking, to mentioned we said 

the SSTA does not talk for teachers. Well I don’t think anyone 

said that. I don’t think anyone necessarily figures or concludes 

that they do. But the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association 

certainly does stand up for the ratepayers they represent as well. 

 

And so when it comes to education in this province, there are 

basically three groups: you’ve got your teachers; you’ve got 

your school trustees; you’ve got government. And we all need 

to, at the end of the day, find ways in which we can work 

together to provide a more harmonious education system to 

meet the needs of young people to prepare them for the 20th 

century. 

 

An Hon. Member:  21st. 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

Mr. Toth:  Or 21st century, pardon me. 

 

I guess one of the concerns we do have — and I think the 

member from Saltcoats addressed that very clearly when he was 

speaking regarding municipal taxation on the municipal Bill — 

one of the big concerns we do have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

fact that from 1991 to today the shift in government and 

property tax owner has moved from the 40 per cent provincial, 

60 per cent to property to a 60/40 split where the government is 

only carrying 40 per cent of the burden now. 

 

And for some educational boards, that means a significant 

reduction in their funding. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three of 

the boards of education right in the area that I represent, in this 

current budget where they thought they were receiving more 

funds, actually have received, in some cases, up to $500,000 

less. And as a result, at the end of the day, what it’s going to be, 

Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, is that there may be fewer and 

fewer teaching positions. And that is a concern to not only the 

school trustees of the area, but it’s of concern to parents as well, 

as we look at how we provide education and the schools, or 

access to the educational system that might be available. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, you can understand why we’re 

standing here today and why we’re debating this piece of 

legislation, why we’re bringing these few points to the attention 

of the Assembly, because I think we’re all partners. We all need 

to work together. We all need to find ways of working together. 

And it wouldn’t be very prudent of us, as a caucus, to just take 

one side and just to listen to one point of the issue and not 

discuss concerns with other concerned groups involved in this 

type of a debate. 

 

So that’s why I have looked forward to this debate. And I look 

forward to the comments that other members would have 

regarding Bill No. 60 before the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. Our 

caucus has recognized that on the whole this Bill is good. And 

we went through it, and as I personally highlighted the areas I 

had questions with, there is very little highlighter on my 

particular page. 

 

We don’t want to overlook the fact that it cleans up many 

inconsistencies and obsolete references, and including 

provisions for mediation that goes some distance to ensure 

effective and harmonious bargaining. And I think that’s one of 

the things that, regardless where on this issue you stand, you’re 

in favour on . You want things to be effective and you want 

them to be harmonious. And I think the Bill has a lot of good 

things to say in that area. 

 

Nevertheless our caucus can’t support this Bill in total as 

there’s one or two things in there that I think need to be 

addressed. And referring specifically to clause 45.1, and my 

colleague referred to the fact that we’ve been getting some 

response on that. A fair number were faxed, a few letters, and a 

lot of phone calls. 

 

To date I’ve called back everyone that has called me, and it’s 

been very interesting. Because when I refer to that particular 

aspect and say, here’s a possibility for interpretation, what 

could be meant by contrary? And in every single case everyone 

has said, that’s not what we mean. And usually these have been 

people who have been primed by their union leaders to go 

ahead and call us. They say that isn’t what it means. I said, I 

think I agree with you because I’ve met with people from the 

STF and they as well tell me that isn’t what it means. 

 

Well I may not be the greatest student of the English language, 

but I can tell a hawk from a handsaw. I can also read that 

particular sentence and know very specifically that that 

particular phrase that’s in there says “conduct contrary to,” and 

it lists and it’s left very wide open. And as that particular part 

stands, none of the individuals I’ve phoned back were in favour 

of it. 

 

I mentioned it to the people I spoke to from the STF. And every 

one of those individuals, if that part was kind of corrected and 

changed, I can live with it, no problem, because the rest of the 

Bill — and there’s a lot of it there — is good stuff; we’re totally 

in favour of it. But that part creates some definite questions. 

Those provisions are far too broad. They allow for all kinds of 

interpretations. 

 

Now admittedly people could say, well this would never 

happen. Well if it’s never intended to happen, then let’s not 

write the legislation in such a way that it could happen. Good 

legislation is written in such a way that it’s clear and distinct 

what it will do and what it will not do. This legislation states 

what could happen, but there’s a lot of other things in there that 

might happen and those might need to be taken out of there. 

 

Given the federation council power to decide unilaterally what 

is in the collective interest of teachers and to disciple 

accordingly, puts the rights of individuals and teachers at risk. 

 

And it’s interesting, when I decided I needed to know exactly 

what information the STF was sending to the teachers, I phoned 

one of the schools in one of the areas that I’ve taught with in 

other lives and asked if they’d send me a copy of that. And they 

said, well yes, but they hadn’t contacted me at all on that. And I 

said, well how come? Well they said, they’d met as a staff and 

looked at that and they agreed with my concerns, because as a 

staff they want the abilities to go ahead and meet the needs of 

their students in whatever way they see necessary in their 

community. 

 

And it isn’t the same from community to community, school to 

school, staff to staff. But they didn’t want to be limited in any 

way, shape or form. 

 

And so they’re definitely on support with the concerns that I 

had. And as I said earlier on, when I talked to the teachers and 

said, is that what you think it should mean, invariably, without 

exception, they all said no. So the point is, that particular aspect 

needs to be clarified. 

 

Examples have already been given in this House, and have been 

given in the media of what possibly could go wrong. This  

  



1560  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

section gives the STF the power to discipline teachers for even 

speaking about the conditions of their employment under The 

Education Act — possibly fairly extreme, I agree. But that door 

should never be there; it should not be something that could be 

opened. 

 

Likewise, concerns have been raised that if a teacher 

volunteered for extracurricular activity in a school, it might be 

— and we’re talking about the might be’s; those might be’s 

should not be there — if we look at that possibility, someone 

might be able to go ahead and coach those particular students in 

a hockey team, which is a community thing, but possibly not at 

a noon hour in a school situation. 

 

Granted these interpretations are somewhat speculative, but as 

we know, in our modern litigious society the interpretations of 

laws are often stretched to extreme lengths. It is important 

therefore that as we as legislators to ensure that Bills are 

worded precisely, so that there is no room for confusion in the 

future. 

 

On this topic, we have heard lately that the STF executive 

themselves have come to agree that this wording is vague. They 

did not intend for it to say what I said it might possibly say — 

to have that interpretation there. 

 

If this is clarified, then most of our outstanding concerns on this 

legislation will be addressed. Until that time, we can’t support 

this Bill. 

 

And as I said earlier on, we’re still getting information from all 

sides on this Bill. I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 60. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:23 p.m. until 4:37 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 31 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Atkinson 

Johnson Lautermilch Upshall 

Kowalsky Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Scott Nilson Cline 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Langford Thomson Krawetz 

McLane Gantefoer Draude 

Bjornerud Julé Aldridge 

Haverstock   

 

Nays — 4 

 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner   

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to rise to 

give second reading to The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 1997. This Bill is being presented in both English and 

French. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is 

replacing. The purpose of the Bill is to provide the government 

with the means to regulate the sale and consumption of alcohol 

within the province and to regulate horse-racing and gaming. 

 

The Act that is being replaced by this Bill was first considered 

by this Assembly in 1988. Since that time, the Act has been 

amended on numerous occasions. As a result, the drafters made 

a number of technical drafting changes to facilitate the 

translation into French. In addition, the provisions of the Act 

were consolidated and renumbered. 

 

This Bill contains one change to the existing Act. Based on an 

opinion from my department’s constitutional law unit, it was 

determined that the provision requiring applicants for permits to 

be Canadian citizens was contrary to the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. As a result, that requirement was dropped 

in the Bill. 

 

Other than the one provision, there are no other changes to the 

existing law. I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of the Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. And I move that Bill No. 71, An Act respecting the 

Regulation of Alcohol and Gaming be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

give second reading to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Act, 1997. This Bill is being presented in both English and 

French. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially identical to the Act it is 

replacing. The Bill authorizes the Minister of Justice to 

establish a maintenance enforcement office to assist claimants 

in collecting support, alimony, or maintenance payments to 

which they are entitled. That office has acted diligently on 

behalf of Saskatchewan claimants and has been highly 

successful in enforcing maintenance orders. 

 

The Bill also establishes maintenance enforcement remedies. 

To facilitate the translation into French, the provisions of the 

Act were consolidated and renumbered; however, the Bill does 

not change the existing law. 

 

  



May 12, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 

Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. And I 

move that Bill No. 73, An Act to facilitate the enforcement of 

maintenance orders be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

(1645) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 

alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Before we begin the Act, I invite the 

minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me this 

afternoon Susan Amrud, who’s the director of legislative 

services; Ian Brown, who’s the director of legislative drafting; 

and Ken Ring, who is Crown counsel in legislative drafting. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Committee members, this is a very 

lengthy Bill. I’m asking leave to proceed with the Bill by parts, 

and if there are concerns with specific clauses in a part, we will 

revert back to that clause. But the intention of the Chair is to 

call the Bill by part. Do I have agreement? 

 

Mr. Hillson: — If I just may, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think this 

will facilitate early dealing with the matter as you’ve suggested 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. What I will do is call short title, 

clause 1, short title. Is clause 1 agreed? 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I think, in terms 

of our handling of this Bill today, I would just . . . First of all, 

welcome this afternoon, the minister and his officials. 

 

I am of course aware of the agreement whereby this province 

has undertaken to translate significant statutes into both official 

languages. And I understand that is the basic reason for the 

exercise before us this afternoon, is to make sure that significant 

pieces of legislation are in fact available to persons of both 

official language groups in this province. And the Liberal 

opposition has no problem with that, obviously. 

 

So the only question I have is, I would like the minister to 

confirm that there are no substantive amendments to the present 

legislation. If there are, I would ask him if he’d be good enough 

to identify them for us so that we could turn quickly to anything 

that does in fact involve a substantive amendment. 

 

If the minister can confirm that there are no material changes to 

the legislation and the legislation is in fact only to comply with 

our agreement, our undertaking to translate into both official  

languages, then this procedure can be expedited very quickly as 

far as the Liberal opposition is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, as I just completed stating in my 

second reading speech, in this Bill there is one change. And 

based on an opinion from the department’s constitutional law 

unit, it was determined that a provision requiring applicants for 

permits to be Canadian citizens was contrary to the Canadian 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. This has been corrected and 

that’s the only change. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 188 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, again I would simply ask the Minister of 

Justice to be good enough to confirm that there are no material 

changes contained in this Act. It is simply for the purpose of us 

complying with our undertaking to have our statutes available 

in both official languages. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I confirm that there are no changes in this 

legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 62 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Again I would simply ask the minister to be 

good enough to confirm that there are no substantive changes to 

this Act, that we are simply complying with our undertaking to 

translate into both official languages. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I confirm that the Bill doesn’t change the 

existing law. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 75 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

 

Clause 1 

  



1562  Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1997 

Mr. Hillson: — I would again request the minister to give the 

usual assurance in this case, and if so, we may proceed through 

committee as far as the Liberal opposition is concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I confirm that this Bill does not change 

the existing law. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/ 

Loi de 1997 sur les beins matrimoniaux 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Hillson: — And I request here again that the minister 

confirm that there are no substantive changes to The 

Matrimonial Property Act. It is simply to comply with our 

undertaking to translate into both official languages. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I confirm that there are no substantive 

changes to this Act. There have been some drafting changes to 

update the language, but other than that there have been no 

changes. 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I recall that the minister did, 

in his second reading speech, make reference to gender-neutral 

language. And I believe he also made reference to simplifying 

the language in some cases. If that is all it is, again the Liberal 

opposition has no problem. 

 

But I would ask him if he would be good enough to confirm 

that there are no substantive changes in the Act, no substantive 

changes to the law, but a matter of cleaning up the 

draftsmanship here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I just did say that I do confirm there 

are no substantive changes. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 61 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to move the 

committee report the Bill without amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. Before I do that, I’d like to thank my 

officials for being here this afternoon, and I’d especially like to 

thank the people in legislative drafting who have worked 

diligently at completing the French translation of these Bills so 

that we could proceed. 

 

And with that, I’d like to move that we report this Bill without 

amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It now being just past the hour of five  

o’clock, this committee will recess until 7 p.m. tonight. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1533 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Deputy Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1548, 1551 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Child Care Week 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

 Weyburn Red Wings Do Well in Royal Bank Cup Tournament 

  Bradley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

 Rising Costs for Farmers 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

 Canada Health Day 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1535 

 Watson Liquor Store Receives Award of Excellence 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1535 

 Estevan Miners Commemoration 

  Ward ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1535 

 Students Support Manitoba Flood Victims 

  Stanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1536 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskTel’s Failed United States Venture 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1536 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1536 

 SaskPower’s Proposed Project in Guyana 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1537 

 Natural Gas Rates 

  McLane .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1538 

 Auto Insurance Rates 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1538 

 SaskPower’s Proposed Project in Guyana 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1538 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1539 

 Pornography on the Internet 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1540 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1540 

 Saltcoats Reassessment 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1540 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1540 

 Permanent Voters List 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 70  The Archives Amendment Act, 1997 

  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

 Bill No. 71 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

 Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

 

 Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 



 

alimentaires 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

 Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

 Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1541 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1542, 1560 

 Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1542 

 Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1542 

 Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les biens matrimoniaux 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 

 Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 

alimentaires 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1560 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 36 — The Health Districts Amendment Act, 1997 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1543 

 Bill No. 2 — The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1547 

 Bill No. 3 — The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 1997 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1551 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1553 

 Bill No. 34 — The Young Offenders’ Services Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1555 

 Bill No 59 — The Education Amendment Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 modifiant la Loi sur l’éducation 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

 Bill No. 60 — The Teachers’ Federation Amendment Act, 1997 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1558 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1559 

RECORDED DIVISION ............................................................................................................................................................... 1560 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 71  The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

 Bill No. 72 — The Children’s Law Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur le droit de l’enfance 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

 Bill No. 73 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 

alimentaires 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

 Bill No. 74 — The Family Maintenance Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

 Bill No. 75 — The Matrimonial Property Act, 1997/Loi de 1997 sur les beins matrimoniaux 

  Hillson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

 

 


