



















































Hansard: April 21, 1997


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1003 

 April 21, 1997 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I’d like to introduce, to my right, Brian Kaukinen, 

the president of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation; behind 

him is Wayne Phillips, vice-president of finance and corporate 

services; and behind me is Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president of 

water resource management. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to the 

minister and his officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, before I ask you some of the questions that will 

allow you to brag about Sask Water this year, my first question 

is I see that your profits have doubled. And being a business 

person, I just have to get you to tell me how you account for 

this marvellous increase this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I guess there are 

two main areas of revenue that really have increased over the 

past years as the member will know. We have done very well 

with respect to water sales under The Water Power Act. The 

economy of Saskatchewan has been very vibrant in the last year 

as you well know, which has meant increased electrical sales, 

and as well it’s meant increased power sales under the Act . . . 

water sales under the Act. As well the utility side of it has done 

very well. Potash is . . . the water sales are up substantially. 

 

So you’ll find as the economy grows and as business grows, the 

busier business is the busier the support services, of which 

SaskPower is part of supplying that support. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. At the same time, I 

notice that the expenses are actually down compared to ’95. 

Can you account for this? How do you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s part of the management of the 

Crown corporations that I think can be shown as experience, not 

only in Sask Water but in other utilities. The operating expenses 

are down due to good management; and looking at efficiencies, 

it might be created and internal to the corporation. 

 

So I think that signals good news for the people of 

Saskatchewan in the way the management of the Water 

Corporation has managed this asset. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, last year you had an opportunity 

to explain to me what the actual mandate was and what the goal 

of the Water Corporation is. Has this changed substantially this 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, the mandate hasn’t changed. 

We’ve been very diligently working on internal costs of the 

operation of this corporation — this Crown corporation. And 

that continues. 

 

And I think with respect to the stewardship of the . . . of water 

in this province, our position hasn’t changed. We continue to 

work with local governments, municipal governments, with the 

federal government, to be sound stewards of this water resource 

in our province and that continues as well. 

 

There are a number of water management infrastructures around 

the province that we continue to manage and operate. And so 

basically the corporate mandate hasn’t changed. It’s very much 

similar to what it was last year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So could you explain the corporate mandate as 

far as SPUDCO goes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well as part of economic 

development in Saskatchewan, one of the opportunities that 

business people around this province have recognized are in 

two areas. One, what we might be able to do with seed potatoes 

and other potatoes that might be grown on irrigated land. 

 

In Saskatchewan historically, the people of this province have 

invested around $200 million in irrigation infrastructure. And I 

think quite clearly that people would expect for the investment 

that there be some diversification and some value added crop 

growth in those areas. And one of the areas that has been 

identified quite clearly is potato development. 

 

A number of farmers on a small scale in the province have 

invested in potato . . . in growth in agriculture through potato 

development. In order to attract manufacturing, all the analysis 

that’s been done would indicate we need to build a critical 

mass, a number of acres, a base number of acres, to ensure that 

there is enough stock to be able to support that kind of 

development. 

 

The Water Corporation has been instrumental because of the 

management of the irrigation facilities and working with the 

people in the farming community in identifying some specific 

areas where in fact development may take place. And so we 

have been partnering in a number of ways with the agriculture 

community over this in this province over the past years — the 

development of the irrigation initially, and now we’re working 

with them to identify some opportunities where in fact we 

might be able to create some value added in this province. 

 

So part of what we see within the corporation is the facilitation 

of value added agriculture, not dissimilar to what has been 

happening in the Department of Agriculture with pork 

production and other areas. 

 

So I think we see opportunities for developing our economy and 

growing our economy and that’s part of what SPUDCO does. 

  



1004  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the mandate for the Water 

Corporation is really to manage, to administer, to develop, 

control, and protect water and related land resources in 

Saskatchewan. I guess I’m having difficulty seeing how 

SPUDCO fits into that. I guess I can see value added as being 

something that’s more along the line of an opportunity for 

Economic Development. How did you determine that SPUDCO 

should be part of Sask Water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, madam, under the Act, as the 

Water Corporation was established, it was established as a 

commercial Crown and as part of the Sask Water Act it is 

mandated with commercial activities. That’s part of the 

legislation under which it operates. Certainly the utility side is 

one component of what has been developed under the 

corporation and that too is part of the mandate under the Act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can you tell the people how much money has 

been spent on the SPUDCO project so far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  In the year under review there was 

around $11,000 spent. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And what is 

budgeted for this year, this upcoming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  To the member opposite, the one 

area where there is some funds allocated for this year is with 

respect to potato development as you indicated earlier. There’s 

about $4 million allocated. We’ve been partnering with farmers 

in that area on roughly a 50/50 basis, so the upcoming year 

there will be in the neighbourhood of $4 million. 

 

Ms. Draude:  There are a number of farmers throughout this 

province that are involved in potation growing, seed farming, 

and commercial potato growing. What percentage of the 

farmers in the province do you feel are covered under SPUDCO 

and will actually benefit from this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well what you have is an 

individual business arrangement and partners with some of the 

irrigators in the area and some of the people who own farm land 

in the area. Of that $4 million we will, for this year, be 

investing roughly 50 per cent of that which is around $2 

million. 

 

And what we’re attempting to do is, first of all, encourage and 

assist with the development of and the understanding of 

growing potatoes in the area. There are a number of farmers 

who have some experience. There are others who have 

indicated and express interest in being involved in the 

development, and so we have entered into a business 

arrangement. 

 

I want to indicate to the member opposite it’s a straight 

business, the same as any other investment. When the crop is 

sold, we’ll be returning our portion of the profits back to the 

corporation. So I want to make it very clear to the member 

opposite this is not a subsidy. This is a business arrangement 

whereby we are investing in developing a critical mass with the 

farmers in that area up to a total at this point for potato growers 

for $2 million and the profits from that will go to pay off that $2 

million investment. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister. I guess you 

misunderstood my question. 

 

My question was what percentage of the farmers are actually 

going to be benefiting, what percentage of farmers in the potato 

business? You had indicated that farmers in that area or ones 

that you are working out an arrangement with will actually 

benefit. I’m wondering . . . Across this province, there are a 

number of farmers growing potatoes that aren’t lucky enough to 

be in this area. Can you tell me what percentage of farmers in 

Saskatchewan will benefit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would want to report to the 

member opposite there are a number of farmers around the 

province, not only from the areas where there is irrigated land, 

who have invested in this. The percentage in terms of the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . number of farmers in the province quite clearly 

would not be large. It’s a very small number of acres that’ll be 

seeded into potatoes, but there are people who are from the area 

who have invested; there are people from outside of the area 

who have invested. And what we have done is looked at their 

business plans and worked with their business plans before 

making the decision to proceed with it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, could you clarify what you mean 

when you say that people outside of the area have invested. 

How do they do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well what I was saying to the 

member opposite, that people who live outside of that area who 

have traditionally developed agricultural land, outside of that 

traditional area, have shown interest and seen it as a business 

opportunity and have entered into a business arrangement with 

SPUDCO to invest in the development of some potato fields 

and the growth of some potatoes in that area. 

 

So what I was saying to the member is there are people from 

outside of the Lucky Lake-Riverhurst area who have invested in 

this partnership because they saw it as a good business venture 

and a chance to return on their investment. 

 

So I haven’t got the number of people who are involved in the 

contracts. I can get that for the member, if you would so wish. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, I do wish if you 

will get that number. 

 

And when you say that they are becoming involved, does that 

mean that they have the opportunity to sell to SPUDCO or what 

will they be doing? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well what we were attempting to 

achieve was 50 per cent-plus investment from the private sector 

in the initial stages of this. And what they do is bring a 50 per 

cent investment. 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

And there are costs. There’s the cost of seed, the cost of 

chemicals, the cost of land at so many dollars an acre. That’s all 

put together. An investment package is put together, and 

whatever profits are at the end of the year based on their 

investment, that’s what kind of a return that they regenerate. So 

it’s a straight partnership arrangement with SPUDCO. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Could the minister explain if each one of the 

farmers that are involved have an individual type of business 

plan that they present on an individual basis, and if there’s an 

interest rate charged for the money that was lent to them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  There was no money lent; let me 

make that clear. SPUDCO invested money. Farmers, people 

who were interested in partnering with SPUDCO, invested 

money. Individual business plans were put to SPUDCO based 

on the type of the potato that they wanted to raise, and that 

business plan would be put together and a contract signed based 

on that business plan. So it’s a straight partnership arrangement. 

There’s nothing fancy about this. There’s no subsidy. It’s a 

straight return on the amount of investment that you put in, in 

terms of what you’re going to achieve for a return. 

 

Farmers, business people, whoever, invested with the 

corporation, and we’ll get the number; I don’t have the number 

with me tonight. But it’s a straight business arrangement, a 

straight partnership, and your return is going to be based on the 

percentage of that contract that you have and that you own and 

based on the quality of the crop the end of the crop year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there a time frame for this agreement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’ve signed our contracts for this 

year, but it would be on an annual basis. And if SPUDCO were 

to pursue a partnership arrangement next year over the course of 

the fall and the winter, people would be more than welcome to 

pursue that kind of investment by contacting the Water 

Corporation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So is there a relationship between Sask Water 

and the Department of Economic Development within this 

SPUDCO project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we work very closely — the 

Water Corporation and the Department of Agriculture and the 

Department of Economic Development as well as Crown 

Investments Corporation on this project. So there have been a 

number of government departments involved. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does your government view this involvement 

in the potato business as a short-term involvement, or is it 

something that you plan on getting out of in a number of years 

when this is up and running? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, we would see this as a 

short-term rather than a long-term investment. What we want to 

do, as I indicated earlier, is work with business, with investors, 

to create a critical mass so that we can hopefully put together 

some secondary manufacturing. We don’t see this as being a 

long-term item for Sask Water. And as soon as we can facilitate 

that base of acreage and the number of years, that expertise 

farmers develop by doing that . . . much of it has already 

happened. But as we expand on the number of acres, quite 

clearly there will be no need for Sask Water to help to facilitate 

this kind of economic development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if a Crown 

corporation has to do the same type of business plan that an 

ordinary business does when they’re doing their planning, but 

you mentioned secondary manufacturing. So does that mean 

that, within your business plan, you have arrangements or 

projections for getting into secondary manufacturing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’ve been working with a number 

of private sector operators who have viewed Saskatchewan’s 

agriculture base as a very good opportunity to develop the 

industry. We’ve got some of the best farm land; we’ve got, as I 

indicated, $200 million of irrigation around this province. And 

there are businesses who are involved in the potato business 

who see Saskatchewan as a place where development can in 

fact happen. 

 

We have worked on a larger-picture, big business plan that 

would hopefully ultimately include a French fry plant because 

that’s really the area where you can develop the most value 

added in terms of the potato resource. So quite clearly we think 

that there are some opportunities here. We see it as a short-term, 

facilitative investment by Sask Water. We don’t see this as 

being . . . the corporation being in the potato business over the 

long haul. We’re only attempting to help facilitate the 

development of that critical mass. 

 

And I would point out to the member, if you look at our sister 

or brother provinces — Alberta and Manitoba — those are both 

two jurisdictions who have actively pursued a potato industry 

and a number of different forms their involvement has taken. 

But in each case both of these governments have invested a lot 

of time, a lot of expertise, and a lot of due diligence in terms of 

attracting an industry to their province. 

 

So we chose this route. We work with farmers in the 

community and other business people who saw this as a good 

opportunity and a good process by which to establish an 

industry; start the nucleus, the groundwork, for this industry. 

And I’m hopeful that we can facilitate as a government, and the 

corporation can help to facilitate, the development of a very 

viable, long-term industry in that area. 

 

I think quite clearly the local interest that’s been shown to this 

point would indicate that the people of Lucky Lake and the 

Riverhurst area see it as a very positive opportunity as well. 

And I think the number of people that we have pursue contracts 

with SPUDCO would indicate that it would make some 

business sense. 

 

So quite clearly the opportunities are there. We’re working with 

those communities to help to facilitate this development and 

hopefully over the long haul we can be creating jobs here in 

Saskatchewan as opposed to jobs in Manitoba or Alberta. 

Because that’s, I guess, what this is all about. Governments are 

all pursuing economic development opportunities and we’re no 

different. 

  



1006  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

We chose this vehicle because we felt it was the least cost 

involved and clearly we could, through this vehicle, stimulate 

some activity, incremental activity in that area. But most, I 

think, importantly is to maximize the benefits of the 

infrastructure that has been spent; hundreds of million dollars in 

successive years in that area. 

 

So that’s sort of where we’ve come from in terms of making 

this decision. As I indicated, we see it as a short-term 

investment. Sask Water is only there to facilitate and I’m 

certainly hopeful that over the long haul we’re going to see the 

agriculture community grow in that area, creating hundreds of 

jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I know that we got quite a 

number of calls when SPUDCO was announced from seed 

farmers and commercial potato growers that were of course 

uneasy that government had gotten involved in a business that 

had been growing, though slowly, very responsively to the 

needs and to the production and marketing requests outside of 

the province. And now all of a sudden they feel that 

government involvement is going to tip the ship and probably 

make a number of people uneasy. 

 

How many calls did your department get from businesses and 

growers that were not as delighted as the farmers around the 

Lucky Lake area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I can say to the member 

opposite that we have — I have, my office has — had some 

calls, some requests for information. As well the Water 

Corporation has had some inquiries from existing seed potato 

producers, some small irrigators in the province. Let me say, let 

me say this: quite clearly it’s not our intent to be competing 

with some of the producers in the province. That’s not the 

intent. What we’re hopeful is that we could set up some seed 

development, hopefully some export in terms of value added 

product. 

 

And I want to remind the member that the percentage of 

production of potatoes here in Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

North American market, and as it relates to the amount of the 

mass of potatoes that are grown in North America, is really 

quite minuscule. You look at the numbers in terms of the 

production in Saskatchewan as it compares to even Manitoba 

and Alberta, and you’ll find that we are very, very much under 

our potential in terms of developing both seed potatoes and 

fresh-packed potatoes; as well as, hopefully at some point in 

time, an export of French fries. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, everybody looks forward to 

economic development and job creation and growth in this 

province, but the farmers who have been working very 

diligently to make sure that their investment in the potato 

industry before the time of SPUDCO is not upset because of 

government involvement do not feel that minuscule is a number 

or a word that should be used with the effort that they’ve been 

putting in. Can you explain to me what you tell people when 

they talk about the worries of NAFTA (North American Free 

Trade Agreement) and the involvement that SPUDCO may 

have in that? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we’ve had opinion from all of 

the powers that be and interpretation from both your federal 

administration and our provincial people, who are very much 

understanding of countervail and NAFTA and the kind of 

impact that this may or may not have. The fact is that we have 

been assured in both instances, by the federal government and 

by our provincial people, that there are . . . there will be no 

opportunity for countervail as a result of this and because in fact 

there is no subsidy. 

 

I want to just say to the member if you look at the number of 

potatoes that are imported — fresh-pack potatoes that are 

imported — to our province on an annual basis, it would say to 

me that quite clearly there are some opportunities for expanding 

the potato industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that there are always . . . when someone enters a 

market-place there will be some changes and there will be some 

shifts. And I think that is quite accurate. But certainly our goal 

is not to be competing with existing producers here in 

Saskatchewan. Our goal is to be competing with the people who 

are producing the potatoes outside of this province and shipping 

them to our province for resale. 

 

And I think it’s quite clear that I would, and all of us would, 

view French fries that come from Manitoba as not necessarily a 

positive economic development opportunity or jobs for 

Saskatchewan people. And if we’re going to ever change that, 

quite clearly we have to develop that critical mass here in our 

province. 

 

So I guess when you make the decision, and you make the 

decision to expand your growth base and create job 

opportunities, you have to have looked very clearly at where 

you’re taking those jobs from. Well our goal would be to take 

them from the people who are exporting fresh-pack potatoes for 

consumption here in our province and who are exporting French 

fries  creating jobs in their jurisdiction  to our province 

because ultimately what we will want to do, and what we’re 

going to attempt to do, is shift those job opportunities from 

people outside of our jurisdiction to job opportunities for people 

inside of our province. Because I mean that’s what economic 

development in Saskatchewan needs to be about — creating 

opportunities for your people. 

 

And it’s easy to do a critique and I understand that, and there’s 

always some concern when change happens. And no one is 

more critical of change than the Liberal opposition is I have 

noticed in the last few months in the legislature, in particular 

since we came back to this session. And I understand the 

difficulty you have with change. I recognize that. But I want to 

assure you that we’re attempting to make change for the better, 

to create job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. That’s why 

we’ve got the lowest unemployment rate in Canada and that’s 

why we’ve been creating hundreds of jobs in this province. 

That’s why our provincial sales are up, retail sales. That’s why 

manufacturing has grown in Saskatchewan and that’s why 

people in this province have a good feeling about them. 

They’ve got a good feeling because the economy is buoyant, 

it’s positive, and we’ve worked with industry and with business 

to ensure job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

So is there change? The answer: quite clearly, there will be 

change, change for the positive. And I think that this is one 

instance where government has been able to work with industry 

to create some very positive opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I think there . . . one of the first 

sentences you said. I have difficulty understanding how you can 

talk about my federal people when we are in the same province 

and we have the same federal government whether you’re 

Liberal or whether you’re NDP (New Democratic Party). We’re 

all trying to work with the same federal guidelines. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’re talking about creating opportunities and the 

government is of course responsible to create opportunities, but 

my problem with projects like SPUDCO is that this government 

has decided which opportunities should go ahead in this 

province and which ones should not. This Liberal opposition 

does not have a problem with change. We would like some 

change, and that’s what we’ve been asking for: this government 

to change their mind in the way they work with businesses in 

this province. We talked about the lowest unemployment rate. 

Well that’s because most of our young people are not here, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I would like to ask you, when we talk about the land prices in 

the area where SPUDCO is working, I have a number of people 

who have told me that land prices are considerably higher now 

that the government is involved in land deals. Could you tell me 

if the land prices have indeed gone up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can say to the member that, you 

know, quite clearly if you look at agricultural land in the last 

few years in Saskatchewan . . . I can describe my area of the 

province, in the Prince Albert area, where land was selling for 

seven times assessment three, four years ago. It’s now in some 

case 10, 11 — I’ve heard as high as 13 — times assessment for 

sale value. So quite clearly there’s been a positive outlook in 

terms of farm land, and people are paying more for it because 

they feel they can get a better return on it. 

 

I don’t know to what you refer in the area you describe, but I 

can say if land prices have gone up in the Lucky Lake area, I 

don’t deny that that’s in fact the case because land prices have 

gone up all over this province. To target one particular initiative 

as being the result of land prices increasing, I don’t think is 

accurate nor do I think can be documented because I think it’s 

something that has in fact taken place all over the province. 

 

And I guess it’s fairly good news  not necessarily for young 

people who want to enter agriculture; it makes it much more 

difficult to get into agriculture. But certainly for those people 

who are looking towards their retirement, it’s a very positive 

thing. 

 

But I only say to the member, and she would look around her 

area, I’m sure that she will admit or agree with me that land 

prices have increased fairly dramatically in the last three or four 

years, but it’s certainly not as a result of SPUDCO’s operations 

in the Lucky Lake area any more than the increase in the price 

of land in Prince Albert is as a result of SPUDCO’s operations 

in the Lucky Lake area. That’s a pretty long bow to draw. 

 

I think if you look at, just look at the retail sale, look what land 

has been selling for, it’s certainly not isolated to one area of 

Saskatchewan; it’s all over the province. And good news for 

agriculture. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials, welcome. I’d like to pursue some questions along 

this area of potato growing in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the first question: I’d like to know where SPUDCO is 

marketing its potatoes. And I’m asking that because there are a 

number of small producers in this province have created a 

market-place for themselves, and the concern they have is 

they’re now going to be competing against an agency that has 

actually got some government seed money. And I’d like to 

know where the potatoes are being marketed and roughly how 

many acres of potatoes to date are covered under this agreement 

with SPUDCO. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials that the 

market analysis would be really quite diverse. One of the areas 

for export opportunities I’m told, is in Manitoba where they just 

aren’t able to produce enough to feed the French fry plant that 

has been built there. 

 

With respect to seed potatoes, there is a large North American 

market that development in that area has the opportunity to 

feed. I’m also told that South America, Mexico, there are export 

opportunities. 

 

So quite clearly there’s a large packaging plant in the Lucky 

Lake area who will be focusing on export development. That 

would be the key areas of focus. 

 

You know, I think, let’s put the cards on the table. Both the 

Liberals and the Conservatives tonight are trying to make an 

argument that if we expand the number of acres that are going 

to be growing potatoes in this province, we are going to push 

some of the small producers — people who have historically 

market-gardened, grown 1, 2, 3, 4 acres, some even larger; but 

that we’re going to be pushing them out of business. Well I say 

to the members opposite that that is not the focus of competition 

and that’s not the area where we’re attempting to market this 

production. We’ve identified many, many export areas which 

will bring money into this province. And if you’re suggesting 

that there should be no economic development or there should 

be no expanded, secondary manufacturing opportunities in this 

province, I can’t agree neither with you nor with her. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I suppose Mr. 

Hansen would like to feel that he’s termed a small potato 

producer in the province of Saskatchewan, because the article 

that Murray Mandryk writes here in the Monday, February 17 

. . . And I hear the Deputy Premier is somewhat disgusted to 

hear Murray Mandryk’s name and I’m not exactly sure why. 

  



1008  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

But, Mr. Minister, the individuals that have talked to me have 

worked hard and they’re not growing 2 or 3 or 5 acres of 

potatoes. And in one case one individual has turned part of his 

farming operation, east of the city here some 160 acres, into a 

table potato. And he’s developed a market himself. He’s 

cleaning and he’s bagging these potatoes, and he’s got an 

agreement with Safeway. 

 

And while you’re talking of, and if the SPUDCO is certainly 

looking at, markets that are available outside of the province — 

like you mention about the French fry product in Manitoba . . . I 

know there’s been a lot of development in the area of seed 

potatoes — I can certainly commend you for that. 

 

The thing that these producers are concerned about, Mr. 

Minister, is the feeling that in order to be competitive, they 

would have to get much larger and they would have to expend 

substantial sums of money to put the equipment in that would 

give them the opportunity of bagging even more potatoes than 

they can on a daily basis right now to try and compete and 

maybe offer the Safeways of those world that they’ve already 

got contracts with their product . . . and try and compete against 

SPUDCO. 

 

And I guess the question I have, Mr. Minister, is what 

assurances to date can producers out there have in feeling that 

they’re not being pushed out of the market-place but are 

certainly . . . a part of and including in this market that they’ve 

worked so hard to develop, is a market that they still have the 

opportunity of continuing to compete in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it’s important for the 

member to have an understanding of the markets and the fact 

that we are a net importer of table potatoes. Many of those 

potatoes come from Washington and Idaho late in the season 

because for the most part, I am told, that many of our producers 

don’t have storage facilities to be able to carry them in till late 

in the season. So late in the season the imports come from out 

of the province. 

 

So I think it would make some sense for potato development, 

and people who are involved in potato development with 

adequate storage facilities, to be able to pursue markets late in 

the season. And I think that in all likelihood would happen. I 

certainly don’t see the focus on sales from the development in 

this area targeted to existing Saskatchewan producers. As I’ve 

indicated before there are adequate export opportunities here. 

We can grow a very high quality of potato in Saskatchewan. 

There are some opportunities in Manitoba with respect to a 

French fry plant; that quite clearly some of these will be 

suitable for shipping and that would be a reasonable place to 

pursue that market. 

 

And I think what we would attempt to do is optimize the market 

where there would be perhaps less competition and a South 

American market might just do that for us, as opposed to 

driving the price down here in Saskatchewan. I think that it 

would be fair to say we would be pursuing with all vigour out 

of the fresh-pack plant, out of the packaging plant, and that 

industry will be pursuing with all vigour some very positive, 

high-price export markets. 

But I want to say there will be some change and no one will 

deny that. And I wouldn’t suggest to you that there won’t be 

opportunities lost for some folks. I would suggest that it would 

be very much minimal. 

 

But what I want to say, the long-term desire and the long-term 

goal needs here to be creating job opportunities and develop an 

industry for Saskatchewan people. I guess in one respect you 

can make the argument that if we had no potash plant in 

Rocanville there may be more job opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people in Esterhazy. And certainly you can make 

that argument. But I want to say that without a potash industry 

in Saskatchewan there would be no job opportunities for anyone 

in Rocanville or in Esterhazy. 

 

So quite clearly there’s a market that can be developed. There 

are job opportunities that can be developed for Saskatchewan 

people and I think nothing that I have heard from arguments on 

the other side tonight would suggest to me that we shouldn’t be 

developing this industry. 

 

I think change is something that comes over a course of time, 

and when you’re going to move ahead changes will happen. 

The expansion of this portion of agriculture in our province is 

no different. There are going to be changes if we expand the 

hog industry in Saskatchewan. There are going to be changes if 

we expand the number of chickens who are grown in this 

province and I think the member will agree with me. But then 

would he make the argument that there should be no expansion 

to those industries? I think not. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well Mr. Minister, when we raise concerns that 

have been brought to our attention . . . you talk about job 

creation, Mr. Minister. I happened to drop by one of the 

operations that had contacted me and there were five people 

there on that occasion, busy bagging potatoes. And to that small 

community, Mr. Minister, that’s five extra jobs in the 

community that may not be there if this producer is forced to 

look at joining together with the producers at Lucky Lake. 

 

And as the two producers that I’ve talked to . . . they’ve 

developed an area in their current farming practices where they 

grow table potatoes. They do have a market-place, and they feel 

that . . . they just want . . . none of them asked to be given a 

special privilege. They want to know that they’re competing on 

the same level playing-field, that they’re not competing against 

a corporation or a company that is receiving seed money from 

the provincial government when they’ve had to invest all of 

their own funds. 

 

And so I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what your department 

has done or what the Water Corporation has done to alleviate 

some of the fears that some of the smaller producers who have 

worked to develop their own small operations, what you’ve 

done to alleviate the fears they have, to let them know that they 

are part of the economy of this province, and that they certainly 

have a role to play as you talk about an expanded potato 

growing industry in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to 

share a little history of the potato industry as it’s described for   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

me. First of all, I want to say that there is no subsidy with 

respect to SPUDCO’s involvement in the expansion of the 

potato industry, number one. 

 

Secondly, there has been subsidy from the federal government 

with respect to these kinds of growers, and I’m told there are at 

least a half a dozen of them who have been given forgivable 

grants up to 35 per cent by PAWBED (Partnership Agreement 

on Water Based Economic Development) by the federal 

government over the course of the years. And that’s fine. I don’t 

mind that, and I don’t think anyone does when there’s an 

opportunity for Saskatchewan business people to create jobs 

and create stability for families in their community. We all 

support that and I support that. 

 

(1945) 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the fresh-pack 

plant in Lucky Lake is not a SPUDCO project. The fresh-pack 

plant is owned, controlled, and operated by private business 

people and people in that community, who as well are creating 

dozens of jobs. So, I understand that Mr. Mandryk writes a very 

interesting article on occasion, and fine that he should quote 

Mr. Hansen. But I would ask you at least to keep in mind the 

fact that in the Lucky Lake area, there are private enterprise 

jobs created by private enterprisers growing potatoes. 

 

Now you can make the argument that that shouldn’t be 

happening in Lucky Lake. I don’t think that’s the argument 

you’re making. If you are, you should maybe clarify that, but I 

think that’s not . . . because I’ve known the member for 10 or 

11 years now, and I know he strongly supports private 

enterprise and private enterprise jobs such as the ones that are 

made through the fresh-pack plant. I’m also told that there are 

opportunities for smaller producers to deliver their product to 

Lucky Lake to have them packaged and exported through that 

facility as well. So they are, as well, a support to some of the 

smaller producers in the province. 

 

I only say to the member that, if you’re doing a critique of 

potato development in the Lucky Lake area, you might want to 

contact some of the owners who have invested an awful lot of 

money in that area. You might want to contact some of the 

producers who supply that facility, and you might want to 

contact some of the business people who work in that area in 

free enterprise jobs in a free enterprise business — totally, 

privately funded. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d ask 

what has your department been doing to alleviate some of the 

concerns for the producers who have been calling, raising the 

question? 

 

Now you mention that SPUDCO is certainly offering . . . 

offered some alternatives, but I’m sure your department has had 

some questions raised. And while you’re expecting the business 

community who have invested in this and are putting money 

aside themselves . . . what have you been doing in view of the 

fact that we have a comment here . . . and of course what I’m 

taking is from an article. They’re reading the same article that 

talks about the Crown corporation offering to finance as much 

as 75 per cent of a new potato production. 

 

And that does raise a goal, and I’d like to know where that has 

come from, number one, Mr. Minister. And those are some of 

the concerns that certainly need to be alleviated, and as people 

raise them they need to be addressed — not just shoved under 

the carpet hoping somebody else is going to take control and 

make sure that proper information, if you will, as you’re trying 

to tell me, is made available to producers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I indicated to the member 

from Humboldt, we have entered into a partnership arrangement 

with a number of contractors, people who have invested 50 per 

cent of the cost of developing and growing the potatoes, and in 

fact who will recover 50 per cent of the profits, as does 

SPUDCO. I can’t say any more other than we’re trying to 

develop a critical mass so that we can create and develop a base 

for potato production here in this province. 

 

I think that that’s a responsible approach to take. I can tell you 

that the Water Corporation has met with many, many people — 

both those producers and people who are interested in involving 

themselves in the expansion of the potato industry in 

Saskatchewan. And I think that’s a reasonable approach to 

make. 

 

I’ve also indicated earlier tonight that it’s not the Water 

Corporation’s intent, through SPUDCO, to be involved in 

potato production over an extended period of time. We are 

trying to encourage. We’ve been very successful in bringing 

new players to potato production in Saskatchewan. We’re 

hopeful that that will be a long-term, sustainable initiative. 

 

Farmers in this province who are investing something in the 

neighbourhood of $1,200 an acre to produce potatoes . . . it’s a 

very expensive industry to get into as you will know — which 

is part of the reason the federal government, though PAWBED, 

used to offer forgivable loans of up to 35 per cent. We are doing 

it in another way. We’ve decided to partner. I mean if it’s all 

right for the federal government, through PAWBED, to invest 

through forgivable loans, I should think it’s at least reasonable 

for us, as a provincial government, to help to facilitate interest 

in partnering with private business people in this province. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, you may not agree with this, 

and it is a pretty weak critique that I’ve heard thus far, but I 

want to say that people on this side of the House want to protect 

jobs — not only with small producers but with new producers, 

people who come to this province to invest in potato 

production. And hopefully we can attract a major French fry 

plant to create hundreds of jobs for people in this area. 

 

And I say to the member as well, we don’t intend to choose 

between people in the Lucky Lake area and people in other 

areas of the province. Jobs are jobs. People’s lives are 

important, and their ability to feed their families are important, 

whether it’s in Lucky Lake or whether it’s in Pilger, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I find it interesting, Mr. Minister, that you would   



1010  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

be standing up here and speaking so well about economic 

expansion and private investment in this province, or even the 

fact that the government might promote, through some small 

programs, a development of an industry, when it seems to me I 

recall some of the debates that you entered into on this side of 

the House and totally and adamantly opposed to any investment 

that might create economic spin-off for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think the Bi-Provincial upgrader is a prime example or the 

Co-op upgrader here in Regina is another example. And the 

other day we see that both of these facilities are now paying 

dividends to the province of Saskatchewan. And I can 

remember the debate at that time. 

 

I can only say, Mr. Minister, I guess it may take a little while 

for some individuals to recognize the positive aspects, and the 

fact that there are people in this province who knew how to 

invest and are willing to take a bit of a gamble. 

 

And as an opposition member, it’s my responsibility as well to 

listen to the concerns of other individuals and to indeed give 

them some reasons as to why they could look at working with 

. . . And I think part of this Lucky Lake project, if I’m not 

mistaken, a couple producers mentioned that they have been 

contacted about possibly investing in and putting some acres up 

in the Lucky Lake area and still running their small facility. 

 

And I just wanted to make sure that your department was aware 

of this; that your department has been doing due diligence in 

making sure that the individuals who are substantial distance 

away aren’t left out in the cold. And I think that would be only 

appropriate and we need to work at that. Certainly economic 

development is important. And while you talk about job 

creation in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, I think 

you’re going to need to find even more than just potato 

development to really generate job creation in this province of 

Saskatchewan. Because while you were right when you said 

hundreds of jobs . . . because most other jurisdictions are 

talking in the thousands or the ten thousands of job creation 

over the past few years. 

 

Mr. Minister, there was, two or three years ago, I believe a 

company called Cole’s and another company called Sask Ida 

came into the province to buy up, I believe it was a potato plant 

that was developing export markets for locally grown seed 

potatoes. And SGGF (Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 

Ltd) had actually put some funds into that. And I’m wondering 

what’s happened to the Sask Ida proposal or if that still 

continues to operate as a company in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that 

initially Sask Ida farms did have an investment by the 

Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund and to the best of my 

knowledge, at this point, it is a small shareholder in Lake 

Diefenbaker potato company, which is the fresh-pack company 

in that area with a packing plant. 

 

I have no knowledge of the other company that you spoke of. 

I’m not familiar with them at all. And that information may be 

available through Economic Development estimates as I believe 

that would be the entity that would be familiar with the 

Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund’s portfolio, perhaps in 

their operations. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. If I’d just read 

down a little further . . . and I forgot to mention this. I believe 

that it was the Cole’s Potato Company, and it’s bankrupt. And 

Sask Ida, I believe, came in through SGGF (Saskatchewan 

Government Growth Fund) and did a small investment in the 

Cole or taking over the bankrupt company. 

 

I’m wondering, is Sask Ida continuing to operate and produce 

fresh potatoes? You said it’s a packaging company. Is it 

continuing to facilitate packaging? And where does it market? 

Does it market outside of the province as well, Mr. Minister? Or 

is it’s market-place mostly inside the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 

officials that Sask Ida is part of Lake Diefenbaker potato 

company, which is a small packaging plant. I’m also told that 

they had some unfortunate circumstance awhile back in that 

they had fires, I understand, problems at Clavet. But that has 

been resolved, and the operation hopefully will be viable long 

term. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, is that what you consider the less 

than acceptable return: fire? 

 

Mr. Minister, I think, I think Saskatchewan people have 

certainly shown initiative in the way they have taken the 

environment around them and used it to their advantage and 

providing for themselves as well as providing job opportunity. 

 

And I can only suggest to you from what I’ve seen, while on a 

smaller scale out in my area, as far as potato production, I was 

quite surprised — to be quite candid with you — that there was 

that production and to hear that it’s even getting larger . . . is 

something that anyone in the province of Saskatchewan . . . I 

think as we look at diversifying the economy of this province 

. . . and in agriculture we’ve diversified and to a number of 

commodities that even 10 years ago we didn’t grow. And the 

addition of potatoes to the diversification is certainly something 

that’s positive. 

 

I think an effort was made in potato production a number of 

years ago. I believe some time in the ’70s there was an effort 

made, and I can remember driving through that Outlook area 

and all those fields in potatoes. And it wasn’t long thereafter 

that those fields ended up going . . . being put into alfalfa. So 

possibly with the new varieties of potatoes and new markets out 

there, there might be even a better chance of the industry 

certainly expanding and being an economic benefit as well as a 

job creator for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you’ve had the opportunity in 

the last few days to tour the Rafferty-Alameda, and if you could 

give me an idea of the amount of water in both projects and 

amount of water flow that may be coming into the facilities at 

this time. And what levels does the Water Corp. anticipate we 

may see by the end of the spring run-off? 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman, we were 

just having a little chuckle here. My officials were trying to 

describe to me how many decametres of water and I said, whoa, 

let’s talk about metres here; it’s something I can understand. 

 

I say to the member opposite I haven’t had the opportunity to be 

to the Rafferty-Alameda facilities this year. I was there last 

spring, and it was really gratifying to see the water in those two 

facilities. Many professionals, people who maybe didn’t have 

the vision of your former leader, would never have believed that 

we could capture that amount of water, at least not for many, 

many decades, based on past forecasts of what we might expect 

for moisture in that area. 

 

I’m told by the officials that in fact the water levels will be 

higher this spring than was the case last year. Alameda is 

operating at the interim level, 552 metres, as per the Tetzlaff 

agreement that you will be familiar with; and Rafferty is 

operating at an interim operating level. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

never thought I’d hear the day when we’d hear the word 

“gratifying” being used about the Rafferty-Alameda project. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Minister, the agreement that was 

reached with the Tetzlaffs is certainly still of concern to the 

people in the Alameda area, especially when they feel that it’s a 

water basin that could be more than full right now. 

 

But be that as it may, Mr. Minister, when does that agreement 

with the Tetzlaffs run out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, this is the last year 

of that agreement. As the member may know, there will be 

hearings, public hearings, in the fall. The corporation will be 

around talking with local people, to work with them to 

determine what an ongoing operating level should be for that 

particular facility. Certainly the amount and the hundreds of 

millions of dollars that were invested in that particular facility, I 

think really does require that the Water Corporation and the 

people of Saskatchewan who have invested so much in that 

particular infrastructure should have the opportunity for . . . and 

say as to how it’s managed, or for input as to how it’s managed 

over the upcoming years. 

 

So it’s been agreed that we will be meeting with people in the 

area to determine what would be a reasonable operating level, 

keeping in mind their desire for infrastructure and all of the 

things that their dreams are built on with respect to the 

operations of that particular facility. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Having just been down 

to Estevan about a week ago, I found it interesting, Mr. 

Minister, that there are a number of people in that area certainly 

are talking of investment along the Alameda and along 

Rafferty. I think, Mr. Minister, a number of us are quite familiar 

with the debate that took place, even though most of us were 

probably just following that when we were in our schools days 

yet, regarding the Diefenbaker project and Gardiner dam. 

And we look at that area right now . . . in fact we’re just talking 

about a project that possibly is going to be enhanced because of 

the development of water resources in the Lake Diefenbaker 

area. But as you look around Lake Diefenbaker, Mr. Minister, 

you can see a number of small, little communities — cabins 

have been out there; people have invested in private property — 

and I can see Rafferty and Alameda following something along 

the same lines. In fact while it may be a short distance across to 

get in and to try and ski across the Rafferty, I know you could 

certainly make a turn at the end of it, but I’ll guarantee you’d 

get a long, long run when you get up on your skis, even in the 

Rafferty basin right now, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I can only hope, Mr. Minister, that your government and the 

Water Corporation will look at any other avenue that can bring 

economic enhancement to our province. And certainly working 

with local residents or any other resident who would like to . . . 

as the water levels rise and as you maintain a level of water in 

that area, where people would start looking at possibly building 

little resort areas along the basin that can derive revenue for the 

province of Saskatchewan. I could only encourage that your 

government seriously take a look at that. 

 

And I am pleased to hear, Mr. Minister, and we will certainly 

follow closely, that you’re going to certainly sit down and listen 

to and work with local people as to how they perceive this basin 

operating. I hope you are better here than the Minister of Health 

has been in the last few days, but I thank you, Mr. Minister, and 

I’ll let other members get in on with further debate on other 

areas and then I’ll get back in a little later. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if 

you can tell me how many orders in councils have been passed 

this year through Sask Water to allow for expropriation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told by the 

officials that there was one expropriation that we had to act on 

and I’m assuming that you’re referring to the Humboldt-Wakaw 

pipeline. Provincially I don’t believe we had any others, but I 

will undertake to check to determine if there were any 

acquisitions that had to be done by expropriation or orders in 

council. I’m not familiar — I just can’t recall any others. I don’t 

really think there were. We can recall one order in council that 

dealt with an expropriation on, how many kilometres? — just 

the pipeline easement. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I ask this 

question is the proposed new legislation is going to allow Sask 

Water to undertake expropriations without going through orders 

in council. The decision to do this must have been made for 

some reason. I wonder if you could explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s only to facilitate, you know, I 

guess the flow of paperwork, and the work that’s done internal 

to the corporation in these circumstances could be minimized. 

And really what we did was, we are proposing amendments to 

the legislation that would be consistent with all of the other 

Crowns, with SaskEnergy, with SaskPower. And so Sask Water 

would be treated in the same fashion in terms of expropriations. 

But it’s to minimize the paperwork is, I think, the main reason 

that those kinds of changes have been proposed in this   



1012  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

legislation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I just understood this afternoon 

for the first time that Crown corporations, or the majority of 

them, are allowed to expropriate without going through orders 

in council. Is this something that you intend to do to all the 

Crowns? Is this normal procedures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, that Act was . . . as I 

recall, passed second reading today. And I’m sorry I wasn’t 

here this afternoon for the debate but that’s . . . it’s the Water 

Corporation. I’m not familiar with the other Crowns. That 

would probably be better asked to the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation or the individual . . . or the minister in 

charge of the other Crowns. 

 

The two I am familiar with though are the ones that I’m 

responsible for, SaskPower and SaskEnergy  both have 

consistent legislation with what’s being proposed under the 

Sask Water Act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Maybe, Mr. Minister, this isn’t a fair time or 

place to ask questions on this. Should I be . . . would you prefer 

I didn’t ask questions on it? 

 

What happens if an individual who is involved in this — in an 

expropriation procedure — doesn’t feel like they’ve had an 

opportunity to have their case heard; where will they go to 

now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well there is I guess a number of 

avenues. The process would be quite clearly that if there was a 

proposal and there was a facility that was planned and designed, 

it’s been the historical background with Sask Water, as I have 

known it, and as long as I have been responsible for it, that the 

amount of community involvement sometimes, I guess, seems 

endless. But it’s a process that really is positive and needs to 

take place. 

 

So in discussions with municipal governments, with town 

councils, when a project is proposed, the communities are 

invited to have a look at what the communities are proposing to 

Sask Water. Sask Water is really the vehicle and the tool to help 

to facilitate the development of an infrastructure piece of water, 

infrastructure piece. 

 

But as you will recall, there was a great deal of discussion. And 

the example I would use is the Humboldt-Wakaw water line 

because it’s the one we just completed and it was a fairly large 

project. There was a lot of discussion that took place at the 

community levels, in town councils. There were people who 

opposed that particular project as put forth by the communities. 

They felt there was another way to do it. So quite clearly there’s 

a lot of discussion at a local level. 

 

The Water Corporation will, after the design and when it’s 

decided where the project might go, they will do all measure of 

due diligence in terms of consulting with landowners in the area 

to describe to them the disruption to their land, the level of 

compensation, the time that their land would be disrupted, what 

kind of surface structures there may be after the line is 

completed, and then to determine what’s adequate and what’s 

reasonable compensation. In some cases it’s not a matter even 

of dispute between say the corporation and a landowner over 

the compensation. 

 

I’m not a lawyer but as I understand it, the one particular 

instance that I will refer to you, was the one order in council 

who’s passed was a result of an estate owning the land, and 

there was no other way to do it because there were some 

outstanding legal issues that required expropriation. Our goal is 

to minimize the number of expropriations on any of these kinds 

of projects and that’s best done working in consultation with the 

people who are affected. 

 

And I think over a course of time people have come to 

understand, in particular in Saskatchewan, if we want to have 

services in rural Saskatchewan it does mean that we have to 

travel under roads, and it does mean that we have to travel 

through people’s farm lands, and it does mean that you have to 

cross rivers. And all of these things require a process of 

discussion before an ultimate decision is made as to how to 

proceed. 

 

And there are some cases where you just can’t get agreement. 

And certainly we want to minimize those as much as we can. 

But in areas where you can’t find agreement there has to be a 

process. But the first step would have to be consultation; try and 

find a mutually agreeable situation; and ultimately the process, 

as it works before this Act will be passed, the Water 

Corporation will make a recommendation through the minister 

to cabinet, and cabinet will approve the OC (order in council) or 

reject it. I can’t recall an instance of an expropriation since I’ve 

been in the government side of the House where an 

expropriation request was denied, because for the most part, it’s 

a last resort. There are a very few number of people where that 

will be necessary for the most part. So I guess the best way is to 

try and do it through discussions and negotiations. But if all else 

fails, expropriation is a last resort. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to change 

topics here for a few minutes and just talk about the grant that is 

. . . I’m not sure if you call it a grant. The money is given from 

the General Revenue Fund to Sask Water Corporation. Since 

the corporation came into being in 1984 can you tell me how 

much money has been given from the General Revenue Fund to 

Sask Water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I certainly don’t have the numbers 

going back to 1984. We have for the year under review which is 

4.888 million, but I don’t have previous years. I would assume 

that that would be available through the library and Public 

Accounts, but my officials certainly didn’t bring that back from 

that many years past. We just don’t have that information with 

us. 

 

Ms. Draude:  If that’s the case then probably you also don’t 

have the figures available to say how much profit has actually 

been returned then through dividends. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told as well by my officials that 

the corporation has never returned any dividends. What they   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

have been allowed to do is have retained earnings which are 

reinvested back into infrastructure, whether that’s investment in 

a water facility or in irrigation. But historically that’s how this 

corporation has been treated during the budgetary review. 

 

(2015) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I was noticing in the annual 

return there was a discussion on a pilot project partnered with 

SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) for developing quality 

water treatment in rural Saskatchewan. Can you give me an idea 

of what this project involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think the project 

that the member is referring to is the biological treatment 

system that we have been working in conjunction with the 

Saskatchewan Research Council and the federal government 

through their green plan to try and develop a commercial 

application to this technology for treating dugouts in 

Saskatchewan. I think the member will recognize that in many 

farms, in many areas, the quality of water is certainly 

substandard, and if we can develop in Saskatchewan some 

technology that’s applicable to that kind of a water resource, it 

could have not only benefits for the people of Saskatchewan, 

but benefits for those in other parts of North America who are 

in flood plains as we are, and who use dugouts for supplying a 

lot of their water for their residential use. 

 

I’ve seen some demonstrations of this project. It actually looks 

very encouraging and I would certainly want to commend the 

Water Corporation and the Saskatchewan Research Council for 

the work they’ve done in this regard. And I’m certainly hopeful 

that in a very short period of time we can have a commercial 

application for this because I really do believe it’s something 

that’s very much needed in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I understand that this project was funded 

partially by the provincial government through Sask Water and 

SRC and also through the federal government Can you give me 

a breakdown of how much money was spent and by who? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that the 

vast majority of that money comes through the PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration), through their green plan, 

but we can forward a copy of the amounts and the breakdown to 

you. You’re not talking millions of dollars, more in the line of 

thousands, but we’ll get those numbers to you. I don’t have 

them here tonight. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You discussed the 

possibility of a commercial venture that may come from this 

project and I imagine that would be something that would be 

looked forward to by many people. Would it be something that 

would be developed again through Sask Water or possibly 

through the Research Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I’m told that the ownership of 

the technology, just as a matter for explanation, is a 

combination of Sask Water and PFRA through the green plan. 

So if there was a commercial application, I guess our partners 

would be the Chrétien government, unless something would 

happen during an upcoming election that he would no longer be 

there. I don’t know that, but it would be a partnership, as I 

understand it, between the two levels of government. 

 

But I would think we would certainly be looking for partners in 

the private sector to, I guess, to process the sales and the 

marketing of that kind of a infrastructure if we could make it 

work. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Well, Mr. Minister, unless the sun comes up in 

the west, I’m fairly sure what the answer to your question is, 

but I’m actually hoping that maybe the Research Council could 

possibly look at something that would allow some development 

of this process. 

 

I just have one more question in this line for this evening, and 

something maybe you don’t have any information on, but in the 

Parkinson’s disease, one of Saskatchewan’s lead specialists in it 

has determined . . . is looking at the possibility that it’s caused 

by water in rural Saskatchewan. And I know there’s lots of 

different possibilities for it. I wondering if, through Sask Water, 

if there’s ever been any contact by Health officials to undertake 

some of this study or work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that we, as 

a corporation, have no medical expertise or no . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . we don’t. We really don’t. So there’s no way 

for us to answer that, only to say that we certainly are well 

aware that there is a water quality problem here in our province. 

We have been large users of chemicals for many years, 

applying those to our crops. And so it’s one of the areas that we 

are concerned with. 

 

When municipal governments contact the Water Corporation 

and ask us to work with them in terms of the quality of their 

water supply, we’re more than willing to do what we can. 

Whether it be through the Water Corporation, working with the 

Department of Health, or working through the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, we do what we can because, quite clearly, 

one of the most important things that we do every day is breathe 

air — and hopefully it’s clean and fresh — and drink water. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my question 

to you is if you had been contacted to see if you would work on 

a study or if you’d be interested in working with them. If they 

would contact you, is there any possibility that funding could be 

found to have a look at this very worthwhile cause? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think we would certainly 

look at that in terms of our budget deliberations. For the most 

part, our money is allocated on an annual basis through the very 

process that we’re going through now. But there may be areas 

during the course of the year where expenditures are decreased 

in an area that we don’t foresee. And if it’s a worthwhile 

project, certainly we would look at the opportunity of assisting 

in funding it, if we could. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I have a question before we may 

move off of this Sask Water tonight. 

 

  



1014  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to know if you’ve received the global 

questions from our office. If you have, are they available 

tonight? I’m wondering if you could get them to us as quickly 

as possible, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that our officials are 

working on them right now, and they haven’t yet been 

completed, but we’ll be getting them to you very soon. I don’t 

think there’s anything in there of any nature that would give us 

any concern, so I would assume they’ll be here. What I will do 

is undertake to get a hold of your office tomorrow. I’ll have my 

staff get hold of your office and let you know when they’re 

going to be coming. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I move we report progress, Mr. Chair. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 

 

The Chair:  Minister, will you please introduce your 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me tonight 

is Dan Perrins on my left, the deputy minister; behind Dan is 

Mae Boa, the executive director of finance and operations; 

behind me is Lily Stonehouse, who is the assistant deputy 

minister; and at the back are Tony Antonini, the executive 

director of finance and technical services in the New Careers 

Corporation; and Brady Salloum, who is the director of student 

financial assistance. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Welcome, 

Mr. Minister, and to your officials as well. I look forward to a 

productive time this evening. 

 

The area of post-secondary education has had a lot happening in 

the area over the past year. When we take a look at the 

university programs offered at both Saskatoon at the University 

of Saskatchewan, at the U of R (University of Regina), when 

we take a look at the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) campuses, even to the fact that we’ve 

had a major fire at one of our campuses during the course of the 

year, a lot has taken place. 

 

Now we start to look at the public consultation plan that 

occurred regarding job training, skills training, the 

apprenticeship program, the plan as far as what role the regional 

colleges will play. A lot has occurred in the area of 

post-secondary education, and I think, as you can see, Mr. 

Minister, there’ll be a lot for us, I think, to talk about in terms of 

understanding where we’re moving in certain areas and what 

kinds of things the Saskatchewan residents can look forward to. 

 

I want to begin though by taking a look at the Department of 

Post-Secondary Education, sort of as a whole. What structure, 

what management structure, do you have at the department 

besides the officials that you’ve introduced today? What is your 

structure? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 

department is divided into two broad areas. One is the 

university and the policy and intergovernmental areas. And the 

second broad area is training and skills programs including the 

relationship between the department and SIAST and the 

regional colleges. 

 

There is a third area which is an area of shared services with the 

Department of Education where the units involved serve the 

needs of both departments. 

 

That’s it in a general way. I’ll be glad to be more specific to 

more specific questions. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I’ll become a little more specific, Mr. 

Minister. While Mr. Perrins serves as your deputy minister in 

charge of the entire post-secondary area, when you talk about 

the university and intergovernmental, and when you talk about 

the skills training area, are you working with managers of those 

areas or are you working with deputy ministers? 

 

And more specific to that, could you identify in terms of the 

number of employees that you would have in those areas 

relative to the manager position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we had to do some pretty 

rapid calculating there. But I think that this is the breakdown 

that the member was asking about. There is of course, the 

deputy minister. There are nine people who are senior managers 

and are either branch or division heads, and there are then ten 

others who are at the director level — so that’s a total of 19 

managers which fall into the two categories I’ve just mentioned 

— then there would be 204 other employees in the department 

who would be reporting to one or other of those managers. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 

know last year you were very accommodating in terms of 

supplying information or having your staff provide me with 

information and I appreciate that. So maybe my next question 

won’t be a question in that respect, but other than that I would 

like if you could instruct your deputy minister to provide me 

with information about the employees that are responsible for 

each of the subvotes, and I know that for instance subvote no. 2 

would not have anyone I don’t believe actually as a full-time 

equivalent in that area, but if you could supply the names and 

positions in terms of where those people are employed and who 

they are responsible for. That would save a lot of time and I 

would appreciate that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, we’ll do that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As far as the budget 

item, Mr. Minister, how many employees are there — I know 

you’ve identified 204 additionals — how many total employees 

are there in the area of post-secondary education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are 223 full-time equivalents in 

the department. 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Mr. Krawetz:  And how does that compare to last year, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, there are 

10 more full-time equivalents this year as compared to last. I 

am told by my officials that that’s a result of positions being 

transferred from other departments to our department. Five 

came with the transfer of New Careers to the department, and 

five others came from various places around government into 

the Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills 

Training, for a total increase in the complement of 10 

employees. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, when you say that five 

employees came with the transfer of New Careers, I understood 

that New Careers was under the direction of Post-Secondary 

Education previously. Are these people that would have been 

responsible under the Social Services program, or where did 

they come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  New Careers reported to me last year 

but they were a free-standing organization in the sense that the 

people employed by New Careers were not included on the 

Post-Secondary complement. This year they are. Five of the 

positions are now to be found in our complement and that 

accounts for that. 

 

I’ll repeat my answer there. The New Careers Corporation, 

while it reported to me, were not carried in the Post-Secondary 

complement of employees. They were a free-standing, 

administrative body. And that’s not the case this year. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. For clarification 

purposes, Mr. Minister, for the area under training programs 

when you indicated New Careers Corporation was in your 

estimates of last year — and I note that of course now with New 

Careers changing or the skills training program going into basic 

education and literacy — we see a combination as identified in 

the position. So when you’re looking at last year’s expenditure 

of $6 million, is there another expenditure then that would be 

identified in the budget document for New Careers last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that if the 

member will look at page 104, the allocation to New Careers 

Corporation is included there under item 3 near the bottom of 

the page — 11.884 million. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  We’ll come back to New Careers on another 

time, Mr. Minister, because there’s a couple of things that I 

need to clarify in terms of expenditures for last year. 

 

As you’ve indicated, you have some employees that are in the 

area of shared services and that you still have employees that 

provide information for the K to 12 system as well as the 

post-secondary. I guess this is the full year of operation also for 

the post-secondary area with you at the helm as the minister. 

Simple question — as far as the department and as far as your 

own position, is the entire department functioning as well as 

you had hoped? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I just double-checked with 

my deputy minister, and it is working. It’s working very well. 

As the member will know, there are three areas: finance and 

operations, and the communications and human resources. All 

three of those areas are working at least as well as they worked 

while it was one department and probably better in some 

respects. We think it’s probably the way of the future, that it’s 

going be a pattern that other departments will follow in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when 

I look at the full-time equivalent positions that you’ve indicated 

of 223, and my question to the minister responsible for the 

kindergarten to grade 12 system had indicated that the 

complement there was about 283, so I take a combined staff of 

about 506, is I think the projection, if my math is correct. 

 

I look back at ’94-95 when there was one single department, 

and I see in the Estimates that there were 484 full-time 

equivalents at that time. Now I don’t know what the breakdown 

was in terms of how many were responsible for the 

post-secondary system and how many were in the K to 12 

system. And I wonder about efficiencies and about how the fact 

that now we’ve divided into two departments, whether or not 

we’re getting value for the number of employees that we seem 

to have expanded to, if I compare the ’94-95 year to the current 

budget. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, it’s a question we didn’t 

anticipate, of course, and we would be pleased to give the 

member an answer for it. So I’d propose that we would develop 

the answer in consultation with the Department of Education 

and give the member an explanation. 

 

We can account for 10 of those because we’ve already covered 

those tonight. But that still leaves 12 outstanding, and we’ll 

provide an explanation to the member for that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I look forward to 

that information. 

 

A couple specific questions, Mr. Minister. What is the 

administration budget that you have for the area of 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I think the member is 

referring to item 1, administration and shared services, which is 

the minister’s office, the deputy minister’s office, and the 

shared services, shared support services that we were discussing 

a few minutes ago. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I see that 2.4 

million, Mr. Minister, what I was actually wondering about is, 

as described in that paragraph, it talks about communication, it 

talks about resource management, it talks about a number of 

issues. And I was wondering whether you had specific 

breakdowns of what is the administration costs? 

 

And then the other question that I’d have, the one that I’m more   



1016  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

interested in, or also interested in, is in the area of 

communications. What portion of that budget is spent on 

communications? And could you identify some of the things 

that your department does and has expenditures for in the area 

of communications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I can. The communications 

function has budgeted for it . . . I’ll just check my numbers, Mr. 

Chair. Sorry, Mr. Chair, we just had to recalculate our numbers 

to better answer the member’s question. 

 

The communications function in the department . . . I’ll take the 

member through it sort of item by item. The kinds of things that 

are done there are: the printing of materials, print material 

production; public communications, which is to conduct 

programs to enhance awareness and understanding of the 

department’s programs and policies and activities and 

information services; a telephone inquiry line in response to 

inquiries; and news releases and that sort of thing. 

 

In addition there is a comprehensive communications program 

designed to provide the public with information about services 

available to them, and to promote public involvement in 

education and training, and promoting linkages to 

employability. And a good deal of that has to do with some of 

the new programing that the member was mentioning in the 

first remarks leading off this discussion tonight. 

 

Now the total — that involves eight full-time equivalents and a 

budget of about $730,000. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for 

sharing that information. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’ll switch gears a little bit here and move to . . . 

We’ll move to something that I think is very, very important — 

very, very important — to the universities in both Regina and 

Saskatoon. And while some members may not think so, I think 

they are very important. 

 

Last year the MacKay report, Mr. Minister, had indicated a 

number of suggestions. And I guess I’d first like to begin with 

asking the question that — you had announced last year I think, 

that the initial cost of the MacKay report was to be $44,000 — 

do you have a final figure as to what the MacKay report cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised that our expenditure was 

about $59,000. That would be the 44,000 that we paid to Mr. 

MacKay and then another 15 in relation to the production of the 

report and related expenses. I don’t have the particulars of that 

tonight but that’s the total amount. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think one of the 

most critical recommendations out of the report was the fact 

that I think Mr. MacKay recognized that there was indeed a 

need in Saskatchewan for two separate universities. But at the 

same time I think there was a lot of emphasis on the fact that 

dramatic changes have to take place at those two universities to 

ensure that they’re both viable and that they both could do the 

job for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess as the minister responsible for those two universities — 

and I know you’ve had discussions, as we’ve had, with Dr. 

Ivany and Dr. Wells — what are you most pleased with in terms 

of how the two universities have reacted to the fact that the 

MacKay report is suggesting that there’s room for both 

universities within this province but yet they must make 

changes? What kinds of things are you happy with in terms of 

the two reactions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I am happy with the entire situation, but 

let me go through a number of things that have in particular 

caught my attention and are deserving I believe, of public 

notice. 

 

One of the early developments that began at a rather rapid clip 

during Mr. MacKay’s work was the discussions around the 

administration of the two universities. Those discussions 

quickly yielded an agenda that covered a couple of pages of 

matters that ought to be investigated to see whether they could 

be done more cheaply if the two universities cooperated — if 

they did it together to provide services to each university. 

 

That project started quickly and it continues today and there are 

all sorts of exciting little developments that are taking place. 

None of them are big, high-cost items that would make a 

dramatic difference, but taken together they will make a 

significant difference. 

 

What they’re important for, in my mind, is the fact that these 

two universities, these two institutions, are working so closely 

together on such a broad range of subjects. And this in a 

situation where they had not distinguished themselves — 

should I put it that way? — for working closely together in the 

past. They had some contact with each other, but they certainly 

had never experienced the sort of things that they’ve 

experienced in the past year at any time in their history. And I 

think that this augurs well and it is a direct result of the 

facilitation of Mr. MacKay. So I’m very, very pleased about 

that. 

 

The MacKay report also worked out . . . or the MacKay process 

worked out the establishment of three mechanisms between the 

two universities and involving the government for a number of 

things. One of these mechanisms has to do with the programing 

of the two universities, and to enhance the level of cooperation 

in their programing that they do offer and plan to offer in the 

future. We think that this is an essential part of the process that 

should go on between these two universities. 

 

As the member and I have said on previous occasions, this 

province is too small and we are simply not able to afford to 

have two full-service universities here. And they must be at 

some pains to avoid duplication and overlap, and they should 

make a real effort to cooperate in that respect so that each of 

them isn’t trying to be all things to all people. That process has 

begun and there are small examples of the two universities 

being sensitive to each other and drawing back from a proposal 

on the ground that the other university is already doing it. 

 

Another mechanism that is in place as a result of the MacKay 

process is the committee that involved the two presidents of the   



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

universities and the Premier and three other cabinet ministers — 

the Premier, the Deputy Premier, the Minister of Finance, and 

myself. 

 

(2100) 

 

And this committee has had one meeting and has another one 

scheduled for this week — Wednesday of this week. I can tell 

the member that the first meeting was very, very exciting for all 

of the participants. The discussion that took place was a 

discussion that I think had not ever taken place before involving 

the two universities and the government. 

 

The government’s careful not to interfere at all with university 

autonomy or independence; but on the other hand, has a public 

interest in these questions and began a discussion about the 

future and about how things might go and how, as a matter of 

process, the two universities can work hard to ensure that their 

programs mesh with a minimum of duplication and a maximum 

of efficiency. 

 

So we’re pleased about that. We’re pleased about the extent to 

which the two universities are in touch with each other on a 

broad range of issues. I mentioned administration, but it goes 

beyond that. There are exchanges taking place and discussions 

going that don’t really fall within the MacKay framework and 

yet seem to us to be extremely important. 

 

An example would be the two colleges of Engineering. And the 

deans of Engineering are working very closely together to talk 

about the future and how they can fit their two programs 

together for the benefit of Saskatchewan. This is happening also 

in the College of Commerce at the U of S (University of 

Saskatchewan) and the college of Administration at the U of R. 

I know that discussions have taken place there as well. 

 

So that is another aspect of or fallout from the MacKay process 

that is, I think, very encouraging, and as the member put it, one 

that I am happy with. 

 

Taken as a whole and speaking very generally, I think that 

Harold MacKay — through the process that he conducted — 

changed the atmosphere completely and put the universities on 

a path towards a cooperation and coordination that will serve 

each of those institutions very well in the future and thereby 

serve the province of Saskatchewan well in the future. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A specific reaction 

to one of your comments and I’d like to know if you could tell 

us . . . You’ve mentioned the committee of the two university 

presidents, the Premier, and the cabinet ministers. And I think 

in the MacKay report it says that they should try to work 

towards a common agenda and discuss the items that are 

common to both. Could you indicate some of the specifics that 

you see in the future that they will be actually able to help, that 

your committee would be able to help both universities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The committee is intended to deal with 

the big issue items, with the big picture, and the way in which 

the process has begun. We are focusing on mandates. How do 

the two universities see themselves, and how do they see their 

future, and how does that vision . . . how do those visions 

compare with each other and to what extent are they in harmony 

or what extent are they likely to produce frictions. 

 

That discussion began, but at a very, very preliminary level 

during the first meeting and is something that will be on our 

agenda I think, for some considerable length of time as the two 

institutions work on these questions themselves and develop a 

clear idea of where they think they’re going, where they plan to 

go, and what their vision is of their own institutions. So that’s 

one thing. 

 

The member has seen the document where we tried to express 

the public interest in the universities. And I believe that the 

content of that document will, in fullness of time, find its way 

onto the agenda. Each of the items raised there will, or could 

find their way onto the agenda of this committee. 

 

The quality of the programing is, I think, something that will be 

of interest. The universities will want to raise it because they 

feel that in some areas they offer an excellent quality, while in 

others they’re not satisfied with the quality of their programing. 

Usually it’s because of the lack of funding or lack of finances. 

But for whatever reason, their quality is uneven at every 

university in the country, as the member knows. And that is 

always of concern to the public because the public is sending 

their kids off to school at these places and the quality can’t help 

but be an issue. 

 

Another matter which will be a subject of discussion — I call 

these issues; a subject of discussion is a better way of 

describing it — is the question of distance education, taking the 

university to the people, delivering university programs in some 

of the small centres in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a subject of great interest to me, because I think we’re 

set up for that. I think we’ve got a province with the distribution 

of population that makes that a very desirable thing to do. And 

we have the technology to do it. And this is a situation that I 

think is a fortunate one for our province, and the way in which 

the universities approach that in the future can’t help but be of 

interest to government. 

 

And we can cooperate with our technical facilities through SCN 

(Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation), for 

example, to help make that programing available. But 

essentially it has to come from the universities. This raises all 

sorts of little issues, but the big-picture question will be 

appropriately discussed at this committee. 

 

And in general, I tell the member that the purpose of the 

committee is not to deal with the little, nitty-gritty details, but 

rather with the big-picture questions that arise in the 

relationship between the universities and the government. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that comment, Mr. Minister. In 

the report, I think Mr. MacKay supported the university 

position in terms of autonomy, in terms of both universities 

having autonomy. And when you talk about the cabinet 

committee — I’ll refer to it as cabinet committee — you’re now 

talking about a group of government officials who are actually   



1018  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

going to be talking about the big picture and possibly providing 

some mandate. And I’m wondering if those two aren’t at a 

deadlock in terms of university autonomy and then involvement 

of government. How do you see that working and how do you 

see that being able to move forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is one of the most delicate balances 

that I have ever seen, and it is a real challenge. 

 

On the one hand, you have institutions that are perhaps the most 

autonomous of our publicly funded institutions. They have a 

long history and tradition of autonomy and of academic 

independence and freedom that has to be taken into account at 

every step, at every stage. We on this side of the House — and I 

know it’s the case with the opposition as well — respect those 

traditions, and we are all determined to respect them with 

respect to all of the work that we do involving the universities. 

 

On the other hand, we’re talking about taxpayers’ money, and 

we’re talking about the institutions that provide a fair slice of 

the post-secondary education of our children and our citizens. 

So there is a significant public interest in the way in which the 

universities function and the quality of the programs that they 

offer and the access to those programs. 

 

Now that public interest can be thought of as being expressed in 

different ways, but certainly the voice of government is one of 

the ways in which it can be expressed. There are others, of 

course, and that is the other kinds of contact that the university 

has with the community, and they receive feedback from the 

public in that way. 

 

But we insist — and I think properly so — that we represent a 

significant aspect of the public interest, and it was only 

appropriate that we express that interest, and we’ve tried to do 

that while balancing full respect for autonomy and 

independence on the other hand. 

 

It’s one of the trickiest balancing acts around, and I sincerely 

hope that we’re doing it in an appropriate way. We don’t want 

to ever be seen to be throwing our weight around and telling the 

universities what to do. But on the other hand, we don’t want — 

none of us — want to fail our kids or our grandchildren. We 

want to ensure that the universities are operating in the real 

world, that they understand what the needs of society are as we 

see them, economically and socially. And it is that aspect of the 

public interest that we are trying so hard to convey to the 

universities as they do the important things that they do. 

 

So the member has expressed it probably better than I did, but it 

is a delicate balance and one that is uppermost in our minds in 

all of our dealings with the two universities. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. MacKay also 

commented that I think he was optimistic — if not maybe 

cautiously optimistic — that the universities could develop 

reforms within their own systems, and that they could move 

forward collectively, with some guidance, probably through the 

committee that he suggested. And I guess I wonder, in the end 

. . . and we seem to see some evidence that indeed there are 

changes taking place. There are definitely changes taking place 

that will probably be better. 

 

One of the suggestions also that Mr. MacKay made I think, was 

that, you know, if the process breaks down I think his comment 

was that the government must consider that intervention in the 

public interest must still be there. And I know we’re moving 

forward, as you’ve indicated — I think positively to a degree at 

the moment — but I guess it can always grind to a halt very 

quickly. 

 

As Minister of Post-Secondary Education, if that process seems 

to be breaking down — and I’m not referring to the next month 

or two; I’m looking a little further down the line. As you’ve 

indicated, our future of post-secondary education for our 

children and our grandchildren is of utmost importance to us — 

if you see this grinding to a halt in the next little while, is there 

a possibility that you will as minister intervene with 

government action? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I hate to contemplate that situation. I 

accept what MacKay says; that if the universities just utterly 

fail to do the things that they must do in order to fulfil their role 

in society then a government may have to intervene. I put that 

in quotation marks. But let us hope most fervently that it never 

comes to that, because if government ever were to intervene in 

the way in which the universities function, it would cause great 

damage to the universities as we have known them. It would 

change their essential nature. And I for one don’t think it would 

change for the better. I think it would damage them in a way 

that would be, in a way that would be very bad for our future. 

 

I’m optimistic about this. Everything I’ve seen supports that 

optimism and I don’t even think about the possibility that this 

may not work. But if everything hits the wall, we’ve got a lot of 

work to do to understand what government should do in that 

situation. I for one, and I think I speak for the member also, 

believe it will not come to that and that such intervention will 

just never have to be contemplated by government. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. By my question, I 

was in no way trying to throw any doom and gloom on this and 

I — as an opposition member — and as opposition party, we’d 

encourage the universities to continue on that drive towards 

becoming better. And I think they are hearing the requests of 

the public, and indeed we have to make changes at the 

university level if we are to survive and my question was one of 

just saying what if, and I know you are not willing to . . . or not 

wanting to look at it and I respect that. 

 

One of the other points in the report, Mr. Minister, was that Mr. 

MacKay indicated that the government should clearly provide a 

commitment towards sustained funding for universities. If the 

universities are to undergo change and make those reforms, 

they must have confidence, they must feel secure that indeed 

the provincial funding was going to be there. And I’m 

wondering what you as the minister, and the Finance minister, 

and your government in general, are doing towards sustained 

funding for the university program? 

 

  



April 21, 1997 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well we have, of course, improved the 

situation vastly with the budget now under consideration 

compared to the previous budget for the ‘96-97 fiscal year. And 

the universities recognize the effort that we’ve made in that 

respect and I think they are pleased about it. It doesn’t solve the 

funding problem. 

 

There are still needs on both the operating side and the capital 

side at both universities that are beyond our reach for the 

moment, for the time being. We are going to continue to do our 

best. It’s one of those situations where you . . . that faces all 

governments — competing priorities. And you try and 

determine where you are going to put any money that you have. 

So we’re not in a position to make a long-term funding 

commitment because of the uncertainty of revenues in the 

future, and the decision-making process that has to be made in 

order to balance the priorities that I just spoke of. 

 

But we are committed to do the best we can for the universities, 

and I think we indicated the direction that we’re prepared to 

take in this last budget. As I say, it doesn’t solve all the 

problems but it sure is a step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When we’re speaking about funding of 

universities, Mr. Minister, I think Mr. MacKay also indicated 

that I think both universities were requesting a review or a 

re-evaluation of the block funding process. And I think Mr. 

MacKay suggested that probably a government-commissioned 

study be in order. 

 

In talking with the presidents, I think there’s support for that. 

And I’m wondering if you could bring me up to date, and the 

people of Saskatchewan up to date, as to what you see 

happening in the area of review and re-evaluation of the block 

funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are actually three, Mr. Chair, and 

to the member. There are actually three reviews that are in the 

works that are captured by the words that the member used. 

There is a review of the operating grant, the distribution of the 

operating grant; the distribution of the capital grant, and the 

question of the technology funds that are available, how they 

are to be distributed. 

 

In the case of each of those, terms of reference have been 

developed and are in front of the two university presidents for 

their reactions. So that went to the presidents last week, and 

they of course haven’t yet responded to them. 

 

As to who will do the reviews, there are names that have been 

bandied about, but no one has yet been agreed on by all parties 

as the person to undertake the review. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve indicated, Mr. Minister, that some 

additional funding of course is provided in this year’s budget 

towards implementation of some of the reports as recommended 

by Mr. MacKay. 

 

And as we note in the budget of course, there’s a university 

special initiatives fund of $3 million. Could you indicate to us 

as to what you see that $3 million being spent . . . how you see 

that $3 million being spent and how will that be administered 

and controlled when we’re working with two universities? 

We’re working with two presidents. We’re working with a 

system that has not had one administrative structure to indeed 

say, we’re going to spend the $3 million collectively in the 

province on the two universities in this fashion. How will that 

money be distributed, and what will it be spent on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, to the member, we’re just 

not able to put our hand on examples of the use of the special 

initiatives fund, and our official responsible is not in the House 

tonight. 

 

I’ll give you a general answer, and then either next time we’re 

up or in a letter to you, I’ll describe it in more detail. These are 

joint initiatives to be undertaken by the two universities 

together. So that’s the first thing about it. It is in the spirit of 

cooperation that MacKay refers to that the money is to be 

dedicated. 

 

It covers initiatives like new methods of learning, new methods 

of instruction, new methods for the delivery of education — I 

have in mind here distance education — ways in which the two 

universities can work together to do what they do. And it’s up 

to the two universities to work these things out and to develop 

proposals for the use of this money. And we’re not telling them 

what these initiatives should be, but we will accept or reject 

them against that kind of a framework for criteria. 

 

And it is at the stage that we’ve had meetings about it, and 

we’re sort of defining what kind of things might be acceptable 

or not. But it will be within this idea of a joint effort by the two 

universities to work together to improve their programing. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I look forward to a 

further response from you on that one as well. 

 

One final question I think in this area, Mr. Minister. While the 

universities, I think, both understand that they are at the control 

of, of course, how many students actually arrive, their 

enrolments, and as the enrolments fluctuate, I think there’s a 

great difficulty for the universities to do their budgets and do 

their planning. And I think we’re all very aware of the two 

years at the University of Regina here where student projections 

did not come near what actually enrolled; and in fact there were 

deficit budgets, even though those are things way in the past. 

 

Mr. MacKay suggests that there would be an improvement to 

the post-secondary system, and in fact they would be able to do 

better planning if there was a more organized study of 

enrolment projections. And I found that recommendation quite 

interesting because I’m not sure how you would look at 

university enrolment projections by going back into the K to 12 

system. 

 

And I’m wondering if you, as minister, if you’re aware if the 

universities are making any effort to carry this out? Are they 

going to be out lobbying in the high school levels and actually 

recruiting and being able to indicate as to the number of 

students that will be entering the university programs next year? 

  



1020  Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1997 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We are not aware of what the 

universities are trying to do to get a better fix on their 

enrolment. It really is the case that you offer the programs and 

then you see who comes. 

 

The member will be aware of the efforts that the two 

universities are making to attract the top students. And they do 

that not so much in competition with each other but to compete 

against Queen’s and the University of Alberta and others who 

are in here trying to attract our top young men and women to go 

to school there. So they’re kind of fighting that battle on a 

different front. And to some extent they compete with each 

other, but the main concern is the efforts by out-of-province 

universities to attract our best students away. 

 

But generally I think they are still very much in the dark about 

how many students are going to come. You literally open the 

doors and see who shows up. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:34 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 50 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1003 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1003, 1011 

  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1007, 1013 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training  Vote 37 

  Mitchell .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 

 

 


